<doc id="381834" wikidata="Q356952" url="?curid=381834" title="Anne de Montmorency, 1st Duke of Montmorency">
<text>Anne de Montmorency, duc de Montmorency ( – 12 November 1567) was a French noble, governor, royal favourite and Constable of France during the mid to late Italian Wars and early French Wars of Religion. He served under five French kings (Louis XII, François I, Henri II, François II and Charles IX). He began his career in the latter Italian Wars of Louis XII, seeing service at Ravenna. When François, his childhood friend, ascended to the throne in 1515 he advanced as governor of the Bastille and Novara, then in 1522 was made a Marshal of France. He fought at the French defeat at La Bicocca in that year, and after assisting in rebuffing the invasion of Constable Bourbon he was captured at the disastrous Battle of Pavia. Quickly freed he worked to free first the king and then the king&#x27;s sons. In 1526 he was made &quot;Grand Maître&quot; (Grand Master), granting him authority over the king&#x27;s household, he was also made governor of Languedoc. He aided in the marriage negotiations for the king&#x27;s son the duc d&#x27;Orléans to Catherine de&#x27; Medici in 1533. In the mid 1530s he found himself opposed to the war party at court led by Admiral Chabot and therefore retired. He returned to the fore after the Holy Roman Emperor invaded Provence, leading the royal effort that foiled his invasion, and leading the counter-attack. In 1538 he was rewarded by being made Constable of France, this made him the supreme authority over the French military. For the next two years he led the efforts to secure Milano for France through negotiation with the Emperor, however this proved a failure and Montmorency was disgraced, retiring from court in 1541. 

He spent the next several years at his estates, relieved of the exercise and incomes of his charges, and removed as governor of Languedoc. He allied with the dauphin, the future Henri II during this time in his rivalry with the king&#x27;s third son. Upon the dauphin&#x27;s ascent in 1547 Montmorency was recalled from his exile and restored to all his offices, with his enemies disgraced. He now found himself opposed at court by the king&#x27;s mistress Diane de Poitiers and her allies the duc de Guise and Cardinal de Lorraine. He led the crushing of the &quot;gabelle revolt&quot; of 1548 and then the effort to reconquer Boulogne from the English which was accomplished by negotiated settlement. In 1551 he was elevated from a baron to the first duc de Montmorency. In 1552 he led the royal campaign to seize the Three Bishoprics from the Holy Roman Empire, though was overshadowed by the glory Guise attained in the defence of Metz. Montmorency led the inconclusive northern campaigns of 1553 and 1554 and was increasingly criticised for his cautious style of campaign. From 1555 he led the drive to peace that secured the Truce of Vaucelles in mid 1556, however the peace would be shortlived. In 1557 he was again tasked with fighting on the northern frontier, and was drawn into the disastrous battle of Saint-Quentin at which he was captured and the French army destroyed. Guise was thus made lieutenant-general of the kingdom, while Montmorency tried to negotiate peace from his captivity. The king supported him in this from late 1558 and in April 1559 he would help bring about the Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis which brought the Italian Wars to an end. 

When Henri II died in July 1559, Montmorency was sidelined by the new Guise-led government of François II, which relieved him of the office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot;. He would not participate in the Conspiracy of Amboise that attempted to overthrow the Guise regime however. When François in turn died in December 1560, he was recalled to a central position in the government, though subordinate to the role granted to the king of Navarre who was made lieutenant-general by the new king&#x27;s mother, the regent Catherine. He quickly became disenchanted with the new government and entered opposition alongside Guise and Marshal Saint-André, forming an agreement known to history as the &#x27;Triumvirate&#x27; in &#x27;defence of Catholicism&#x27;. When the French Wars of Religion erupted the following year, he and his Triumvirate colleagues secured the royal family for their cause and fought against the Protestants led by Navarre&#x27;s brother, the prince de Condé. In the climactic battle of the war at Dreux Montmorency was again made prisoner, and from his captivity negotiated the peace with the likewise captive Condé. During the peace, he joined Catherine and the court for the grand tour of the kingdom and feuded with his former ally Guise. In 1567 the Protestant aristocracy led a new coup against the crown and Montmorency led the defence of Paris against their army. Pushed to confront the Protestants, Montmorency died as a result of wounds sustained at the battle of Saint Denis on 12 November 1567.

==Early life and family==

Anne de Montmorency was born in 1493 at Chantilly, the son of Guillaume de Montmorency and Anne de Saint-Pol. His parents named him for his godmother, Anne, queen of France. Guillaume held a senior position in the household of the future king François I (at that time, comte d&#x27;Angoulême).

The Montmorency family prided itself on being the &#x27;oldest barons&#x27; in France. Indeed, Montmorency&#x27;s son would later boast to the English ambassador that the barons of Montmorency existed before there were kings of France. Despite these boasts, Montmorency was not a prince, and therefore his rivals the Lorraine family had a greater pedigree than he did. Montmorency would however fire back that he was a true born Frenchman, while the Lorraine family were &#x27;foreign princes&#x27;. This criticism stung his rivals, who were pleased to see the barony of Joinville raised to a principality in their favour in April 1552 so that they would no longer be &#x27;foreign princes&#x27; but &#x27;French princes&#x27;.

===Marriage and children===

Montmorency married Madeleine de Savoie, a cousin of the king François I on 10 January 1527. Their marriage was sumptuously celebrated by the king during a period of extravagance at court which contrasted with the relative paucity of funds at the disposal of the household of the king&#x27;s captive children in España. This marriage brought Montmorency into the royal family and going forward the king&#x27;s mother and sister referred to him as their nephew. Madeleine brought with her to the marriage family lands in Picardie. Her brother, Montmorency&#x27;s new brother-in-law was Claude de Savoie, comte de Tende the governor of Provence. He was thus afforded a relation with powerful interests near his governate of Languedoc that he lacked in terms of personal feudal control. Together they had the following issue:

*Éléonore de Montmorency (1528–1556), married François III de La Tour d&#x27;Auvergne, vicomte de Turenne in 1546 and had issue.
*Jeanne de Montmorency (1529–1596), married Louis III de La Trémoille, duc de Thouars in 1549 and had issue.
*François de Montmorency (1530–1579), Marshal (1559), duc de Montmorency (1567), governor of the Île de France (1556). Married Diane de France in 1557 without issue.
*Catherine de Montmorency (1532–1595), married Gilbert III de Lévis, duc de Ventadour in 1552.
*Henri I de Montmorency (1534–1614), duc de Montmorency (1579), governor of Languedoc (1563), Constable of France (1593). Married Antoinette de La Marck in 1559 and had issue.
*Charles de Montmorency (1537–1612), sieur de Méru then duc de Damville. Married Renée de Cossé in 1571 without issue.
*Gabriel de Montmorency (1541–1562), sieur de Montbéron.
*Guillaume de Montmorency, (1544–1591) sieur de Thoré. Married Léonore d&#x27;Humières in 1561 without issue.
*Marie de Montmorency (1547–1572), married Henri de Foix-Candale in 1567 without issue.
*Louise de Montmorency, abbesse de Maubuisson.

Several of Montmorency&#x27;s sons were afforded the privilege, by his senior station at court, to become &quot;enfants d&#x27;honneur&quot; (children of honour), which meant they were raised alongside the royal children. For his daughters, Montmorency secured prestigious marriages into esteemed families, including La Trémouille, Ventadour, Foix-Candale, and Turenne. These were all great lords in the south west of France, important in Poitou, Limousin and Auvergne respectively. He provided his daughters with suitably grand dowries, the eldest three bringing 50,000 &quot;livres&quot; to their marriages, while the last brought 75,000 &quot;livres&quot;. His sons meanwhile were all introduced to military careers by their father, with none destined for the church.

His eldest son, François transgressed against his father&#x27;s plans for his marriage into the royal family by exchanging legally binding &quot;paroles de promesse&quot; with Jacqueline de Piennes. In reaction to this &#x27;betrayal&#x27;, Montmorency got a law passed in 1557 that allowed a father to disinherit a son under the age of 30, or a daughter under the age of 25 who married without their parents permission. The law was retroactive, thereby obliging his son to annul the arrangement. He further had Jacqueline confined to a convent. His intended marriage of his son to Diane would go ahead on 4 May 1557, thereby further uniting the Montmorency with the royal family.

The death of his daughter Éléonore and her husband left Montmorency with the responsibility to raise the future Marshal of France, the vicomte de Turenne.

===Relatives===
Unlike the Lorraine family he would not take advantage of his power to put many of his relatives into senior positions in the French church, this left the field open for his rivals to dominate the senior positions of the French clergy.

Montmorency&#x27;s sister Louise de Montmorency was an early secret convert to Protestantism among the great nobility and married Gaspard I de Coligny. Her husband died in 1522, and therefore Montmorency and his sister would jointly raise his nephews, who would all be drawn towards Protestantism. Montmorency was greatly attached to his lineage, and thus despite his strong religious convictions did not formally oppose them for some time.

Through his sister, Montmorency had three nephews who would go on to play an important role in the early French Wars of Religion. Gaspard de Coligny, Odet de Coligny and François de Coligny all converted to Protestantism and led the movement with zeal. The first, would become Admiral of France, the second most senior role in the French military, while Odet would become a Cardinal at the age of 16 due to Montmorency&#x27;s influence. Montmorency&#x27;s sons would not follow his nephews into Protestantism. 

===Religion===
In religious temperament Montmorency, and his wife, were firmly Catholic, and were displeased by the Protestantism Montmorency&#x27;s sister and nephews adopted. Montmorency&#x27;s four sons would share his Catholicism, though both Thoré and Méru were sympathetic to Protestantism at one point or another. During his political ascendency, he received concerned reports of the growth of Protestantism in south-west France. Montmorency&#x27;s Catholicism was not Ultramontane but rather highly Gallican in disposition. It was therefore with Montmorency&#x27;s encouragement that Henri II flirted with the possibility of schism with the Papacy. He objected to the political program that often existed alongside Protestant movements in France, which advocated radical reforms. Despite this, the realities of Protestant opposition to the power of the Lorraine family in the 1560s meant that Montmorency was drawn in a more tolerant direction by his sons. He would have great affection for his nephews despite his disapproval of their religious persuasion. For Montmorency it was understood that the war on heresy that he supported was not meant to target members of the social elite (such as his nephews). So long as they publicly conformed it was no ones business what they did in their private chapels.

In his later years, Montmorency was afflicted with Gout.

He had a reputation as a taciturn man, something which contrasted with some of his more refined contemporaries in the French court. He was described by contemporaries as a &#x27;bluff soldier&#x27; and conservative in temperament.

===Wealth and estates===
With many offices to his name, by 1560 Montmorency enjoyed an annual income from his various positions of 32,000 &quot;livres&quot; (pounds). This direct income from the crown did not include the revenues he received from his many estates and territories across the kingdom. With his various estates factored in, Montmorency enjoyed an income of around 180,000 &quot;livres&quot; in 1548, which dwarfed the income of the Bourbon-Vendôme princes of the blood that sat at around 71,000 &quot;livres&quot;. At the end of his life in 1567, Montmorency enjoyed pensions totalling 45,000 &quot;livres&quot;, alongside his income from the office of Constable which was around 24,000 &quot;livres&quot;, and an income from his land of 138,000 &quot;livres&quot;.

Indeed, by land the Montmorency were the wealthiest non-royal family in France. It was said that they had more than 600 fiefs to their name. Alongside his great wealth, the Montmorency family could count on more clients than any other &#x27;private&#x27; family in the kingdom. Montmorency had great landed interests in the &quot;Pays de l&#x27;Oise&quot;, Vexin, Picardie, Bourgogne, Normandie, Champagne, Angoumois, Berry and Bretagne. 

===Châteaux and residences===
The Montmorency family had great landed estates in the Île de France, including the famous Châteaux of Écouen and Chantilly.
The Château of Écouen was built under his direction beginning in 1538, meanwhile Chantilly was restored at his request from 1527 to 1532. Écouen was a testament to the new architectural style of the period, and was renowned for its beauty, it featured sculpture work by Jean Goujon (such as the sculpture of victory wielding the sword of the Constable, which hung over the fireplace) with the architecture overall led by Jean Bullant. Écouen featured two statues by Michelangelo that had been gifted to Montmorency by François I (originally destined for the tomb of Pope Julius II), along with mosaics of coloured stones and an elaborate courtyard. The emblems of Henri II, Catherine de Medici and his own would be strewn throughout the château. Chantilly was so grand it rivalled a royal palace, the original feudal centre of the château renovated inside in the style of the Renaissance. Beginning in 1524 Montmorency added a long gallery to the château. A small châtelet (gatehouse) was added at the level of the pond.

These were two of the seven principal châteaux belonging to Montmorency, the others being Thoré, Mello, La Rochepot, Offémont and Châteaubriant. The royal family would occasionally stay at his châteaux, as when in 1565 Catherine and Charles IX spent time at Châteaubriant during the royal tour of the kingdom. Henri II also had occasion to stay at one of Montmorency&#x27;s baronial residences of Fère-en-Tardenois in both 1547 and after the campaign of 1552. In 1531 François was pre-occupied staying at Chantilly with Montmorency when his mother died, and therefore did not come to her bedside.

In Paris itself he had four &quot;hôtels&quot; (grand residences), one of which featured a room devoted to listening to music to emphasise his &#x27;cultured nature&#x27;.

===Patron of the arts===

Montmorency was also a patron of the arts, and commissioned the famous painter Léonard Limousin who produced an enamel dish which depicted a scene inspired by Raphael in which the various Greek gods were used as representations of the king, queen and his mistress. The artist Rosso Fiorentino produced a rendition of the Pietà for him in 1538. This work is now housed in the Louvre. His châteaux also boasted libraries filled with books acquired from Roma. Montmorency was a collector of antiques, and arms, which he stored in his châteaux.

===Childhood===
In his youth, Montmorency was a playmate of the comte d&#x27;Angoulême future king François I. The two played racket sports together alongside another future royal favourite Philippe de Chabot.

==Early career==
===Ascent of François I===

Montmorency saw his first military service in 1511 in the campaigns of king Louis XII and fought at the famous battle of Ravenna in the following year.

When François I ascended to the throne in 1515 he was keen to reassert the French claims to Milano. Montmorency therefore joined the campaign into Italy and distinguished himself in the service of the king at the battle of Marignano in 1515.

Around 1516, Montmorency already enjoyed the privilege of being the captain of 100 lances, even though he was only 23 years old. At this time he was made governor of the Bastille and governor of Novara in Italy.

With relations declining between France and the Holy Roman Empire in 1518, a rapprochement was undertaken with England. Admiral Bonnivet led an embassy to England accompanied by 80 young &#x27;gallants&#x27;. The product of this embassy was a series of treaties. Tournai was to be returned to France, in return for 600,000 &quot;écus&quot; (crowns). Cardinal Wolsey was further financially compensated for the loss of his see (Tournai), and eight French nobles were dispatched to England as hostages pending the final settlement between the two countries. One of the nobles who spent time as a hostage in England was Montmorency.

This was not the end of his advancement early in the reign of François, and around 1520 he was established as &quot;premier gentilhomme de la chambre du roi&quot; (first gentleman of the king&#x27;s chamber), giving him privileged private access to the king.

When an Imperial army invaded France in August 1521, Montmorency helped lead the defence of Mézières during a siege.

===Marshal===

In August 1522 he became one of the Marshals of France, was made a councillor of the king, and was inducted into the Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel) as a &quot;chevalier&quot; (knight).

Montmorency enjoyed poor relations with the comte de Saint-Pol (the count of Saint-Pol) brother of the duc de Vendôme (duke of Vendôme). This complicated matters when Montmorency was established as commander of the garrison of Doullens in 1522 under the authority of Saint-Pol. Saint-Pol refused to depart the province, claiming this would be to his dishonour in their dispute. Saint-Pol enjoyed some support in his push for Montmorency&#x27;s removal, but the Marshal was not without his own allies.

===La Bicocca===

In that year, Montmorency fought in Italy under the command of the vicomte de Lautrec (viscount of Lautrec). He received communications from his father at court, who informed him of the efforts the king&#x27;s councillors were making to ensure the royal finances were in order. Lautrec commanded an army of Swiss, French and allied Venetians. He faced off against the condotierri Prospero Colonna, who commanded the Imperial forces based in Milano in front of Pavia. The arrival of Colonna&#x27;s army near Pavia forced Lautrec to back off, much to the irritation of his Swiss forces, who were eager to be paid. Colonna (with his army of 18,000) shadowed Lautrec as he pulled back from Pavia, and established himself at Bicocca. Lautrec understood La Bicocca to be a highly defensible position, but the Swiss troops argued in favour of battle which was therefore given. 

Lautrec gave the Swiss permission to charge the enemy, while French nobles, under the command of Montmorency followed them on foot in the hopes of gaining glory. Lautrec took the final portion of the army around the right flank hoping to enter the Imperial camp that way. The frontal assault of the Swiss was a bloodbath, the French nobles with Montmorency suffered equally badly and the two groups would constitute a large part of the 3000 dead. After the defeat, the Swiss soon left the army, as did the Venetians, Lautrec himself returned to France where he received a cold reception from the king.

===Bourbon&#x27;s betrayal===

To compound the misfortune of the disaster at La Bicocca, France was hit with the treason of Constable Bourbon, who signed a treaty with the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V on 18 July 1523. Around this time England, which had previously allied with France against the empire decided to declare war on the kingdom, invading Picardie and the coasts of Bretagne and Normandie. While this situation was developing, Montmorency was charged with raising a new royal army for a southern thrust. He found mercenaries willing to fight for the crown, and with new artillery also assembled, Montmorency brought them to Lyon for a push into Italy. François then travelled south to join the army at Lyon in August, only to be hit by an illness, word of the English attacks in Picardie and the knowledge of Bourbon&#x27;s betrayal.

François felt it necessary, with Bourbon&#x27;s betrayal to abandon his plans to join the campaign, and he returned to court to secure the kingdom, leaving the army under the direction of Admiral Bonnivet who led the 30,000 men Montmorency had assembled towards Turin in September 1523, but the army was ravaged by disease and was forced to retreat from Italy in April 1524. On the retreat, Montmorency led the vanguard of the army but became so ill from the plague that racked the army that he had to be carried in a litter. Upon re-entering France, the Swiss troops formerly under Bonnivet&#x27;s command went their own way vowing never again to work with the French, while the French never again desired to trust the Swiss.

The Holy Roman Emperor Charles V was keen to revenge himself on France for their campaigns in Italy, and to this end appointed the &#x27;traitor&#x27; Constable Bourbon to lead an army out from Italy into France in Autumn 1524. Bourbon hoped to invade in coordination with an army under the king of England and the Emperor, however neither would join him in the endeavour. Having invaded Provence, Bourbon became bogged down besieging Marseille while François mustered a strong army at Avignon. On 29 September 1524, Bourbon recognised his efforts were hopeless and began a retreat. Montmorency pursued with his cavalry, meanwhile François restored French control over Aix which had fallen to Bourbon. François followed in Montmorency&#x27;s wake and continued the campaign back into Italy, entering the ducato di Milano (duchy of Milano). Under Montmorency&#x27;s command were the dauphin and the future royal favourite Saint-André. The dauphin found himself reliant on Montmorency, particularly due to his increasingly difficult relationship with his father François.

===Pavia===

François decided to put Pavia to siege, and settled in for the winter around the city. The Imperial army, conscious that if they tried to wait the French out their army would dissolve for lack of pay, decided to force a battle with the French. The battle of Pavia was an unmitigated disaster for the French. François, Henri II, king of Navarre, the comte de Saint-Pol, the comte de Tende, future father in law of Montmorency and Montmorency himself were all taken prisoner. The Imperial army was almost overwhelmed by the number of prisoners that they took.

Montmorency and François were held captive in Pizzighettone, alongside other great nobles such as the future Admiral of France, Philippe de Chabot. Montmorency was granted permission to depart his captivity in the service of raising funds for his ransom in early March. Montmorency met up with the royal family and assured them the king was in good health, and urged them to write often, as news of his family was François&#x27; greatest joy. After his return to captivity the Papal Nuncio, who had visited the king, would remark that Montmorency was the king&#x27;s main source of comfort in captivity.

===Captive king===

Montmorency would not be in captivity long, and was exchanged for Ugo de Moncada. François at first remained captive in Pizzighettone, before proposing to his captors that he be transferred to España. The Imperial viceroy Lannoy agreed, but to stop any mischief by the French fleet requested several French galleys be involved in the transfer. Montmorency therefore arranged with the regency government for 6 galleys to be handed over. The fleet left Genoa on 31 May 1525. Montmorency then travelled to Toledo where he appealed for safe-conduct for François&#x27; sister Marguerite to come and negotiate a peace in España and that a truce be declared while negotiations were ongoing. The Emperor allowed all this, and Montmorency went to the regency government to obtain the powers to agree the truce. Philippe de Chabot travelled to Toledo soon thereafter and signed a truce on 11 August. 

In exchange for peace, the Emperor demanded that France cede Bourgogne, recognise Imperial control of Artois and Vlaanderen and relinquish their claims on Napoli and Milano. This was too much for François and his mother Louise de Savoie who led the regency. From his captivity in Madrid, François first considered escape, and when frustrated in this, abdication in favour of his eldest son so that the Imperials would no longer possess a valuable captive with which to extort France. In the event of his release, François was to be restored to the crown with his sons regal powers suspended until the formers death. Montmorency and Cardinal de Tournon witnessed the sealing of the decision. Montmorency brought the decision of the king from Madrid to the Paris &quot;Parlement&quot; (highest court in France) to register, but they refused to consider the king&#x27;s abdication, moreover the Emperor was not fooled by the manoeuvrer which only alerted him to the value of the king&#x27;s children. In the treaty which released him from his captivity in January 1526 his release was contingent on the captivity of his two eldest sons as a guarantee that he would cede the land he committed to (including Bourgogne). Montmorency brought the news of the treaty back to France.

In fact the treaty provided two options for the king, either he cede the dauphin and twelve of the kingdom&#x27;s military leaders (among them Montmorency, the duc de Guise, Lautrec and Admiral Chabot) or he cede both his first and second son. It was this latter course which was pursued, the regent little desiring to deprive the kingdom of its military leadership.

==Ascent==
===&quot;Grand Maître&quot;===

Montmorency was appointed to the position of governor of Languedoc on 23 March 1526. The post had formally been occupied by the traitor Bourbon. In the same year he received this honour he was made &quot;Grand Maître&quot; (Grand-Master), and therefore given supreme authority over the king&#x27;s household and the court. In this office he replaced the king&#x27;s uncle the comte de Tende, who had died of the wounds he sustained at the battle of Pavia. As &quot;Grand Maître&quot;, Montmorency enjoyed a position as head of the king&#x27;s councils, which convened under his auspices. He also held authority over appointments in the royal household, court expenditure and security. This authority over the king&#x27;s household gave him an important intermediary position as regarded the two young princely hostages that had been delivered to the Imperial camp, and it was through him that all correspondence with them would be conducted. For the management of the king&#x27;s material household, he had at his disposal deputies, including the &quot;premier maître d&#x27;hôtel&quot; (first steward).

Bourbon&#x27;s sack of Rome in 1527 had the effect of fostering a greater understanding between England and France. King Henry VIII feared that the captive Pope would not be able to sanction his divorce. Therefore Wolsey met with François to talk business in August 1527 at Amiens. It was arranged for Mary Tudor, daughter of Henry to marry the duc d&#x27;Orléans and Henry retracted his objection to François&#x27; marriage. If war began again with the Emperor, English merchants would maintain their privileges in France. To celebrate the newfound accord, Montmorency was dispatched to England, to award the Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel) on Henry, while Henry in turn awarded the Order of the Garter to François.

===Captivity of the princes===

In December 1527, François convened an Assembly of Notables with the aim of raising 2,000,000 &quot;écus&quot; to either pay the ransom of his sons, or if the Emperor attached the return of Bourgogne to the ransom, the money would be used to prosecute a new war against the Empire. The Assembly responded positively, with the clergy offering 1.3 million &quot;livres&quot; in return for the rescue of the Pope, destruction of Protestantism and protection of Gallicanism. The nobility likewise promised their goods and lives. The &quot;prévôt des marchands&quot; (provost of the merchants) agreed Paris would pay part of the ransom. The promises needed to be converted to money, however the nobility proved less than willing to deliver what they had agreed. Montmorency took responsibility for securing the money required from the Boulonnais but was frustrated that they would only grant him a fifth. He was so upset at their &#x27;insolence&#x27; that he did not even pass their offer on to the king. He told the &quot;sénéchal&quot; (seneschal) that nothing would be accepted from the region until they had committed themselves the way other regions had. Eventually the Boulonnais complied. Due to the &#x27;stinginess&#x27; of some parts of France, the king would be obliged to take loans, using Montmorency as the guarantor.

A sensitive matter arose in 1528 as the English king Henry sought a divorce from his wife, the aunt of the Holy Roman Emperor. François was keen to support the English king in acquiring it but was sensitive that open support would be politically dangerous, given his sons were still in Imperial captivity. Therefore he worked on the theologians of Paris through a proxy, and Montmorency took it upon himself to rebuke a syndic named Noël Béda who objected to the divorce, however Béda remained firm. Béda would indeed go on to sabotage the debate at the faculty of theology, much to the disquiet of the English ambassador.

Montmorency had an important role to play in the negotiations that were conducted, beginning 5 July 1529 between Louise de Savoie and Margarete von Österreich. Montmorency assisted the king&#x27;s mother Louise alongside Chancellor Duprat and the queen of Navarre. Together they would establish a peace agreement known as the treaty of Cambrai or &quot;Paix des Dames&quot; (Peace of the Ladies). An enormous ransom of 2,000,000 &quot;écus&quot; would restore the liberty of the princes, while François would have to abandon his suzerainty over Artois, Vlaanderen, Milano and Napoli, but would be allowed to maintain Bourgogne, Auxerre and Mâcon.

During his first period of ascendency in the 1530s, Montmorency ensured the disgrace of the vice-admiral of France (and governor of Le Havre) Charles de Moy. His relations with the vice-admiral would remain poor for decades, as typified by his ensuring that his nephew Coligny would receive the office governor of Le Havre upon the accession of Charles IX in 1560.

As far as the execution of the terms of the treaty were concerned, François delegated responsibility to Montmorency and Cardinal de Tournon. By 29 April 1530, Montmorency was able to show to the Spanish finance-general a large pile of gold already assembled for the Emperor. By May the money assembled would be ready, and handed over to the Spanish delegation. It would however take until June for the entire ransom of 1,200,000 &quot;écus&quot; to be paid off. By this time Tournon had taken over responsibility for the provision of the money, while Montmorency went to receive the hostages from their exile in España from the condestable (Constable) de Castilla, as well as François&#x27; new bride the sister of Charles V. The crossing over of the princes to France and the money to España was scheduled for 1 July to be overseen by Montmorency. The Condestable of Castilla was suspicious of a trap, and halted the advance of the royal children when he received word that a large party of French horsemen were nearby, fearing that the French may take the children and then intercept the ransom. As the hours passed, Montmorency was increasingly concerned that the party of the Condestable had not yet appeared and sent an envoy to find them. Upon reaching the Spanish camp, the representative was told of Castilla&#x27;s suspicions of a trap, which caused the representative to challenge Castilla to single combat. The new queen of France took it upon herself to threaten Castilla with disgrace if he did not continue with the transfer. Finally it began, Montmorency and the French money departing in a boat from one side of the river to a pontoon in the centre, while Castilla and the royal children did likewise from the other bank. The Condestable provided his apologies to the two young princes for the conditions of their imprisonment, only the dauphin responded graciously.

===Guardian of the princes===

In the years that followed, it would be Montmorency who devoted himself to the needs and time of the young princes, supervising their days from dawn to dusk in his capacity as &quot;Grand Maître&quot;, and winning their affection with his attentions and provisions. He oversaw the education of the dauphin and duc d&#x27;Orléans (as the king&#x27;s second son was known at that time), planned out their days and instructed them in the courtly ceremonies in a way the king lacked time for. To support him in providing for the young princes, Montmorency relied on three men, Humières, Saint-André and the comte de Brissac. Several of his nephews (Coligny and Andelot) would be among the &quot;enfants d&#x27;honneur&quot; (children of honour) who had the privilege of being raised alongside the royal children.

Montmorency was close with the new bride of the king and supported her at court. He remarked that &#x27;Frenchman should thank god for giving them so beautiful and virtuous a lady&#x27;. This was in contrast to François himself who was more infatuated with his mistress Anne de Pisseleu. Éléonore, sister to the Emperor thus had to content herself with being overshadowed. It would be Montmorency who supervised the arrangements for her coronation, which was undertaken on 5 March at Saint-Denis.

The successful outcome of the payment of the ransom and return of the king&#x27;s children elevated Montmorecy in the esteem of the court with Montmorency receiving many congratulations. While the court travelled back to the capital, he went to spend some time in his estates at Chantilly.

===Picardie===

After the treason of Constable Bourbon in 1523 it had become necessary for the duc de Vendôme to devote himself to affairs at court. This meant Vendôme could not fulfil his responsibilities as governor of Picardie. The &quot;Parlement of Paris&quot; demanded that the province be governed in his absence. To this end in May 1531 Montmorency&#x27;s brother the seigneur de La Rochepot was appointed to fill the office. The appointment of his brother was a victory for Montmorency in his battle at court with the Admiral Chabot at a time when the hatred between the two men was barely being contained by the king. Montmorency would defend his brother&#x27;s financial interests in front of the Chancellor of France and supported his methods of raising money for his role as governor at court.

The family&#x27;s control of Picardie was aided by the presence of two Montmorency clients in subsidiary governorships, that of Péronne and Boulogne. Jean II de Humières the governor of the former accompanied Montmorency in 1527 on his embassy to England, the governor of Boulogne Oudard du Biez meanwhile received a 10,000 &quot;livres&quot; bounty thanks to the efforts of Montmorency to push the sum through the &quot;chambre des comptes&quot; (chamber of accounts). Both men reported on their efforts to raise funds for the crown in 1529, the nobility of Péronne refused to shoulder the tenth that Humières proposed, leaving the governor to write to Montmorency for advice on how to proceed. The nobility of Boulogne meanwhile offered a twentieth forcing Montmorency to write to du Biez that such a sum was not acceptable to the king. Du Biez protested that the land was ravaged by the effects of war.

As for Montmorency personally, he had lands around Boulogne, and therefore the presence of his client in the governorship of the centre aided him greatly in the extraction of revenues.

===Diplomat===

A meeting took place in October 1532 between the English king Henry and François. Great gifts were exchanged between the two monarchs. Alongside the gifts, the duke of Norfolk and Suffolk were made &quot;chevaliers&quot; of the French &quot;Order de Saint-Michel&quot;. Meanwhile Montmorency and Chabot became knights of the Order of the Garter. Alongside the gift giving an alliance against the Ottoman Empire was established, however this was a smokescreen for their plans to resist the Emperor in Italy.

The &quot;Grand Maître&quot; had an important role to play in the marriage alliance concluded between the Papacy and France in 1533. The king&#x27;s second son, the duc d&#x27;Orléans (future Henri II) was to marry the Pope&#x27;s cousin Catherine de Medici, duchessa di Urbino (duchess of Urbino). Back in September 1530, when negotiations had begun for the marriage, the king had turned to Montmorency for advice on the political clauses of the marriage contract. Montmorency prepared Marseille for the Pope&#x27;s arrival on 12 October to seal the union. He sailed among the Pope&#x27;s flotilla as it approach the city in a frigate of his own decorated in Damask, and after greeting him on the shore, escorted the Pope and duchessa di Urbino to the king&#x27;s garden near the abbey Saint-Victor where four French cardinals (Cardinal Legate Duprat, Cardinal de Bourbon, Cardinal de Lorraine and Cardinal de Gramont) and various other senior churchmen were waiting to receive him.

On 26 October there was a banquet for the assembled dignitaries. The following day, the marriage contract was signed in the Pope&#x27;s chambers, after which Orléans was led into an audience hall. It was Montmorency&#x27;s responsibility to bring his new bride, Catherine, into the room where, after Cardinal de Bourbon affirmed the consent of both parties, Orléans kissed Catherine and the celebratory ball began.

Orléans would prove cold towards his wife, with his real romantic interests directed towards Diane de Poitiers, the comtesse de Brézé (countess of Brézé) from 1537. Montmorency had long enjoyed a close relationship with the Brézé, often taking himself up to their Château d&#x27;Anet to discuss matters of state with her and her husband Brézé. Montmorency played an important role in facilitating the young prince&#x27;s romantic indiscretions, allowing for the rendezvous&#x27; to transpire at his Château d&#x27;Écouen. By 1538, Diane would however have assessed Catherine as her preferred match for Orléans, now that the alternative of the son of the duc de Guise had been suggested and therefore worked to keep her lover and his wife together. Catherine&#x27;s security was further enhanced by the rivalry between Montmorency and Guise, whose attempts to introduce his daughter to the dauphin were a considerable threat to the &quot;Grand Maître&#x27;s&quot; position.

An ordinance of 24 July 1534 authorised the raising of 6,000 soldiers from Picardie as a &#x27;legion&#x27;. Montmorency was given the responsibility to raise this army, and issued commissions to the six gentleman who were to command the force. François personally inspected the raised force in an elaborate ceremony the following year. The legion would see much use in the following years, overall though the force proved ineffective and prone to ill discipline.

===Departure from court===
The Emperor sent the graaf van Nassau (count of Nassau) to France in October 1534 to present two proposals to the French. The first was that the duca di Milano (duke of Milano) should provide a pension to François&#x27; son Orléans in return for François renouncing his claim to Milano and Genoa. His second proposal was a marriage between the king&#x27;s third son, the duc d&#x27;Angoulême and the king of England&#x27;s daughter Mary. Montmorency, who received the proposals, dismissed the first out of hand, the &quot;Grand Maître&quot; writing a reaffirmation of France&#x27;s claims over Milano to Nassau. Montmorency was however far less quick to dismiss the second proposal, and therefore the Emperor decided to take it further. François therefore dispatched Admiral Chabot to England with the latter proposal but received only counter-proposals from Henry and departed the country unsatisfied.

While the Emperor was occupied with his campaign into al-Ḥafṣiyūn controlled Tunis in June 1535, François did little to take advantage of his rival&#x27;s absence. Montmorency had promised the Imperial ambassador that France would not exploit the Emperor&#x27;s absence. Admiral Chabot and the war party at court were incensed, and Montmorency found it necessary to retire to Chantilly, leaving Chabot ascendent by default. François could have found himself in a diplomatically challenging position if he had followed the advice of the war party to attack while the Emperor was fighting the Muslims.

His departure was not however a disgrace, and he remained in all his titles and pensions. In October he oversaw the convening of the local Languedoc Estates. He conducted an inspection of the legion of the province and ensured Narbonne&#x27;s fortifications were up to an appropriate standard.

After the French seizure of Savoia in early 1536, tensions skyrocketed with the Empire, northern Italy descending into an unofficial war. Chabot was made lieutenant-general of French controlled Piemonte. However Montmorency now returned to the centre of government, arriving on 7 May. Soon thereafter Chabot was removed as lieutenant-general of Piemonte, replaced by the marchese di Saluzzo (marquis of Saluzzo). Saluzzo would not long be the French lieutenant-general as he defected to the Empire on 17 May. Humières became the lieutenant-general of Dauphiné, Savoia and Piemonte, meanwhile the Emperor decided to invade Provence. A day after his decision to launch an invasion on 14 July Montmorency was made &#x27;lieutenant-general&#x27; on both sides of the mountains with powers that included troop mobilisation, the command of the forces on the ground and the ability to negotiate peace.

===Provence campaign===

On 24 July 1536, an Imperial army, under the command of the Emperor invaded France from Italy, proceeding by the coast through Nice, crossing into the kingdom at Var. Concurrently an army under the graaf van Nassau invaded Picardie. Montmorency led the defence of the south, and François&#x27; attentions were focused in that direction. The king&#x27;s council successfully convinced him not to lead the army, and leave it to the command of Montmorency. Montmorency&#x27;s force assembled at Avignon, and by 25 July totalled 30,000 men. A month later this had ballooned to 60,000. Montmorency adopted a scorched earth strategy and devastated the lands of Provence to deny his enemy supply. He inspected the fortifications of Aix and Marseille and determining that Aix&#x27;s were inadequate without at least a month&#x27;s work and 6000 soldiers, he therefore had Aix evacuated. Marseille by contrast had recently been reinforced and had played a key role in the defeat of Bourbon&#x27;s invasion in 1524, and therefore was not subjected to the destruction that was put upon Aix. The Emperor&#x27;s goal was the capture of Marseille, and towards this end he captured Aix on 13 August. All roads to Marseille were blocked by French forces, and as his army sat near Aix it began to collapse to disease. The army was also in great want of food and water which they struggled to acquire in the devastated landscape. Foraging parties that sought to acquire food were sometimes set upon and butchered. By 2 September 1536, Montmorency estimated the Emperor had lost over 7000 men to dysentery and famine. The new dauphin Orléans (François&#x27; second son) received permission from François to join the army in the defence of Provence. By 11 September Charles decided to withdraw from Provence and Nassau made a similar decision up in Picardie around the same time. The invasions had been a failure. François joined the army at this time, but decided against ordering a pursuit, contenting himself to ordering a harassment of the retreating army by the light cavalry.

In the spring of 1537, Montmorency engaged in a campaign on the northern frontier of France, and was rewarded with great successes. The king had declared Artois, Vlaanderen and Charolais which he had ceded in the peace of Cambrai to be confiscated in January, and tasked Montmorency with advancing in the north. To this end Montmorency was made lieutenant-general with the responsibility to recover Saint-Pol and Artois. Montmorency and François captured Auxy-le-Château, then besieged Hesdin. On 6 May Saint-Pol was occupied by the royal army, threatening the Imperial supply line through Lens and Arras. Montmorency prepared to disband the army and send 10,000 soldiers to join Humières in Picardie. While demobilisation was ongoing, the Emperor launched a lightning offensive, threatening to surround Thérouanne. Saint-Pol and Montreuil fell quickly back to the Emperor. François dispatched Orléans the new dauphin to join Montmorency and conduct a counter-offensive, the young prince arriving in mid-June. A cavalry force under the duc de Guise also arrived to bolster the royal forces in Picardie. Montmorency was pleased with the effect the dauphin had on the army. In July they secured a favourable truce in the theatre and prepared to move south to where the war was continuing in Piemonte, Montreuil had been successfully regained and Thérouanne would remain in French hands; only the conquest of Saint-Pol had been reversed.

François had orchestrated a counter-offensive back into Italy in 1537, though with many troops tied up in other theatres it was limited in scope. A small army under the command of Humières, the lieutenant-general of French Piemonte had invaded Piemonte in April 1537 and made an unsuccessful attempt on Asti, and successful attempts on Alba and Cherasco. François secured a truce in the northern theatre thanks to the efforts of Montmorency and Orléans so that he might bring force to bear on Italy, in the meanwhile he urged Humières to hold firm and dismantle fortifications he could not hold. The Imperial commander del Vasto had little intention of waiting around for a new French army to show up, and began a counter offensive.

===Entry into Piemonte===
Montmorency arrived in Lyon, and was established by the king as the new lieutenant-general of French Piemonte. He had with him a force of 10,000 French infantry, 10,000 Italians, 14,000 Swiss, 12,000 landsknechts and 1,400 men-at-arms. The force was technically under the command of the dauphin Orléans, but Montmorency led the army in actuality. By this time, October, France only held Turin, Pinerolo and Savigliano in Piemonte, the towns were being besieged by del Vasto. Montmorency left Besançon on 23 October towards the pass de Susa which was held by Cesare Maggi with 6,000 men. Montmorency forced the passage. This success caused del Vasto to break off his sieges of the final French held towns and cities. The combined French army then began sieging back the towns of Piemonte, with François himself joining the army soon thereafter. He had by now had success in negotiations with the Emperor, and wanted to secure as much of Piemonte as possible prior to a truce coming into force. By November del Vasto had been compelled to retreat across the Po. On 27 November 1537 a three month truce was declared in Italy, del Vasto and Montmorency met to discuss the minutiae and agreed that each side would maintain in Italy the troops necessary to garrison their respective towns, and send other forces away.

This truce would last more than three months, being twice extended while the two sides argued over the specific arrangements of control that a more permanent peace settlement would entail in Italy. Montmorency and the Cardinal de Lorraine met with envoys of the Emperor at Leucate and agreed that the ducato di Milano would be given to the king&#x27;s third son the duc de Angoulême as a dowry for his marriage to the daughter of the Emperor. However dispute arose between the king and Emperor over how many years the king would be able to administer the duchy for his son. Unable to achieve a consensus over the destiny of Milano, François and the Emperor compromised by agreeing to an extension of the truce for 10 years, during which time each side was to maintain what they currently possessed. Montmorency provided assurance that neither party would ever declare war over claims to Milano again. While the talks were ongoing, Montmorency directed a young Monluc, future Marshal of France to spy on the fortifications of Perpignan.

The king was greatly pleased with Montmorency, and met with him in Montpellier on 31 January 1538 to provide him his pay for the campaign, which totalled 158,000 &quot;écus&quot;, the court thronged around to celebrate him upon his entry to Lyon.

==Ascendency==
===Constable===

On 10 February 1538 several important appointments were declared by the king which benefitted the Montmorency family. His brother La Rochepot was appointed governor of the Île de France and therefore departed from his charge in Picardie. Most importantly however, Montmorency was established as Constable of France. The office had been left vacant since the treason of Constable Bourbon. In a ceremony on that day, ironically celebrated at a château that had once belonged to Bourbon, Montmorency was escorted by the sister of the king, the queen of Navarre from the king&#x27;s private chambers to the great hall, where the king gave him the sword of the office. The Constable of France was the most senior commander of the French military, and he and the Marshals of France, whose concurrent number would total four by the 1560s held overall responsibility for France&#x27;s land forces. On the battlefield the Constable outranked even princes du sang, and had the right to lead the vanguard even when the king was present. The most prestigious elements of the military under his authority were the gendarmerie of heavy cavalry, which was composed of ordinance companies of 30-100 men-at-arms. By this time, the French military possessed continually standing components, which greatly contributed to the kingdom&#x27;s tax burden. The Constable also enjoyed advantageous apartments in the royal residence of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, right next to those of the king and queen. By this appointment, Montmorency effectively became lieutenant-general of the kingdom.

As Montmorency was ascending to the office of Constable he was no longer a Marshal, and therefore the king appointed two new Marshals, Claude d&#x27;Annebault and René de Montjean.

His elevation to the office of Constable was in part a reward for his leadership in the defence of France against the invasion of Provence that had been conducted in 1536. The great benefits he received from the king also felt like a victory to the dauphin, who saw them as a reward for his own successes on campaign, throughout which Montmorency and Orléans had become very close. During the campaign Orléans had undertaken an affair with Filippa Duci which had resulted in a pregnancy. Montmorency was informed of this and ordered that she be watched for the duration of the pregnancy, and kept the dauphin appraised with updates, filling the young man with pride. The child of this affair, Diane de France would first be married to the duca di Castro, grandson of Pope Paul III, with the marriage contract signed for the king by Montmorency, Aumale and the chancellor Olivier. The Pope committed to providing his grandson 200,000 &quot;écus&quot; to spend on land in France, and the ducato di Castro (duchy of Castro). After Castro&#x27;s death, Diane would go on to marry Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son.

===Milano===

In July of 1538, talks were conducted between the Emperor and king of France at Aigues-Mortes. For these important discussions Montmorency was among those granted an Imperial audience. The devolution of Milano to Angoulême was again discussed, in return for François committing France to a war against the Osmanlı İmparatorluğu. The two men agreed to co-operate going forward in the &#x27;defence of Christendom&#x27; and reunification of the church behind Catholicism. Montmorency was delighted at the success of the meeting, which astonishing contemporaries insofar as the two bitter adversaries now appeared to be friends. While some at court were sceptical of this new friendship, Montmorency assured the court that the peace between the two men would last their entire lives. For his part, Montmorency ensured that France honoured the truce with the Empire.

Montmorency would be completely ascendent in the direction of French foreign policy for the next two years. His desire was to secure Milano for France, but through diplomatic means. All ambassadors wrote to him alongside the king. He recognised that to best achieve his goal, he needed to be in a position of strength with the Empire, and therefore sought to consolidate the French position in Piemonte and Savoia. &quot;Parlements&quot; and &quot;Chambre des comptes&quot; (chamber of accounts) were established in each of the occupied regions. Fortification was also undertaken of the key city of Piemonte, Turin, while the northern border was simultaneously fortified by Montmorency&#x27;s brother La Rochepot.

As Constable of France, Montmorency was approached by foreign kingdoms that wished to do business with France. To this end in 1539 he received a request from the English court for the provision of 60,000 m2 of hemp fabric. This would have been sufficient to supply 100 great ships. In response it was &#x27;diplomatically&#x27; protested that France lacked the capacity to fulfil such an order.

It was through the protection and patronship of Montmorency, that Saint-André received the charges of lieutenant-general and governor of Lyon in 1539.

Montmorency was again leaned upon for diplomatic purposes when François sought further peace talks with the Emperor in 1539. Montmorency organised the receptions for the Emperor which involved ceremonial entries into many cities as the Imperial party progressed through the country. The Emperor was received at the Château de Fontainebleau for Christmas. The Constable enjoyed his own apartments on the first floor at Fontainebleau. Upon the party&#x27;s entry into Paris on 1 January 1540, the Emperor entered the city under a canopy, Montmorency proceeding him, holding the sword of his office aloft.

After some time together, Montmorency accompanied the Emperor back to the border, taking leave of the king at Saint-Quentin. Montmorency and the king&#x27;s sons escorted the Emperor as far as Valenciennes. They brought back gifts from the town to the French court. It was generally assumed that Montmorency and the Cardinal de Lorraine would shortly be called to Bruxelles for a more formal deal, however the Emperor became distracted by the revolt of Ghent. Rumours began to swirl that the understanding between France and the Empire had broken down, which Montmorency derided as &#x27;jealous talk&#x27;. In March the Emperor revealed that he had changed his mind about the provision of Milano as a dowry for François&#x27; third son. Instead, he suggested a dowry of Nederland, Bourgogne and the Charolais for the young prince. François would not receive Milano, and would have to withdraw from Piemonte and Savoia as part of this deal. Further, the lands would be administered under the Emperors&#x27; supervision and if his daughter María died without issue, the territory would revert to the Habsburg male line.

===Path to disgrace===
Upon receipt of this news François, Montmorency and Orléans locked themselves in a room for a long discussion. When it was concluded, Montmorency retired unwell to bed for several days. François delivered his reply to the Emperor in which he argued Nederland was a poor substitute for Milano which was his by right anyway. Moreover the instant gratification of Milano could not compare to a territory he would have to wait many years to receive. He later altered his reply to say that he would accept Nederland instead, but only if he received it immediately: the reversion clause could remain but only if Milano was given in compensation for the loss of Nederland. By June 1540 talks had collapsed entirely.

While still in a degree of favour, Montmorency engineered the disgrace of his long time enemy Admiral Chabot. Back in 1538 he enjoyed a position as the patron of the young duc d&#x27;Aumale who wrote to him that he might he was as much at Montmorency&#x27;s command as were his own children. Aumale remained on positive terms with him in 1541 describing himself as Montmorency&#x27;s &#x27;very humble servant&#x27;. Aumale&#x27;s father, the duc de Guise would remain cordial with Montmorency throughout the Constable&#x27;s period of disgrace. In later years, Aumale would become the great rival of Montmorency as a favourite of the king in his capacity as the duc de Guise. 

Around this time, Montmorency became aware his influence was beginning to slip with the king. In the hopes of buttressing his authority, he attempted to play upon François&#x27; hatred of subversion. To this end he shared with the king the sonnets of Vittoria Colonna (who was sympathetic to Protestantism), which he informed the king had been sent to his sister. However the queen of Navarre was able to gain the upper hand in this dispute. François continued to erode Montmorency&#x27;s civic responsibilities, getting him to hand over the keys to the Louvre which he possessed in his capacity as &quot;Grand Maître&quot;.

In this first stage of his disgrace, he was removed from influence over diplomatic affairs, which were granted to Tournon. This removal occurred in April 1540, but he remained in overall favour with François who remarked that the Constable&#x27;s only fault was that he did not &#x27;love those who I love&#x27;. French foreign policy was now back in the hands of the war party at court, and François privately boasted of his plans for a new war against the Emperor.

On 11 October 1540, the Holy Roman Emperor decided to award the ducato di Milano (duchy of Milan) to his son the future Felipe II of España. Thus, François was to give up all his conquests in Italy, and reconstitute the defunct duché de Bourgogne which had been integrated into the royal domain as a dowry to be gifted by the Emperor to his son. François was enraged at the betrayal, and took out his frustrations on Montmorency. It was Montmorency, François alleged, who had allowed the Emperor to present this diplomatic embarrassment to him. Montmorency was forced to withdraw from court when the news arrived. 

Not a month had passed since this news arrived in France than the king forbade his secretaries to use the cyphers Montmorency had provided them. Montmorency, believing himself disgraced, asked François for permission to retire from court but François told him he still had use of his services. Indeed he staged something of a revival in his fortunes in early 1541, with the Imperial ambassador reporting that his credit had increased. It was ephemeral, by April he was reported to be at the mercy of the king&#x27;s mistress, the duchess d&#x27;Étampes at court, his credit decreasing daily. Fully aware of this, Montmorency advised the lieutenant-general of Piemonte Langey to send his correspondence to Marshal Annebault in future.
In June 1541 the king humiliated Montmorency through a request he made at the wedding of Jeanne d&#x27;Albret, the daughter of the queen of Navarre and the herzog von Jülich-Cleves-Berg (duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg). Jeanne refused (or was unable) to walk to the altar for the ceremony, and therefore the king commanded Montmorency to carry her to the altar. The court was shocked that such a high ranking man as Montmorency had been ordered to undertake such a demeaning task, and Montmorency remarked to his nearby friends &#x27;this is the end of my favour, I am saying goodbye to it&#x27;. The day after the wedding, he left court, and would not return during the lifetime of François.

==Disgrace==
===Governate revoked===
On 21 May 1542, François abolished all governorships in France, and ordered the people of France not to obey their ex-governors&#x27; commands. He justified this on the grounds that their powers had become excessive. In the following weeks he proceeded to re-appoint every former governor of the provinces with the exception of Montmorency who was replaced in Languedoc. The initial abolition is therefore understood to be an attack on Montmorency disguised in a general dismissal due to his power making a specific dismissal unfeasible politically.

With his disgrace, Montmorency was no longer able to protect his political clients - this led to the disgrace of the chancellor of France Poyet in 1542. Conversely, Admiral Chabot was rehabilitated, and returned to a central place at the French court.

===Dauphin&#x27;s party===
During his time of disgrace Montmorency was absent from the court. However, he remained close with the dauphin the duc de Bretagne (formerely the duc d&#x27;Orléans), while the duc d&#x27;Orléans (formerly the duc d&#x27;Angoulême) allied himself with the king&#x27;s mistress the duchesse d&#x27;Étampes. Also in the faction of the dauphin were the queen and most of the French cardinals. Bretagne would ask the king to recall Montmorency so that he could serve with him in the campaigns against the Imperials, however this was refused. With Bretagne and Orléans in opposition to one another, each man represented a centre of their respective faction; this dynamic would however be radically altered by the sudden death of Orléans in 1545. Bretagne felt keenly the absence of his mentor from the centre of power.

These years would be ones of retirement for the Constable, and it was only with the death of the king that he returned to holding political influence himself. As early as 1546, Bretagne began to anticipate his coming reign, and to this end, planned the division of offices that would go to his various favourites upon his ascent. Montmorency would be recalled from disgrace, Saint-André made &quot;Premier Chambellan&quot; (first chamberlain) and Brissac established as &quot;Grand Maître de l&#x27;artillerie&quot; (grand-master of the artillery). Reports of these speculative appointments was delivered to François by the court jester, and he flew into a rage when he heard of his son&#x27;s presumptuousness. He advanced on his son&#x27;s chambers with the captain of his Scots guard and broke the door down, finding no one inside he had the furniture destroyed. Shortly thereafter the remaining partisans of Bretagne were expelled from the court.

Not all those who allied with Bretagne in the final years of François&#x27; reign were to profit as completely as Montmorency and Saint-André. Another favourite, Dampierre ended in the dauphin&#x27;s disgrace for daring to attack his mistress Diane de Poitiers, others died in battle or judicial duels.

As he lay dying, François summoned Bretagne to his bedside. Father implored son not to recall Montmorency from his disgrace, and to trust in the men the king had surrounded himself with since 1541, chief among them Tournon and Annebault.

==Return to the centre==
===Palace revolution===

François I of France died around 14:00 on 31 March 1547. While those in the room were still mourning, the dauphin Bretagne, now styled King Henri II dashed off letters summoning Diane and Montmorency to come to court. Montmorency&#x27;s recall was therefore rapid, and he was invited to join Henri at Saint-Germain. The two engaged in a 2 hour conference on 1 April during which Montmorency and the king engaged in a complete reorganisation of the government. After the meeting Montmorency received the apartments of François&#x27; former mistress the duchesse d&#x27;Étampes at Saint-Germain. Holding court here, he received the flocks of condolences that poured in for the recently departed king. 

Montmorency assumed the position that had been jointly occupied by Admiral Annebault and Cardinal de Tournon in leading the administration of François in the king&#x27;s final years. Both men were dispossessed of their charges that evening. Annebault was allowed to remain Admiral, however he would no longer be paid, in much the same way as Montmorency had maintained his charge of Constable without pay during his disgrace. He was further obliged to surrender his Marshal office to Saint-André. Montmorency became commander of the royal armies and the lynchpin of the royal council almost immediately. His proximity with the new king was such that he even shared the king&#x27;s bed on occasion during 1547, a practice which shocked some contemporaries. The ambassador of Ferrara remarked on the matter with revulsion. His establishment as head of the administration was represented by his resumption of the offices of Constable and &quot;Grand Maître&quot; which he had enjoyed in former years. The duchesse d&#x27;Étampes, enemy of both Montmorency and Henri was banished from court. Montmorency also received the arrears of pay he would have been owed if not for his disgrace.

With great pride Montmorency remarked on a different incident of intimacy with the king where Henri had entered his chambers while he was receiving a footbath. The Constable bragged about the event to Saint-André, who in turn told the duc d&#x27;Aumale. According to the ambassador of Ferrara, Aumale was mortified, keenly aware the king would never make such shows of intimacy with him. One of the king&#x27;s favourite horses, &quot;Compère&quot; was a gift from Montmorency.

Montmorency was restored to the governate of Languedoc, and his brother La Rochepot was restored to his office as governor of the Île de France and Paris. His eldest nephew Cardinal de Châtillon received rich new benefices among them Beauvais. Montmorency received the charge for the second time on 12 April 1547. Keen to reward his favourite, the return of his governate came with back-pay for the years in which he had been denied his possession of Languedoc, totalling 100,000 &quot;écus&quot; in addition to the annual income of 25,000 &quot;écus&quot; he would receive going forward. In sum Henri distributed 800,000 &quot;livres&quot; among his three great favourites (Montmorency, Aumale, and Saint-André) upon his ascent, which was raised by a tax of two tenths upon the clergy.

On 12 April the king received Montmorency&#x27;s oath in his capacity as Constable of France, with the king declaring that all civil and military officials were to be subordinated to him. He also restored the exercise of his old lesser charges, that of captain of the forts of Bastille, Vincennes, Saint-Malo and Nantes.

Until at least 1552, all ambassadors to France presented their credentials to Montmorency before they were received by the king.

Back in favour, Montmorency advanced his nephews once more, with Coligny being elevated to the position of colonel-general of the French infantry within a month of Henri&#x27;s accession. Over the following years of Henri&#x27;s reign, Coligny would be made Admiral of France, governor of Picardie and governor of the Île de France. Through advancement of his nephews Montmorency secured his own power.

At the centre of power once more, Montmorency was again able to be a distributor of royal favour to a network of patronage. As such he was soon approached by the queen of Navarre who was seeking to re-enter royal favour. The two had a frosty relationship. This meant that when in 1548 the king became suspicious that the queen and her husband the king of Navarre were intriguing with the Emperor, Henri turned to Montmorency, who had his agents intercept all mail addressed to the couple for several months. In 1556 suspicions would again arise at court as to the potentially treasonous actions of the new king of Navarre and his wife with the Emperor over Spanish Navarre. The king of Navarre wrote to Henri and Montmorency, hoping to recharacterize his dealings in a less dangerous light. The queen of Navarre wrote to Montmorency separately, urging him to maintain the good relations he enjoyed with Navarre.

===Push for war===
Despite the centrality of his position in the new administration, Montmorency was unable to make the king forget the captivity he had experienced in Imperial hands in prior years. Henri was keen to exert himself against the Empire and therefore summoned the Holy Roman Emperor to appear at his coronation in his capacity as the comte de Flandre, formerly a vassal of the French crown. The Emperor replied that he would attend the coronation, at the head of an army of 50,000 men. Montmorency, who desired peace with the empire, was tasked with reinforcing the garrisons on the border.

Henri&#x27;s coronation did not immediately follow his father&#x27;s death, it no longer being seen as the ceremony by which royal power was conferred. Therefore, it was not until 25 July 1556 that it was undertaken. The next day, representatives of the four most ancient baronies of France went to receive the ampulla of sacred oil that would be used to anoint the king. 
The Montmorency who represented one of the four baronies were represented by the Constable&#x27;s eldest son as the Constable was required elsewhere. During the coronation, Henri awarded two collars of the Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel), the highest order of French chivalry. One was granted to the Italian condotierri Piero Strozzi, while the other was awarded to Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny.

Montmorency also ensured that gentlemen were not left in a state of discontent with the crown where possible. To this end he assured such figures received a caress or embrace from the king, which he advised would appease their discontent. According to Brantôme, if such a system worked at this time, it broke down by the time of the Wars of Religion.

On 26 June 1547 Henri created a new law applying to the frontier provinces of the east. The border was to be divided into three zones of control, each subordinated to a Marshal of France. The Marshal would have all the authority over troops in their region, depriving the governors of the provinces. Montmorency, as the authority above the Marshals would therefore have military authority over all eastern border provinces. The motivation for this new policy, though it was a dead letter on arrival, was to invest authority in Montmorency and the three Marshals (Saint-André, Bouillon and Melfi) all of whom were favourites of the new king, at the expense of the Lorraine and Clèves family who were governors of those regions.

===Coup de Jarnac===

At the start of Henri&#x27;s reign a celebrated duel exposed the factions that were to dominate the reign of the young king. La Châtaignerie and Jarnac were granted permission to conduct a judicial duel by the king. It was the first judicial duel that had been authorised in France since the times of Louis IX. Diane and the Lorraine family acted as patrons to La Châtaignerie, while Montmorency took Jarnac (formerly a member of the duchesse d&#x27;Étampes&#x27; party during the reign of François) under his wing. Jarnac&#x27;s second would be Claude de Boisy, a friend of Montmorency&#x27;s. Crowds gathered for the duel, which featured hundreds dressed in satin. In a shock to many of the watchers, Jarnac was able to deliver a quick victory in the duel getting around his opponent and slicing him in the back. The king was stunned, and for a while did not respond to Jarnac&#x27;s request to have his honour restored and opponent spared. Marguerite and Montmorency urged Henri to speak so that La Châtaignerie&#x27;s life could be spared. Henri eventually spoke, but did not say the customary plaudit to the victor that he was a man of honour. La Châtaignerie humiliated by his defeat tore off the bandages provided to him and bled out. Montmorency was the main winner of the duel, seen as wise for his backing of Jarnac. Henri meanwhile vowed to never allow another judicial duel during his reign.

Saint-André had suffered disgrace during the reign of François for his allegiance to Henri, however he was richly rewarded upon his patron&#x27;s rise to power. He was made a Marshal and &quot;premier gentilhomme de la chambre du roi&quot; (first gentleman of the king&#x27;s chamber) which gave him access to the king at times when even Montmorency was precluded from being in his presence.

===Valentinois&#x27; party===

The king&#x27;s mistress Diane de Poitiers, duchesse de Valentinois, seeking a counterbalance to the great influence over the king that Montmorency enjoyed, found it in the patronage of the Lorraine family, and in particular the duc d&#x27;Aumale and archbishop of Reims. She and the Lorraines had been in friendly conversation since at least 1546 when a marriage was arranged between the marquis de Maine and her daughter Louise de Brézé. The family achieved a major coup in 1548 when they secured a promise of marriage between the four year old dauphin and their six year old niece Mary Stuart. This marriage would come to pass on 24 April 1558. The alliance of the Lorraine family and Diane began to erode Montmorency&#x27;s power, much to his consternation. In opposition to this, he frequently tried to contrive reasons for the Lorraine brothers to be absent from court. Ultimately, the Lorraine brothers would not attain the level of intimacy that Montmorency enjoyed with Henri. 

In the rivalry between Montmorency and the Lorraines during the reign of Henri, Saint-André maintained a flexible position between the two, ready to follow whichever advantaged him most in the particular circumstances. Saint-André would however have a rivalry with Montmorency&#x27;s nephews for access to military command.

In 1548 the Venetian ambassador reported that it was a matter of dispute at the court which of Diane and Montmorency, Henri loved more.

===Royal council===
During the reign of François a &quot;conseil des affaires&quot; (council of affairs), sometimes called the secret council had been established. It would meet with the king every morning and was composed of the leading royal favourites, Montmorency, Saint-André, the Lorraine brothers, the elder Cardinal de Lorraine, the king of Navarre, the duc de Vendôme, Marshal Bouillon and some administrative royal functionaries who did not participate in the discussions proper. Through this council, royal police was decided upon. In the most sensitive discussions, only Montmorency, Saint-André and the Lorraine brothers would be invited. In the afternoon the &quot;conseil privé&quot; (privy council) convened to consider matters of finance and administration. Legal matters that had been referred to the king could also be settled during the course of its sessions. It was a far larger council, and could meet without the presence of the king himself.

The two families, Lorraine and Montmorency dominated Henri&#x27;s councils. Aside from the direct members of the families on the council, such as Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Odet de Coligny their respective &#x27;creatures&#x27; filled the body. Montmorency and the Chancellor François Olivier enjoyed a close relationship, unified by their antipathy for the Lorraine family. For example, Jean de Morvillier the bishop of Orléans, and Louis de Lausignan, the seigneur de Lanssac were both men of Montmorency&#x27;s faction on the court. However affiliation was not binary between the families, and men such as Jean de Monluc, the bishop of Valence maintained relationships with both families. While Montmorency enjoyed the most senior position on the royal council, the Cardinal de Lorraine held the second most senior position. The king for his part was not particularly interested in domestic politics and was content to balance the networks of his favourites in the administration while they ran things.

On 1 April 1547 letters patent established a new royal secretariat, that of the &quot;secrétaire d&#x27;État&quot; (secretary of state), which was grafted onto the former office of &quot;secrétaire des finances&quot;. The letters patent were likely drawn up by Montmorency himself. Montmorency also enjoyed the benefit of having one of Henri&#x27;s four &quot;secretaires d&#x27;État&quot;, Jean du Thier, being an old client of his. Indeed Montmorency had gained for Thier the position of &quot;secrétaire du roi&quot; (secretary of the king) in 1536 and the secretary had served as his personal secretary since 1538. Du Thier was his own man however, and by his appointment in 1547 he was willing to work equally with the Cardinal de Lorraine and over the following decade would depart from Montmorency&#x27;s service to be firmly associated with the duc de Guise. Three of the four initial secretaries established to the office in 1547 were the picks of Montmorency, and they generally leaned towards him, as they favoured a similarly peaceful international policy as opposed to the Lorraine war policy. The four secretaries did not however have the privilege of opening diplomatic dispatches addressed to the king, at least early in Henri&#x27;s reign, before the grandees became occupied with war. Montmorency took responsibility for this personally from 1547, both due to his assiduous nature and his desire to maintain his centrality in the court. In 1552, the &quot;secrétaires d&#x27;État&quot; were joined by a new office, that of &quot;messieurs des finances&quot;. Both these roles were subordinate to the authority of Montmorency, who acted as something like a prime minister.

The grandees of the court, and in particular Montmorency, frequently took advantage of the secretaries to provide either the postscript or closure to the correspondence he was dispatching on his own account. On occasion the secretaries would write the entire letter for Montmorency.
In their later biographies, Marshal Tavannes and Marshal Vielleville would both characterise Henri as a passive presence during his own reign. For Tavannes, it was in fact the reign of Montmorency, Diane and the Lorraine brothers. Vielleville described the various grandees (adding Saint-André to Tavannes&#x27; list) as &#x27;devouring the king like a lion&#x27;. Whether this distance from rule was a choice of the king is debatable, Montmorency was accused of keeping the king out of involvement in government to better allow for his total control. This included only showing him a portion of the correspondence the court received. It was also true that Henri&#x27;s long running dispute with his father had meant that he had been kept out of the decision making processes of state for much of his adult life, and therefore he looked for guidance from a man with far more experience. It is possible even that Montmorency represented a surrogate father figure for a man so long estranged from his own. The Italian ambassador at one point remarked that the king trembled when Montmorency approached &quot;as children do when they see their schoolmaster&quot;.

A reflection of this balance can be seen in the awards of office made by the royal council. When such awards were signed off on by the king, the supporting grandee would be indicated as &#x27;present&#x27;. Of the 109 awards made in spring 1553, 11% had the backing of the duc de Guise while 10% had the backing of Montmorency.

===Italian expedition===
As early as April 1547, Henri planned to visit Italy. Montmorency liased with the prince de Melfi the governor of French Piemonte to increase the number of troops under his command, such that the visit could be safely conducted. Melfi therefore raised an additional 500 soldiers, a challenging expense as his finances were already overstretched rebuilding the fortifications of the region. In Autumn 1547, Montmorency was informed that the Emperor planned to invade Piemonte. This warning came at a time of increasingly troubling border incidents, which only magnified the need of the king to come to Piemonte. The marchese di Saluzzo (marquis of Saluzzo) refused Melfi&#x27;s order to accept French garrisons in his castles and was subsequently arrested. To free himself from his imprisonment, he agreed in March 1548 to cede all his property to Montmorency. This was an attractive prospect to Montmorency, who through his wife could stake a claim to Monferrato and the town of Tende. With all these combined he could build himself an Italian principality, however he ultimately refused the donation. The marchese died and was succeeded by his brother, who complied with Melfi&#x27;s garrison order. Montmorency organised the escort to accompany Henri into Piemonte, the comte de Tende put the naval forces on alert in support of this. 

Henri had at first wanted to seize this moment to resume war in Italy but Montmorency strenuously opposed the king in this matter. His case was made for him when Venezia announced that it would not enter an alliance with France, a crucial lynchpin of the militant factions policy. Henri nevertheless decided to go forward with his visit to Italy.

In August Henri crossed through the pass de Susa and entered Italy, arriving in Turin on 13 August. The duca di Ferrara (duke of Ferrara) came to pay his homage to the French king, and while there worked out the details of his daughter&#x27;s marriage to the duc d&#x27;Aumale. The duca di Savoia petitioned Henri to be restored to his lands but Henri refused to countenance abandoning French control of Piemonte.

===Gabelle revolt===

A revolt against the &quot;gabelle&quot; (salt tax) in 1548 disrupted the king&#x27;s plans for advances in Italy. Tensions had been rising in the south-west of France since 1544, and exploded in this year with 50,000 rioting and taking up arms. At first, Henri was satisfied that the local authorities would be able to suppress it, but this confidence faded as more reports came in. Learning of what was transpiring in September 1548, he was convinced an exemplary punishment was required. From Piemonte he, Montmorency and the secretary Laubespine planned how to respond. Montmorency argued the population had already revolted 5 years previously, and that to pacify the area they should remove the entirety of the population. This extreme plan was however rejected by the king. It was agreed that a pincer movement would be conducted against the rebellious region, with Montmorency marching up towards Bordeaux from Languedoc, while the duc d&#x27;Aumale, (duc de Guise in 1550) would advance from Poitou. Montmorency who departed Piemonte with 1000 soldiers and 500 cavalry was to raise further troops of Languedoc, Béarn and the Basque country for his part of the pincer. Both men brought with them men of the other&#x27;s party. Aumale had with him the sieur de Burie, lieutenant-general of Guyenne who was a client of Montmorency&#x27;s. Meanwhile Montmorency was accompanied by Aumale&#x27;s brother the marquis de Maine. 

The bourgeois of Bordeaux found themselves sympathetic to the cause of the peasant confederacy that dominated the surrounding countryside, known as the Pétault. The garrison and militia therefore were not charged with suppressing the Pétault and their allies. Moneins, the governor of Bordeaux was persuaded to negotiate with the rebels, however he was killed by a restless crowd on 21 August. This act of violence alienated the bourgeois of Bordeaux from the movement, and they repressed it in the city&#x27;s confines. As Montmorency meanwhile approached, he was well informed of how the situation had calmed in the period during which he had been assembling his army; indeed he received a stream of representatives from the city who assured him all was well. By this time Henri had lost interest in the progress of the two armies in suppressing the revolt. 

Montmorency was little interested in the efforts of the bourgeois of Bordeaux to support him and he entered Bordeaux in force in October. The people of Bordeaux had decorated the streets with draperies for his arrival. Montmorency took all the arms in the possession of the city over the following days, including the city&#x27;s artillery pieces. Montmorency suppressed the revolt with savagery, having 150 of the ring leaders executed, while the city itself was subject to the looting of his soldiers. He suspended the &quot;Parlement&quot; and installed magistrates from Provence, Normandie and Paris in the region. He instructed these parachuted magistrates to open an investigation into the city and its leaders. Meanwhile, on 26 October a funeral was commemorated for Tristan de Moneins. On 6 November 1548 the magistrates reached their conclusion, Bordeaux would lose its urban privileges, pay the cost of the campaign and an additional fine of 200,000 &quot;écus&quot;. The city hall was razed. With this sentence pronounced the executions began: men of many ranks were sentenced to death, from the &quot;prévôt&quot; (provost) of Bordeaux who had &#x27;failed to have his orders against the rebellion obeyed&#x27; to peasants and craftsmen. Various tortures were inflicted on the rebels.

He dispatched several companies of soldiers to reduce Limoges, which was held by peasant insurgents. On 22 November 1548 he left Bordeaux, leaving in the subjugated city the force he had initially brought out of Piemonte and several companies of &quot;gendarmes&quot;. He departed for Saint-Germain-en-Laye.

The harshness meted out by Montmorency towards Bordeaux would be short-lived, tensions with England creating concern Bordeaux would attempt to defect to the country. Therefore after 6 months the suppression of the civic institutions of Bordeaux was reversed, and the fines rescinded. In a further concession to the impetus towards rebellion, the majority of the unpopular changes to the &quot;gabelle&quot; would also be revoked in the coming years. The &quot;gabelle&quot; revolt would be the only major popular revolt during Henri&#x27;s reign.

His behaviour during the &quot;gabelle&quot; crisis contrasted with that of Aumale who suppressed the rebellion in Saintonge with far more generosity. Durot posits that Aumale may have been making a conscience effort to distance himself from unpopular harshness, thereby allowing Montmorency to receive most of the backlash. Montmorency hoped by this exemplary savagery that the Holy Roman Emperor would find no lingering embers to fan in conjunction with an invasion of France. Aumale and Montmorency returned to court by November 1548 for Aumale&#x27;s elaborate marriage with Anne d&#x27;Este. No sooner were the celebrations for Aumale&#x27;s wedding concluded, than Montmorency had celebrations for his nephew Andelot to conduct, having secured his nephew&#x27;s marriage with the rich heiress Claude de Rieux. The former&#x27;s wedding was on 4 December, and the latter&#x27;s on 9 December 1548, neither royal favourite willing to move the celebration to a different time to allow space for the other.

===Boulogne campaign===

Both Montmorency and the Lorraine family were in agreement as to the importance of recapturing Boulogne from the English, therefore offers of arbitration on the dispute were rejected by the court. Montmorency tasked Odet de Salve, the French ambassador to England with acquiring the plans of the defensive works the English had constructed around the city. Both Aumale and Montmorency proposed that French fortifications on the left bank of the river be reinforced. A new fort was thus built, with works completed in July 1548, it was named fort Châtillon and entrusted to Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny. It had the capacity to cannonade the English batteries. 

In 1549 the campaign finally came. Montmorency encamped at Montreiul in August for the thrust to recapture Boulogne, half his forces were staged there while the other half resided at Ardres. An Imperial herald visited the camp where Henri had joined him and warned the French king that while the Emperor would tolerate an attack against the &#x27;new English conquest&#x27; of Boulogne he would not abide by an attack against the &#x27;old English conquest&#x27; of Calais. Henri almost flew into a rage at the representative but was calmed by Montmorency. The Empire and England were bound to protect one another if more than 2000 French soldiers approached Calais, therefore Henri sent an ambassador to the Imperial court to inform the Emperor that the English had violated the previous convention first by fortifying Boulogne among various other transgressions. This appeal impressed the Imperial court. 

The Constable tasked the priore di Capua with using his naval squadrons to intercept any English relief efforts across the channel. He then struck out at Ambleteuse, a settlement to the north of Boulogne protected by four fortresses. With one of the forts put to siege on 23 August 1549 it would be quickly surprised and its garrison of several hundred massacred. The garrison of Ambleteuse were demoralised by this setback and sortied from the town to set fire to some barns, the royal army was thereby able to enter Ambleteuse. Support from the priore di Capua&#x27;s naval squadron led to the reduction of the remaining parts of the town. The garrison proper was granted clemency, allowed to retreat to Calais. His forces then advanced to Hardinghen but were increasingly frustrated by the wet weather. The royal army led by Montmorency, Aumale and Henri made attempts on Boulogne itself but after three weeks of siege and bombardment of the city without progress a blockade was found to be the only practical course. To this end, it was ordered that several ships be scuttled at the entrance to the port of Boulogne.

The English were however willing to negotiate, as early as October 1549 talks began between the earl of Lincoln, English lieutenant-general of Boulogne and Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny, who was to be the French lieutenant-general of Boulogne. Henri departed the army at this time, feeling his presence no longer necessary. In February 1550 formal peace talks were opened. Montmorency&#x27;s brother La Rochepot led the delegation to England, and was accompanied by his nephew Coligny. The delegation was authorised to pay up to 400,000 &quot;écus&quot; for the return of Boulogne to France. The negotiations bogged down as the English delegation proved reticent even with the large sum on offer to surrender the fort, however talks progressed due to the advocacy of Montmorency. Montmorency was able to convince the duke of Northumberland, regent of the kingdom, to support the deal. In April a treaty was signed. The English agreed to evacuate Boulogne within 6 weeks on 6 March 1550. The English finally evacuated the city on 25 April without removing their food supplies or artillery much to the delight of La Rochepot and Coligny who had received the keys from the English. The king was impressed with the fortifications the English had installed in the city during their occupation upon his visit to the city on 15 May. The peace with England ushered in a new period of warm relations between the two kingdoms, incubated by Montmorency&#x27;s kinsmen and friends who served as ambassadors. Indeed it was at Montmorency&#x27;s Château de Châteaubriant that an English delegation was received for the awarding of the Order of the Garter to Henri.

Until such time as the money was fully paid to the English, Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son François was to stay in England as a hostage, alongside five other great lords. In celebration of the victory at Boulogne, Henri organised a triumph in the city of Rouen. Montmorency and Guise (Aumale had succeeded his recently deceased father to the office) had pride of place in the procession, both of them proceeding the &quot;princes du sang&quot; (princes of the blood) in the parade through the city.

The death of the elder duc de Guise and ascent of his son to his titles was not without controversy. At the time of his death, Aumale was also seriously ill, and therefore accusations were cast towards Montmorency that he had poisoned the late duc and attempted to do likewise to Aumale.

Montmorency was one of the nobles whom it was necessary to negotiate with for the acceptance of the Ludovico di Gonzaga of the ruling family of Mantova into the French court. In a council meeting on 3 February 1565, Montmorency would be among the assembled grandees who assented to Ludovico&#x27;s marriage to the heiress of the duché de Nevers, thereby making him a great French lord. Indeed the Nevers landed position was estimated to be worth around 2,000,000 &quot;livres&quot;, in comparison with Montmorency&#x27;s landed interests which were worth around 3,000,000 and which had been built by his great proximity to the centre of power. His presence, alongside that of Cardinal de Guise and La Roche-sur-Yon was necessary to provide evidence that all the great families of the kingdom either assented or were not opposed to the arrangement. Montmorency would however present a force of opposition to the new duc when it came to him being made a &quot;pair&quot; (peer) of the realm by the Paris &quot;Parlement&quot;, attempting to block the transfer of the honour to either Henriette de Clèves or her new husband. Montmorency had a history of disputes with the former ducs de Nevers over their respective precedence in the peerage, however in the matter of Gonzague (as he was now naturalised), he argued &quot;peerage&quot; could not be inherited by or through a woman, and therefore the &quot;pairs de Nivernais&quot; had died out with Jacques de Clèves. The crown intervened in the dispute, deciding in favour of Gonzague for his elevation as &quot;pair de France&quot;, but making no ruling on whether Nivernais or Montmorency was a more senior title in the French peerage. Nevers was therefore received by the &quot;Parlement&quot; on 22 June 1566.

At court, Montmorency extolled the virtues of the lieutenant-general of Bourgogne, Tavannes, who in return wrote gratefully to Montmorency, asking to be considered even the most humble of the Constable&#x27;s servants. Tavannes could not be counted among his reliable clients however, and when Tavannes sought intervention with the king in 1561, he sent identical letters to Montmorency, Guise, Tournon, Saint-André and others to be his representative at the court in the matter of his pension.

===Royal entry===
Due to the busyness of his first few years, it would not be until 15 May 1549 that Henri made his &#x27;entry&#x27; into Paris. In a grand procession of the great lords and ladies of the kingdom, Montmorency had an important role to play, carrying aloft the golden baton of his office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot;. In a further grand procession that took place in the city on 16 June, Montmorency rode out in front of the king holding above him the Constable&#x27;s sword, wearing a golden cloth and using gold reigns for the horse that he led. Henri proceeded behind him under a canopy held by the &quot;échevins&quot; (aldermen) of Paris. Two days later, on 18 June when the queen would make her ceremonial entrance into the capital in an open litter, Montmorency rode alongside the litter which was surrounded on all four corners by cardinals.

Scandal rocked the court in 1550, over the king&#x27;s liaisons with Lady Fleming which Montmorency had been facilitating by bringing the king to her chambers each night. Montmorency was taking advantage of a broken leg Diane had sustained during riding to try and detach him from his powerful mistress with a woman of his own choosing, thereby furthering his total control of the administration. Diane de Poitiers was furious, as were the Lorraine brothers, who argued Montmorency was dishonouring their niece Diane by his actions. She brought Henri back to where she was recuperating at the Château d&#x27;Anet. Diane accused Henri of betraying the Lorraine family, his wife, his son and herself. She then turned on Montmorency showering him in insults for advising the king to conduct the affair and stating that going forward she would not speak to him. Her anger at Montmorency would not last long, and soon she would be writing to him to enquire of the king&#x27;s health as she had previously. Henri meekly tried to explain that the two were just having conversations but Diane noted that his affair would sabotage the marriage between the dauphin and Marie Stuart as he would surely object to marry the &quot;daughter of a whore&quot;. Henri conceded to the pressures of the anger and blamed Montmorency for the whole affair, refusing to speak with him for some time. Despite ceasing his liaisons with Fleming, during their time together the two would have a son, Henri de Valois, who would later be made the duc d&#x27;Angoulême.

===Duc de Montmorency===

In July 1551, Montmorency was elevated from a simple baron, to the distinction of &quot;duché-pairie&quot;, (ducal peerage), catapulting him into the highest echelons of the French nobility. He was further assured that the title would not go extinct if there was only a daughter to succeed the duc, and would be inheritable through the female line. The justification for this extraordinary elevation was both on the grounds of his &#x27;personal virtue&#x27; and the great lineage of his family which went back to the time of Mathieu II de Montmorency who had served under Philippe II Auguste in the 12th Century. The recent triumph at Boulogne and accord with England further recommended the move to the king. This &#x27;unprecedented&#x27; elevation for a baron attracted some disapproval from those of more princely lineages.

===War clouds===

In Italy, war once again loomed as dispute arose between the Pope and the Farnese rulers of Parma. Henri&#x27;s advisers were torn on how to proceed. The Lorraines advocated intervention, hoping for the conquest of Parma, Montmorency meanwhile favoured caution. Henri decided to engage in a proxy conflict, swearing to protect the house of Farnesse on 27 May 1551, to which end he undertook a subsidy of 12,000 &quot;écus&quot; and to provide 2,000 infantry under the command of Piero Strozzi. The Pope was determined to prosecute the war, and declared Parma a rebel. the comte de Brissac was established as governor of French Piemonte in July 1551, and given a force of 15,000 men with which to support Parma.

To finance the wars he undertook, Henri borrowed considerably from the bankers of Lyon and other places. He had inherited a royal debt of 6,800,000 &quot;livres&quot;, and had been able to reduce much of it with the royal reserves François had amassed. For future loans, the grandees Montmorency and Guise&#x27;s property was used to guarantee repayment.

===Metz campaign===
During this time of peace with the Holy Roman Empire, Montmorency had not been idle. Instead he continued the profitable French policy of seeking out whatever enemies of the Emperor he could find to provide them with covert support. At Montmorency&#x27;s urgings, Henri bided his time for the perfect moment, which came when a group of Protestant Imperial princes appealed to Henri for support. A treaty was established at Chambord in January 1552 by which France would support the Imperial princes in their resistance to &#x27;Papal-Spanish tyranny&#x27;, and in return for providing 240,000 &quot;couronnes&quot; (crowns) up front and a further 60,000 monthly to fund the Protestant armies they would allow Henri to occupy the Imperial cities of Cambrai, Metz, Toul and Verdun, which he was to govern in the capacity of a vicar of the Holy Roman Empire. This occupation was theoretically meant to be temporary, a defence of the cities from the tyranny of the Emperor.

Despite the lofty promises of Chambord, most of the Imperial princes would make their peace with the Emperor after only a few months of conflict. Montmorency was reticent about direct open warfare with the Empire, and urged Henri to seek compromise but more bellicose council prevailed against him. With war therefore resumed in 1552, Henri sought to make good on the deal he had struck. To this end a royal army was assembled in Champagne beginning in March. The king conducted a review of the troops alongside Montmorency, Guise and Saint-André in Vitry in April, in total there were 15,000 French foot soldiers, 15,000 Landsknechts, 1300 men-at-arms, 3000 light cavalry and various other assorted forces. Though the king was with the army, he granted Montmorency formal command. Montmorency was tasked with securing the city of Metz, while the king and duc de Guise would secure other parts of Lorraine. 

The regent of the duché de Lorraine Christine allowed their army to pass, lacking the means to provide any serious opposition. Montmorency first captured Toul on 5 April 1552, the city being betrayed into his hands by a servant of the former Cardinal de Lorraine, he left the city with a royal garrison. This accomplished he took Pont-à-Mousson, again without a shot being fired, before he made his approach to Metz. Outside Metz he faced his first resistance, being compelled to storm the abbey of Gorze which was held by the Imperials. Though Metz had no Imperial garrison he sent ahead Tavannes and Bourdillon to the council to ask their permission to occupy the city, in aid of German liberties. The intimidated councillors assent on condition he only impose two bands of infantry on the city, to which Montmorency agreed. The bands were however far bigger than had been expected by the councillors, but it was too late to withdraw their consent. Arriving in the city centre, Montmorency had the centre and gates seized. Henri arrived at Metz on 17 April and was welcomed with a review of Montmorency&#x27;s troops. Henri first desired to appoint Vielleville as governor of Metz, however Vielleville argued that if they wished to be treated as liberators in Alsace, they should employ a light hand in Metz as an example. Montmorency baulked at this, arguing that the grandees of Strasbourg were no smarter than those of Metz, and that these cities would fall as easily as a &#x27;knife through butter&#x27;. Therefore the king established a client of Montmorency&#x27;s, the seigneur de Gonnor as the governor of the city. Gonnor was replaced as governor of Metz by Vielleville (a client of Guise) after the siege of Metz later that year caused significant friction between Montmorency and the duc.

With Metz conquered, Montmorency moved across the Vosges, facing resistance at the small stronghold of Haguenau which he successfully reduced after deploying his artillery and forces. Montmorency entered the square in triumph, shortly followed by the king. By mid-May the royal army arrived at Wissembourg. Upon reaching Wissembourg the royal army was approached by the pfalzgraf von Zweibrücken (count-palatine of Zweibrücken) who stated that if this was truly a conflict about German liberties, they should advance no further. By this time, word had reached the army that there was to be an invasion into France from Spanish Nederland, the French distraction with this invasion was a relief to the German princes. Therefore the king ordered the army be split into three divisions, one under Guise, one under Montmorency and the final under the duc de Vendôme. Montmorency oversaw the capture of Ivoy on 23 June 1552; during the siege Henri had ventured into the trenches and messed with several cannons, arousing Montmorency&#x27;s fury. Though he intended to divide the loot of the place between his own company and that of his son, he was unable to control the troops who engaged in unrestrained looting. The army then proceeded onto Sedan. These armies marched north west and put Damvillers to siege, shortly thereafter the king disbanded the army on 26 July. 

Though the campaign was a considerable success for the French, it failed to yield any of the results that the &#x27;allies&#x27; of the French, the German princes had hoped for. Montmorency&#x27;s duplicity in the occupation of Metz was remembered bitterly. the elector of Sachsen who had been one of those who invited the French to participate would not forgive them, and soon reconciled himself with the Emperor. Going forward the German princes would reject the claims of outsiders to their territories. The king by contrast was delighted with Montmorency, and rewarded him with the elevation of the seigneurie of Damville to a baronnie, he further awarded the vacated office of Admiral to Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny upon Admiral Annebault&#x27;s death. Coligny therefore resigned the charge of colonel-general in favour of another of Montmorency&#x27;s nephews Andelot.

Despite the serious nature of the military campaign, the rivalry between Montmorency and the Lorraine family continued, and having arrived back at court Montmorency expended his energy to ensure that information about the diplomatic situation did not reach the duc de Guise who remained in the field. Guise&#x27;s brother who had received his former title, the duc d&#x27;Aumale informed Guise that he had been compelled to approach the king at a time when Montmorency was absent to keep his brother informed of international developments. The Emperor was greatly aggrieved by the French coup and desired to recapture those settlements that were lost. To this end he crossed the Rhine in the middle of September 1552. Montmorency sought to replicate his scorched earth strategies that he had employed in Provence, and therefore ordered the removal of all grain, the throwing of millstones into water and the removal of the irons from the mills. The Imperial army invested Metz on 10 November 1552, bombarding the settlement from the east and south. In total 50,000 men would besiege Metz, led by the Emperor personally from 30 November. Montmorency prepared to lead a relief army, and assembled a force at Reims, penetrating into Lorraine with 38,000 men during October. To divert the French, the Imperials launched another force into Picardie that put Hesdin to siege, the king recognising the greatest strategic priority of Hesdin diverted 22,000 of the men in Champagne to march north to relieve the town. Montmorency advanced as far as Tilly before his progress failed, and he retreated back to Reims where he met the king. The two stayed there until the end of November, with Montmorency dispatching several of his sons to support Guise in the defence of Metz. Montmorency continued to ensure his policy of starving out the Imperials is adhered to, and upon hearing reports of the poor state of the Imperial camp is satisfied as to the effect of his policy.

On 26 December 1552, the Emperor decided to abandon the siege, having lost too many of his men for too little impact on the walls of Metz. The Emperors&#x27; failed siege of Metz made the reputation of the duc de Guise, who led the city&#x27;s successful defence with only a small force at his command of around 6,000 men.

While Henri and Montmorency campaigned together, Catherine entrusted Montmorency with sending frequent correspondence back to her so she could be appraised of her husband Henri&#x27;s health. She was not the only one who relied on Montmorency to impart information of the king&#x27;s health, and Diane also corresponded with Montmorency to that effect. For her part, Catherine was entrusted with the regency government, Henri being out of the capital on campaign. After taking some initiative in early affairs during the regency, Montmorency urged her in future to refer the decisions she was to make to the king before proceeding with them. Catherine in turn requested of Montmorency that he always ensured her husband&#x27;s safety.

At around the time of Henri&#x27;s expedition into Lorraine, Leone Strozzi a &quot;condotierri&quot; of the famous Strozzi family who had been at the French court fled the country to Malta. Strozzi had entered dispute with Montmorency after the Constable secured the office of captain-general of the galleys for Coligny. This departure came after Strozzi had executed a confident of the Constable&#x27;s Gian Battista Casella. Fearing reprisals Strozzi had taken two galleys from Provence, and fled to the sea, away from the comte de Tende, Montmorency&#x27;s brother in law and governor of Provence, who wished to revenge himself for the killing. Montmorency denounced the Strozzi as treasonous to the king. Henri was furious at Leone and was determined to disgrace the entire Strozzi family. Catherine, who was close with the family interceded on the behalf of Piero Strozzi with Montmorency, telling him that she was certain he would remain loyal and die in French service. Montmorency in turn was able to convince Henri that Piero Strozzi at least was a trustworthy commander.

Piero Strozzi again found himself at risk in April 1555 due to his involvement in the capitulation of French held Siena which had been subject to an Imperial siege. In the months that followed, Strozzi&#x27;s forces were almost encircled, and he had to flee by ship to France. Strozzi proposed to the king that they strike back against the Empire by a naval campaign. Henri frostily noted that Strozzi had already &#x27;ruined a land campaign&#x27; and that he did not want the fleet to also be compromised. Catherine and Montmorency worked together to save the Marshal from disgrace, inviting him to court on 20 June 1555 where the king greeted him icily but did not disgrace him. 

Guise was flush with victory after his triumph at Metz, and had gained great esteem in the eyes of the king for his performance. Upon his return the king kissed him, and addressed him as brother. Montmorency was infuriated by this favour shown to his rivals.

===Northern campaign of 1553===
After the embarrassing defeat at Thérouanne in 1553 a large royal army was raised for a counter offensive against the Imperials. Montmorency was in part blamed for the failures at Thérouanne, as his eldest son had been the commander in the town. His son was therefore now in captivity. For his part, Montmorency was critiqued for failing to follow up the victory at Metz with a decisive blow against the Imperials in Vlaanderen. Montmorency and the king jointly took charge of raising a force totalling 42,000 men. After the Emperor had razed Thérouanne to the ground he moved on Hesdin. Montmorency still raising his force dispatched 2,000 men under Marshal Bouillon to hold the town. Though Bouillon was able to establish himself in the Château he was bombarded from all sides and soon forced to submit on 18 July. Montmorency and the royal force now set out towards Doullens and were able to relieve the siege of the town. Opposite them stood an Imperial force of roughly equal number. Arriving near Corbie Henri inspected his forces, which alongside Montmorency boasted many of the realm&#x27;s princes. The force under Montmorency would devastate Bapaume and much of the surrounding countryside and inconclusive struggles in Luxembourg. The Papal Nuncio who joined Montmorency for the campaign pled with him to be merciful, but Montmorency informed him that it was necessary to execute their revenge. The Nuncio estimated around 2,000 villages were burned down. Arriving at Cambrai, which had like Metz been promised as neutral Montmorency demanded they open their doors and supply his army. The inhabitants, well remembering Metz refused and therefore Montmorency began a bombardment, which lasted only six days before the army decided to move on. Montmorency would become seriously ill during the campaign, and it would ultimately be cut short. Indeed it was suspected by many that he was going to die in September 1553. Bad weather and the lateness of the season without any success contributed to the campaign&#x27;s end.

===Languedoc===

Despite holding the office of governor of Languedoc, Montmorency rarely visited the province, as such there was something of a power vacuum in the region. He held little in the way of territory in Languedoc, with only the seigneuries of Florac, Bagnols and Pézenas to his name in the province. Montmorency&#x27;s attentions were either devoted to political influence at the centre of power or occupied on campaign. This absence from Languedoc was true even in his period of exclusion from power between 1559 and 1562.

The lieutenant-general of Languedoc during his governorship, Joyeuse was as rigidly Catholic as Montmorency, as was the town governor of Narbonne Raimond de Beccarie whose charge was important in the province. Joyeuse had been named lieutenant-general of the province in 1561 at Montmorency&#x27;s request and his father (a former governor of Narbonne) had been a client of Montmorency&#x27;s since 1548.

===Northern campaign of 1554===

In 1554 the French army again campaigned in the north, with the army divided into three columns, one under Montmorency while the others were under the duc de Nevers and the prince de La Roche-sur-Yon. La Roche-sur-Yon entered Artois burning as he went while Montmorency took the left bank of the Meuse and Nevers the right. On 28 June 1554 after a siege Montmorency secured Mariembourg (renamed Henrimbourg by the victors), where he received the king a few days later. After briefly uniting with the force under Nevers, Montmorency&#x27;s army stormed Bouvignes with the garrison of 800 massacred. The army continued its push towards Bruxelles and carved a path of burned suburbs and destroyed villages all the way to Crèvecœur-sur-l&#x27;Escaut where the force under La Roche-sur-Yon joined the royal army. Montmorency and the king decided to devote the entire royal army to the siege of Renty. However by now the entire Imperial army of 45,000 was in the area. Guise and Coligny, in charge of a small party of 300 were able to turn back the Imperial vanguard, however Montmorency did little to exploit this success and Renty would remain untaken. After Renty, the king decided to retreat the army back to France.

Montmorency&#x27;s responsibilities for the direction of the army became a great burden for him and he was accused of limiting the pursuit of the Imperial army after the battle of Renty so as to deprive Guise of an opportunity for glory. The Venetian ambassador held him responsible for the failure of the campaign to take Bruxelles. His overall approach to the campaign had been cautious, which became the subject of criticism. It was alleged he was more interested in securing the ransom of his son than the prosecution of the campaign. In both court and the town squares of France Latin verses were composed decrying him as a coward.

==Man of peace==

Contemporaries to the reign of Henri believed that the prime mover in appointments to bishoprics during this period was the Cardinal de Lorraine, who it was said was present whenever candidates to become bishop were read before the king for his approval or disapproval. His influence over the process was not however total, and Montmorency and Diane de Poitiers both exerted their own influence on ecclesiastical elections against Lorraine. For example, the archbishop of Arles, Jacques du Broullat was Montmorency&#x27;s relative. Even if Montmorency did not enjoy anything like total influence over ecclesiastical appointments, there were bishops among those whom he exerted influence to protect. For example, when François de Dinteville, the bishop of Auxerre was accused of having attempted to poison the king&#x27;s son, Montmorency secured the dropping of the charges against him.

As a testament to the great influence Montmorency enjoyed, he was made godfather of Henri&#x27;s youngest son the duc d&#x27;Alençon after his birth in 1555. 

The Île de France was increasingly a territory of the Montmorency family. As a reflection of this, Montmorency was able to secure the governorship of the province for his son François upon such time as he was released from imperial captivity. The appointment of his eldest son to the office also reflected the upcoming marriage between him and the king&#x27;s bastard Diane de France. At the same time, Coligny became governor of Picardie. With this region as his &#x27;fief&#x27;, Montmorency was greatly aggrieved when in 1555 the Lorraines acquired the comté de Nanteuil (a days ride from Paris) for 260,000 &quot;livres&quot;. In response to this intrusion on his domain, Montmorency would devote the next several years to frenetic land purchases in the Île de France. The two families&#x27; rivalry would come to a head over the comté de Dammartin. The last holder Françoise d&#x27;Anjou had died, and her succession was disputed between two heirs. Montmorency purchased the rights to the comté from one of the claimants for 192,000 &quot;livres&quot; in 1554; five years later the Guise bought out the other claimant for 200,000 &quot;livres&quot;. To achieve this, the Lorraines had to convince Boulainvilliers to rescind the contract he had made with Montmorency. The dispute between the two grandees for possession of this (relatively poor - possessing revenues of only around 5000 &quot;livres&quot; per annum) fiefdom would continue until 1572. At times the hatred generated between the two families over Dammartin was anticipated to bring the two families into civil war.

===Negotiation efforts===
The Papal Nuncio Prospero Santacroce was keen to secure a peace between France and the Empire, so that both kingdoms might focus their attention on the &#x27;true threats to Christendom&#x27;, the Osmanlı İmparatorluğu (Ottoman Empire). He proposed that each side retain what they held, arguing that this was in France&#x27;s interest, as they currently possessed Metz. Montmorency therefore alongside Lorraine and the secretary de Laubespine met with the Pope in early 1555 in a searching effort for an agreeable peace. During May 1555 peace talks were conducted at Marcq, however the French were unable to tolerate the demands of the Imperial side to vacate Piemonte, Monferrato, Metz, Toul, Verdun and Corse in return for very few concessions from the Emperor and therefore talks broke down. The talks were further sabotaged by French gains in Italy, which lessened the interest of the crown in attaining peace. Montmorency had little to gain by the continuation of the war, with both a son and nephew in captivity (not to mention his son-in-law Turenne and brother-in-law Villars), and much to lose. However Guise and the Lorraines&#x27; interests were much more closely tied to the prosecution of the war. With the death of Pope Julius, a new pope, Paul IV who was far more anti-Imperial, pushed for an alliance with France against the Neapolitans. Montmorency was frustrated by the efforts that were needed to stop the Pope inflaming the war.

===Truce of Vaucelles===
The failure of Piero Strozzi to defend Siena, which fell to Imperial forces on 12 April 1555 contributed to the push for peace. In negotiations with Cardinal de Granvelle in May Montmorency&#x27;s strident desire for peace was apparent. More embarrassingly for the Constable, his admiration for the Emperor was also on display. In a notable incident when he praised the Emperor as a man who &#x27;knew what is what&#x27;, Lorraine turned to Montmorency who reddened and added &#x27;after my master [Henri]&#x27;. Despite his passion for peace, Montmorency was not willing to concede to all the Imperial demands and long discussions were held concerning Metz, Milano, Boulogne, Napoli, Vlaanderen and Bourgogne. Ultimately the election of the pro-French Pope put an end to the talks for the time.

At the French court, opinion was sharply divided between the Lorraine brothers, who saw advantage in continuing the fight in Italy, and Montmorency who saw it as an expensive liability (indeed the crown had already sunk 45,000,000 &quot;couronnes&quot; into the conflict by 1556). Montmorency disapproved of what he saw as &#x27;adventurism&#x27; from the Lorraine brothers. France&#x27;s ambassador to the Papal States, Avanson, was persuaded to negotiate France into a military alliance with the new Pope in October 1555, even before negotiators of proper rank arrived. This alliance was aimed at the Spanish control of Napoli. When Cardinal de Tournon and Lorraine arrived in December 1555 they endorsed Avanson&#x27;s agreement in a slightly modified version. Henri was to assist the Pope in liberating Napoli. 

In October 1555, the Emperor began the process of his abdications, ceding control of first Nederland and then España to his son Felipe. This process was useful to the resumption of peace talks, as much of Henri&#x27;s hatred of the Imperial camp was personally directed at the Emperor Charles, and he had less personal animosity towards Felipe. Negotiations opened, at first on the more specific issue of ransoms for the imprisoned nobility, before they expanded in December to a more extensive conference. As it remained nominally only a discussion of ransoms, Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny led the talks for the French. He considered withdrawing in late January 1556, but Montmorency&#x27;s desire for peace ensured the conference continued. 

Montmorency ultimately arranged for the Truce of Vaucelles to be signed on 5 February 1556 between France, the Empire and España. This had the advantage of helping him with negotiating the release of his son François from his captivity. Meanwhile for the Emperor it allowed him to conduct the formalities of his abdication. The truce declared that there would be a five year truce between France and Felipe II, who was elevated to kingship in España. It was further declared that neither side would build any further fortifications. The truce was a considerable victory for the French, allowing the king to keep control of Metz, Toul, Verdun, all the places captured in Luxembourg, Hainaut and Vlaanderen between 1552 and 1555; their control of Piemonte, Monferrato and Corse.

For his leadership in the movement towards peace, he was subject to increasing scorn from public opinion. He was accused of being fearful that if war was allowed to continue he would be supplanted in the royal favour by more aggressive captains such as Guise, Vielleville, Monluc and Brissac. De Crue, Montmorency&#x27;s biographer, finds this attitude short-sighted and highlights Montmorency&#x27;s skill at ensuring the army remained supplied and his determination to preserve the stability of the monarchy. More personal scorn was directed at Montmorency by the Lorraine brothers for the undermining of the work they were undertaking with the Papacy.

Alongside his nephew Coligny the governor of Picardie, Montmorency worked to ensure that vigilance was maintained on the north eastern border of the kingdom. Montmorency ordered engineers to overhaul the fortifications of the Haute Somme.

===Raising ransom===
The Constable was distraught to learn of the escape from French captivity of the hertog van Aarschot (duke of Aarschot). Not only a violation of his word of honour, Montmorency had hoped that Aarschot&#x27;s ransom would constitute the majority of the sum that would see his son released from Imperial captivity. An event which had not yet happened due to continued negotiations over the size of the ransom. Montmorency and Henri threatened to void the truce if an agreeable ransom was not agreed. The Venetian ambassador recognised this as a bluff, as the captivity of his son had brought Montmorency to the peace table in the first place. Montmorency would opine that he was aware the Imperials were preparing for war, but that they would find the French ready to meet them on the field. With Montmorency for war, Lorraine advocated peace, arguing that they could not disrupt the peace of &#x27;Christendom&#x27;. When a truce of 50,000 &quot;écus&quot; was finally set for his son&#x27;s ransom on 25 July 1556, Montmorency reverted to his pacific posture. 

===Henri&#x27;s Italian campaign===
In the end, the Truce of Vaucelles would not last its intended five years, being violated in September 1556, with the war therefore reopening at this time. When the Pope had learned of the truce of Vaucelles he was furious, and while it would have been improper for him to denounce it formally, his scorn was open. He put pressure on Henri to break it and despite the urgings of the French ambassador, succeeded in provoking the duque de Alba (duke of Alba) to invade Papal territory, thereby persuading Henri to void his adherence to the truce. Against the Lorraines Montmorency condemned the drive back to war to the king. At council, Montmorency argued that Alba had not violated the truce and that he should content himself to support the Pope monetarily, Guise and Brissac meanwhile argued that the king&#x27;s honour was at stake if he did not defend the Pope. Though the royal council was deadlocked on renouncing the truce for sometime, the king was able to convince Montmorency that by supporting the Pope he was not violating his agreement with España. Nevertheless Montmorency remarked that they would &quot;ride across the Alps but come back on foot&quot;. On 28 September Henri committed to an Italian expedition.

The duque di Ferrara(duke of Ferrara) would not play ball with the campaign plan established by the French, which required his financial support. Montmorency jumped on the opposition to try and convince Henri to cancel the campaign, but to no avail. Despite the campaign into Italy, the truce of Vaucelles remained technically in force. On 6 January 1557 Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny launched a surprise attack on Douai. In the wake of this debacle, Montmorency tried to ensure the event would remain a local embarrassment as opposed to the beginning of a broader campaign. However, when Henri learned (wrongly) that Venezia was about to ally with France, a formal declaration of war was exchanged with España on 31 January 1557. 

===Persecution of the Protestants===

The growth of Protestantism, under the stewardship of the queen of Navarre (who had affiliated with Protestantism since 1557) in Béarn was a cause of great concern for Montmorency. In the hopes of combatting the &#x27;heresy&#x27;, he dispatched his militantly Catholic lieutenant Cardinal d&#x27;Armagnac from his position in Toulouse to &#x27;restore ecclesiastical discipline&#x27;. These efforts would however come to little, and in July 1561, the queen of Navarre legalised Protestantism and outlawed Catholicism in her territories.

By the means of the Edict of Compiègne in July 1557 the inquisition was established in France. The edict called for three &#x27;inquisitors&#x27; to run the proceedings. A man from each of the three leading families of the kingdom was selected for the role; Cardinal de Lorraine for the Lorraine family, Cardinal de Châtillon for the Montmorency and Cardinal de Bourbon for the Bourbons. By this time Châtillon&#x27;s Protestant sympathies were already suspected, making his inclusion a subject of historical curiosity. Romier explains his inclusion as a political necessity, as Montmorency would never tolerate being excluded from such an important method by which to enhance his authority, which would be left in the hands of Lorraine.

Guise was charged with leading a campaign into Italy in support of the Pope in 1557. The campaign was a disaster, with the Spanish refusing to engage his force, allowing attrition and poor supplies to eat away at the strength of the French. At court, Lorraine complained in letters to his brother that he had to spend every hour of the day with the king if he was to have any hope of stopping Montmorency from getting the king to agree with his position that the invasion was a terrible idea.

===Disaster at Saint-Quentin===

The king was increasingly conscious that the next Imperial thrust might come from the north, and this was only furthered by the new state of war with England. To this end, he replaced Navarre (formerely the duc de Vendôme prior to the death of the old king in 1555) as commander of the northern frontier army with Montmorency in May 1557.

While the duc de Guise was fighting in Italy, a Spanish army led by the duca di Savoia (duke of Savoia), first cousin of Henri invaded France from the Spanish Netherlands. They first made a feint towards the east, suggesting they were to attack Marienburg before pivoting towards Saint-Quentin in Picardie. The town was initially poorly defended, but the small garrison happened to be reinforced by a passing company of the dauphins lances. This provided time for Montmorency to dispatch Coligny with 300 men-at-arms and two infantry companies to reinforce the town. They were able to slip in before the siege lines were sealed. Montmorency was charged with leading an army to relieve the town, the king having informed his favourite that he was angry better provisions had not been made for its defence. With several attempts failed at introducing troops into the besieged town, Montmorency prepared to withdraw, his army outnumbered considerably, however his order came late, and by then the besieging army was able to bring him to battle before he could reach the woods. Therefore on 10 August he was handed a crushing defeat by the duca in front of Saint-Quentin. His army attempted to extract itself to the east of the city, but upon entering a plateau with his cavalry routed, the infantry was bombarded relentlessly for four hours. Only some small portions of the army under Condé and Nevers were able to withdraw to La Fère. During the combat 6000 Frenchmen were killed, and around 600 French nobles were taken prisoner, including, the duc de Montpensier, Marshal Saint-André, Montmorency himself and his fourth son the sieur de Montbéron. It was the first total defeat for the French army since Pavia. While there were fewer French casualties than at Pavia, the battle was at a far more dangerous location for France.

The destruction of Montmorency&#x27;s army was a disaster for France. Henri lacked present troops, generals, and supplies. The remaining intact French forces were largely occupied far away in Italy. Therefore the capital was in theory open to attack from the Spanish. In the climate of panic some Parisians turned on their Protestant neighbours, besieging a secret Protestant service that was taking place at the &quot;rue Saint-Jacques&quot;. At court, bitter recriminations were levelled against Montmorency for his incompetence. In a couplet that spread throughout the kingdom it was noted that the people &#x27;excused Henri, and cursed Montmorency&#x27;.

While France descended into fearful panic with the loss of Montmorency&#x27;s army, the town of Saint-Quentin was able to hold out long enough for the king to hurriedly recall Guise from Italy, and invest him with the authority of lieutenant-general of the kingdom, granting him general command of the kingdom for the emergency. Guise&#x27;s brother Lorraine took up a position approximating Montmorency&#x27;s domestic responsibilities. With the fall of Saint-Quentin on 27 August, another of Montmorency&#x27;s relatives, his nephew Coligny fell into Spanish hands. During his imprisonment he would convert to Protestantism. Having taken Saint-Quentin, the Spanish decided against a thrust towards the largely undefended Paris, and moved on to sacking other Picard towns, among them Ham, Le Catelet, Noyon and Chauny.

===Captivity===
Guise, now lieutenant-general of the kingdom, assembled a new army at Compiègne and was able to drive the Spanish from the kingdom.

Montmorency&#x27;s imprisonment caused great anguish for the king, who began to send out peace feelers in the hope of quickly securing his return to the court. Alongside his desire to be reunited with his favourite, he was increasingly cautious about leaving the Lorraine family to have unchecked pre-eminence in his court without Montmorency as a counterweight. He was also concerned that he could no longer finance the war. Meanwhile, with Guise ascendant in Montmorency&#x27;s absence, the duc secured the capture of Calais from England in January 1558, bringing the city that had been in English hands for 200 years back into the control of the French crown. By this means Guise made his name as &#x27;the greatest captain in France&#x27;. According to later testimony by Coligny, the Lorraine government showed considerable hostility to the captive Constable.

With Montmorency&#x27;s influence in the kingdom therefore weakened, some of his clients broke away from him and became clients of the Lorraine family. One such noble who was sensitive to the way the wind was blowing was the governor of Berry La Châtre who had long been in Montmorency&#x27;s sphere.

At first, Montmorency was transported by the victorious army to Saint-Omer, and from there he was moved to Ghent. In the initial reports that reached the king, it was said that he had died. However, when Henri learnt that Montmorency was in fact alive, but badly injured, he hurried to despatch the famed surgeon Ambroise Paré to him, though his captors refused to allow this. Several of the king&#x27;s doctors were allowed to see him while he was staying in Enghein, and he began to heal. From his captivity in Ghent, Montmorency was not sitting idly. Hoping to facilitate a peace, Montmorency established marriage proposals aimed at sealing a deal - in one match up, the daughter of the king Elisabeth de Valois would marry Felipe of España&#x27;s son Don Carlos and in another the dauphin would marry Felipe&#x27;s widowed sister the princess of Portugal. This second arrangement would have the advantage to Montmorency of avoiding a proximate relationship between the dauphin and his rivals the Lorraine brothers. For a while the king listened to Montmorency, and agreed to postpone his ascent to the marriage. However, with Guise&#x27;s victory at Calais, the marriage of his niece to the dauphin was committed to by the king, and the ceremony celebrated on 24 April. At the top table during the wedding meal, the Montmorency family were thin on the ground. Only Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Cardinal de Châtillon was there to represent the family at this key marriage. For the celebrations, Guise possessed the staff of the &quot;Grand Maître&quot; during Montmorency&#x27;s absence.

In an assertion of their ascendency, the Lorraine family moved against Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Andelot in May 1558, overseeing his arrest on charge of heresy. Andelot had been working as a negotiator for the peace accords with España and it was the Spanish who tipped off the Lorraine brothers to this opportunity. He would not be in captivity for long, and by July Montmorency had already secured his release, with Lorraine being forced to admit that the information he had been provided was intended to dupe him into falsely accusing Andelot. Henri was increasingly uneasy with their power, as was the Lorraine family&#x27;s former patron Diane. Diane took this moment to realign herself towards Montmorency, and arranged a marriage between her granddaughter and the duc de Montmorency&#x27;s second son Damville. She had grown weary of the Lorraine brothers, who now had no need of her in their time of ascendency. The marriage would take place at Montmorency&#x27;s château de Chantilly in January 1559, with Montmorency inviting the king and the queen to attend. Montmorency and Diane would dine together every evening in January as a reflection of their new political accord.

The king was frustrated by the obstinacy Guise showed towards continuing the war, and the need to be reunited with Montmorency which Guise was thereby denying him. In reflection of his increasing distaste for the duc de Guise, when Guise requested the office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot; be transferred to him from Montmorency in late 1558 as a further reward for his victory at Calais, the king refused. Guise seeing the way the wind was blowing, departed court in frustration on 1 December.

In light of the great wealth of Montmorency, and his importance to the king, Savoia set his ransom at a great amount, 600,000 &quot;livres&quot;. The first instalment of Montmorency&#x27;s huge ransom was paid in late 1558, and therefore he was released from the duca di Savoia&#x27;s captivity. Montmorency was released from captivity for two days on 10 October on Felipe&#x27;s instruction in the hopes his presence would break the king&#x27;s resolve to continue the war. Waiting impatiently for his favourite, Henri eventually resolved to ride out and meet him. He found the Constable alone on the road, and after a long embrace the two travelled back to Amiens. They spent every minute of the following two days together, with Montmorency sleeping in the king&#x27;s chamber. Montmorency complained to the king of the ambition of the Lorraines, with the king adding his own complaints about them onto his, upon receiving word of their discussions, Guise was so dispirited that he departed court to go and hunt at one of his châteaux. After leaving back to captivity, Henri wrote to his favourite &quot;Nothing in the world can turn me from the love I have for you&quot;. It would indeed be the renewal of the king&#x27;s affections for him that were the prime result of his paroled release, with little immediate developments towards peace. 

===Return to power===
With the 200,000 &quot;couronnes&quot; required for the first instalment of his ransom paid, Montmorency again returned to the centre of political power. A thousand riders came out to meet him as he travelled back to Paris in December. He arrived at court in Saint-Germain on 21 December 1558, and set about re-establishing his dominance over the court in just the way it had been prior to his capture. That same day Lorraine returned his signet ring that he had received from the king back in 1557. Henri asked the Cardinal why he and Guise had stopped attending council, to which Lorraine replied that &quot;he [Lorraine] did not wish to pass as Montmorency&#x27;s valet&quot;. With his return, Guise&#x27;s authority as lieutenant-general of the kingdom was cancelled. Henri also promised Montmorency that his eldest son would inherit his office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot; upon his death. Guise was however able to delay this from coming to pass, and the appointment of Montmorency&#x27;s second son Damville as a Marshal. Around Christmas in court the situation was explosive and matters almost came to blows in the halls of Saint-Germain. On 24 December Guise asked two courtiers to secretly watch him, and then challenged Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son to a duel over a slight (likely the matter of his having blamed Guise for failing to get Papal dispensation to annul his secret marriage). Montmorency&#x27;s son swore to the duc that he had done nothing to dishonour him and then departed to inform Montmorency and the king. Henri was unsettled by the episode, but Montmorency laughed it off. In the wake of this, those opposed to the influence of his relatives retreated. For example Blaise de Monluc who had usurped the position of colonel-general of the infantry in the Constable&#x27;s absence, resigned the charge in favour of Montmorency&#x27;s nephew François de Coligny d&#x27;Andelot. In Picardie, Coligny returned to his charge as governor and was now joined by Andelot as his lieutenant-general. At liberty, Montmorency continued to work for peace. This did not mean he was blind to the considerations of the war however, should peace fail, and he oversaw the fortification of Péronne and incited Süleyman into attacking the Empire, so that the Emperor would not be in a position to seek the return of the three bishoprics.

===Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis===

As early as July 1558, Saint-André and Montmorency, both captives, had a conference at Oudernarde at which they agreed on the importance of securing a peace. With their discussions finalised, Saint-André went to the princ van Oranj (prince of Oranj) to inform him that the king wished to negotiate a settlement with España. Both Montmorency and Saint-André conducted negotiations with their captors through September, alongside the secretary L&#x27;Aubespine, hosting some of the talks in their chambers. A formal conference for the end of the war was begun at Cercamp on 8 October 1558 while Montmorency was still in captivity. The peace talks were impeded by the extent of the Habsburg demands; the French were to cede Piemonte, Calais, Corsica, Luxembourg and any other Italian possessions. Montmorency protested the ceding of Piemonte, arguing that this Italian territory should be left with France, however the Spanish countered that the mountains were the natural border that should be abided by. Lorraine was able to convince Montmorency of the necessity of jettisoning Piemonte. Initially these demands were viewed as too much, and the conference was at risk of breaking up. However Montmorency, keenly aware the collapse of the peace talks would mean his return to captivity, persuaded the king to continue the negotiations. In this he was supported by a new ally, the king&#x27;s mistress Diane. In a stormy council meeting on 15 November, Henri announced that he was determined to make peace, even if it involved ceding almost all of these French conquests in Italy. Henri informed the council that he had called them, not to debate the proposal but merely to inform them of his decision, only Archbishop of Vienne objected to the king in the meeting, but he was told to be quiet. 

Catherine and other courtiers were horrified at this conciliatory approach, and implored Henri not to cede French Italian possessions. Henri had indeed promised Guise personally that French Piemonte would not be given away at the peace table. On 30 November 1558, Guise told the king that he would rather his head be cut off than admit the treaty proposals were honourable. He sought to publicly embarrass the king by publicly reminding him of his promise to transfer the office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot; to him. The captains such as Brissac and Monluc were also disgusted by the &#x27;betrayal of their military sacrifices&#x27;. Monluc would later write that Montmorency and Saint-André were the prime reasons why the king established the peace, but that he did not blame them for the misfortunes of the peace and that which followed, as they too were victims of the troubles that were to follow. Montmorency was blamed by the war party for convincing the king of this approach, but Henri defended his favourite, arguing to Catherine that the wrongdoer was not Montmorency, who had always acted properly but rather those who had pushed for the resumption of the war after the truce of Vaucelles had been negotiated in the first place.

On 2 November 1558 Montmorency, Lorraine and Saint-André departed from the negotiations to meet with the king at Beauvais. Henri was overjoyed to see the Constable again. The Lorraine brothers later alleged that it was at this time that the two men entered into a secret agreement for the terms of the peace. Montmorency returned to the talks on 7 November, and therefore a second session began that day which would last until the end of the month. In the second session the matter of the parties&#x27; allies was considered, for France the kingdom of Navarre, for España the ducato di Savoia. The claims of the king of Navarre to Spanish Navarre were abandoned. Matters then turned to England, with the Spanish and English delegation demanding the return of Calais to English control. Lorraine could not countenance this, and although it was the conquest of his political rival, Montmorency&#x27;s loyalty to France would not allow him to support handing over Calais either. On 30 November negotiations were adjourned for 6 weeks, in part so Montmorency and Saint-André could sort out their ransoms.

Towards the establishment of the peace, Montmorency ordered Brissac to dismantle French fortifications that were present in Piemonte and Monferrato. Brissac greatly resented the order, but complied with what was asked, he further dismissed 12,000 soldiers under his command. The soldiers therefore likewise felt betrayed by the peace.

Upon the resumption of the talks, they were moved to Cateau-Cambrésis, viewed as a more convenient and comfortable location. Montmorency, Saint-André and Lorraine arrived for their resumption on 6 February 1559. By now there was a new queen in England, and Elizabeth proved far more conciliatory as concerned the fate of Calais. Nevertheless discussions became very heated, and Montmorency advised Henri to make the appearance of preparing for war to ensure that they got the peace they hoped for through the recruiting of new captains. The issue of Calais was finally cracked on 12 March. The French determined that it was necessary to treat England and España as separate peace treaties to progress. For Calais, France agreed to either return the city to England within 8 years, or failing that provide compensation to England of 500,000 &quot;couronnes d&#x27;or&quot; (golden crowns). England would forfeit its rights to Calais or compensation if they committed aggression against Scotland or France.

On 4 April 1559 the Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis was signed, it constituted two separate peace treaties, one between France and España, the other between France and England. France would maintain Calais, the Three Bishoprics (Metz, Toul and Verdun), Saluzzo and several towns in the Piemonte, but return all other conquests. Felipe for his part would return to France Ham, Saint-Quentin, Thérouanne and Catelet. Felipe II agreed to marry Elisabeth de Valois, a similar arrangement to the one proposed by Montmorency in early November. The peace was bitterly resented by the majority of French military captains. The queen of Navarre had written to Montmorency in November urging him to represent her husband&#x27;s claims to Spanish occupied southern Navarre, however this would not form part of the peace settlement. The finalisation of the specific terms of Montmorency&#x27;s ransom payments also formed a component of the peace.

===Concord with England===
With peace now established, Montmorency worked to push friendship with England. At this time the great hostages France had agreed to provide England as part of the treaty arrived in London, while the English hostages were received with great pageantry by Henri. For the release of common prisoners of war, imprisoned in the galleys of their enemies, Montmorency signed a separate convention with the duque de Alba (duke of Alba) by which the French released the Spanish captives in their possession and the Spanish did likewise for the French. The only monetary compensation demanded for the common soldiers was for the cost of their food during captivity, therefore France paid España around 30,000 &quot;couronnes&quot;. Instead of providing the sum in cash, Henri released 9 Spanish captains of value without ransom.

===War on heresy===

On 10 June 1559, Henri decided to visit the Paris &quot;Parlement&quot; to observe the &quot;Parlementaires&quot; in session. He was inspecting the body at the urgings of radical Catholic deputies who had warned him that the court was filled with Protestants who wanted to strip him of the authority of his kingship. His visit would be one of the most important in the history of the &quot;Parlement&quot;, and he was accompanied for the occasion by Montmorency and the Lorraine brothers. In the session that followed, several deputies, including one Anne du Bourg voiced opinions that bordered on &quot;lèse majesté&quot; (defamation to the dignity of the king), and Henri was unable to tolerate what was said particularly in light of fact it was done in the presence of his favourites. As a result eight &quot;Parlementaires&quot; were arrested, Henri commanding Montmorency to arrest them despite the traditional protections of their office, with Anne du Bourg being burned at the stake in December 1559.

At this time the king was determined to reinforce his measures against heresy. While with Montmorency at his Château d&#x27;Écouen a new edict was formulated to stiffen the persecution. This edict came at a time when Montmorency was ascendant at court.

==Fall==
===Death of the king===

On 30 June 1559, Henri was participating in a tournament to celebrate the recently signed peace. In a joust with the comte de Montgommery, captain of his Scots Guard his opponents lance pierced his visor, with a shard of wood embedding itself in his eye. Montmorency and Tavannes rushed forward, holding the king in their arms before they carried him to the Palais des Tournelles with the assistance of Guise, Condé and Martigues. In the following days Henri slowly and agonisingly died while attended to by the greatest doctors of the age. During his periods of unconsciousness Catherine ensured Montmorency was kept away from the king, but when he was conscious he was able to call for Montmorency to be with him. Guise began discussing a potential inditement of Montmorency on the grounds of failing to fasten Henri&#x27;s visor properly. The Constable was agitated, and brought the body of a man murdered in Paris to the court so that the effects of Henri&#x27;s wounds could be analysed on the skull. After experimenting on the corpse the physician concluded that Henri&#x27;s wound would not be fatal but that he might lose an eye. Montmorency reported optimistically to the English ambassador that the king was on the mend. Henri&#x27;s condition then took a turn for the worse as blood poisoning set in. Ultimately Montmorency began preparations for what was to come in the reign of Henri&#x27;s son, and to this end entered contact with the king of Navarre to unite their political interests.

In his capacity as &quot;Grand Maître&quot; Montmorency had an important role to play in the events that followed the king&#x27;s death, bringing 48 monks into the mortuary chamber to perform their chants.
===Palace revolution of the Lorraine brothers===

With Henri dead, the Lorraine family wasted little time in seizing the opportunity of their close proximity to the new king. Montmorency was unavoidably occupied with his responsibilities to guard the body of the late king, and remained with the body at the Hôtel des Tournelles alongside Saint-André while the court generally departed to the Louvre. Therefore Guise and Lorraine occupied the Louvre palace which had in the reign of Henri been reserved for the usage of Montmorency and the king&#x27;s mistress, in so doing they took possession of the young king. Catherine served as the Lorraine families ally in these moves against Montmorency and Diane as she despised both figures. Her hatred of Montmorency derived from his détente with Diane and his alleged description of her as a mere &#x27;merchants daughter&#x27;. She also despised the peace of Cateau-Cambrésis, which had destroyed the French position in Italy, and held him to be the peace&#x27;s architect. Montmorency&#x27;s apartments were taken by the duc de Guise, while Jacques d&#x27;Humières took over Saint-André&#x27;s, and Lorraine usurped Diane&#x27;s.

At the funeral of the king at Saint-Denis the effigy which had adorned the coffin was removed and the corpse lowered into the pit. The great officers of state then all threw their batons into the hole on top of the coffin. Montmorency had the responsibility to cry the (traditional since 1515) declaration &quot;The king is dead. Long live king François, second of his name, by the grace of God most Christian king of France&quot;. The duc de Guise then raised the royal standard, as he assumed the role of &quot;grand Chambellan&quot; for the purpose of the ceremony.

The Lorraines furthered this palace revolution with an assertion of control over the military, church and the kingdoms finances. Montmorency was informed of this on 11 July 1559 when the king told him, that it was his wish going forward for Guise to handle his kingdoms military affairs, and Lorraine to handle the kingdoms financial situation. Montmorency was told by the king that his presence at court was un-necessary. François had long held a distaste for Montmorency, who his father had compelled him to respect with the address of &quot;compère&quot;. Andelot was again dispossessed of the charge of colonel-general, this time in favour of the vicomte de Martigues. The specifics of the administration was however to be left to the secretaries to execute, a marked departure from the hands on administration Montmorency had preferred during his ascendency. Only several days into the young boys reigns, ambassadors were reporting home on the ascendency of the Lorraine family over the crown. The young king&#x27;s mother initially endorsed this arrangement, and went along with the dismissal of Montmorency and the Bourbon princes from power. 

Montmorency wrote urgent appeals to Navarre to come to court so they could present a united from against the Lorraine administration, however Navarre stalled. Navarre did not feel prepared to confront the power of the Lorraine brothers, and had sour memories of how little Montmorency had done to advance the territorial interests of his kingdom during the negotiations of Cateau-Cambrésis. Indeed, Montmorency had rarely acknowledged him during the reign of Henri and therefore in Navarre&#x27;s eyes there was a probability that this was some form of trap. However, according to Navarre&#x27;s wife Jeanne, Montmorency had shown friendship to Navarre during the 1550s.

Eventually however he agreed and began marching north alongside his brother the prince de Condé. Montmorency dispatched a secretary to meet with the princes, and his three nephews were also present to meet them in a conference that transpired in early August at Vendôme. Aside from their collective opposition to the Lorraine government, the assembled grandees could agree on little. The only product of the meeting was an agreement for an end to the feud between the Montmorency and the Bourbon-Montpensier family, which had been ongoing for a decade. Having accomplished little, Navarre proceeded on to court, arriving on 18 August 1559, where he did little to assert the opposition&#x27;s position. Upon his return to his estates in southern France, Navarre affirmed his loyalty to the administration and Catholicism, and was richly rewarded with the addition of Poitou to his governate of Guyenne. Condé for his part was offered the governorship of Picardie to replace Coligny. The chief Bourbon princes were all offered places on the royal council.

As part of the palace revolution, Montmorency was dispossessed of the office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot; on 17 November 1559, the charge being granted to the duc de Guise, he was further compelled to provide his royal seal to the brothers. By this means Guise gained control of the court. The negotiations to remove him from control of this office were predicated on the receipt of the office of Marshal by his eldest son François. His removal from the centre was not however total, he maintained the office of Constable and the charge of governor of Languedoc (neither of which he had remained in control of in his 1540s disgrace). His daughter Louise was granted the abbey of Maubuisson at this time. His partial maintenance in favour represented one aspect of what made the palace revolution of 1559 far less total than that which accompanied Henri&#x27;s ascent to power in 1547.

===Retirement===

Left with little access to power at court, Montmorency withdrew from court to his estates. He told the king that he was &#x27;old and tired&#x27;. Not a single award made of office at court in 1560 would be to someone with his backing, the Lorraine brothers meanwhile were responsible for 74% of grants.

The new Lorraine administration was cautious in its policy, and did little to rock the boat in terms of the foreign policy Henri and Montmorency had pursued in their final years. The peace with España was maintained and efforts continued towards gaining influence over Scotland.

In that year, a promotion to the &quot;Ordre de Saint-Michel&quot; of eighteen new &quot;chevaliers&quot; attracted Montmorency&#x27;s disapproval. It was around this time that receipt of the award began to be considered a degraded and diluted honour.

The new administration of the kingdom was faced with a financial crisis, and responded with a radical program of austerity and repossessions. To this end various parts of the royal domain that had been alienated under the prior two kings were resumed in control by the crown. Therefore Montmorency was deprived of the comté de Beaumont (valued around 50,000 &quot;livres&quot;) which had been alienated to him in 1527, alongside the seigneuries of Compiègne and Baux.

===Conspiracy of Amboise===

In March 1560 a Protestant conspiracy attempted to seize the king while he was staying at the Château d&#x27;Amboise. Despite being frozen out of power, Montmorency would not involve himself in the plot, nor would his three Protestant inclined nephews who during this time stuck to rhetoric to express their opposition to the government. Only his nephew Andelot would express sympathy with the plotters, and protest against their repression. Montmorency and his son François took charge of the security measures to keep Paris from falling to any conspiracy. The gates of the city were shut, guards increased and searches conducted. Any strangers present in the city were to leave within 24 hours unless they could justify their presence. Aside from the capture of a few weapons, little suspicious activity was uncovered by these efforts.

The coup would be unsuccessful, but panic and fear of subsidiary uprisings spread across the kingdom. Condé was suspected of involvement, but denied the charge. The Lorraine family began to imagine the possibility that the Bourbon family had executed the plot in league with the Montmorency. Therefore they had Catherine summon Montmorency&#x27;s nephews to court. Upon his arrival, Coligny argued that the Lorraine brothers had done a poor job recognising the services Montmorency had rendered to the crown, describing the Constable as victim of an injustice. Montmorency was forced to defend his innocence in front of the &quot;Parlement&quot;, making a speech in which he denounced the conspiracy, while taking shots at the Lorraine government. In the days that followed the conspiracy, the Lorraine government promulgated a pardon of those who had participated with solely religious motivation to present a petition, thereby differentiating &#x27;heresy&#x27; from &#x27;sedition&#x27;.

As early as June of 1560, Montmorency began to consider the possibility of a reconciliation with the Lorraine government in return for the granting of the comté de Dammartin to him which had been stripped from him in the palace revolution, however for the moment little came of this. Baumgartner suggests that Montmorency&#x27;s lack of interest in joining with his nephews, implies that his retirement was not a source of significant resentment.

On 21 August 1560, the Assembly of Notables that had been convoked by the crown met at Fontainebleau. Montmorency arrived in force for the event, accompanied by his three Châtillon nephews and sons, alongside a broader entourage of 1600 followers of whom 800 were noblemen. This large show of strength was intended as a display of his power in the hopes of defending his interests, an illustration to those who thought his days of power were behind him. On the third day of the Assembly, his nephew Coligny presented several petitions for the consideration of the Assembly, that argued that temples be granted for Protestant worship. The petitions were unsigned, but Coligny assured the notables that he could attain 10,000 signatures if necessary. The duc de Guise shot back that he could get a million signatures for a counter petition. In the end the Assembly agreed to convoke an Estates General, which was to meet on 10 December, and a religious council which would meet on 20 January 1561.

Condé, increasingly fearful of his position began to consider his options of how to proceed. He wrote to the vidame de Chartres and Montmorency urging both men to provide assistance to him against the Lorraine government. Montmorency rebuffed Condé&#x27;s advance, while Chartres promised his support against all but the royal family. He was promptly arrested and thrown into the Bastille on 29 August.

As testimony implicating Condé in the various disorders that had racked the kingdom in 1560 continued to be received by the Lorraine government of the kingdom, the king ordered all governors to return to their governates, in preparation to mobilise if the Bourbon prince tried to more openly rebel. Montmorency and Guise were excluded from this order, both men allowed to remain at court through the crisis. Condé and his brother Navarre were meanwhile summoned to present themselves at court. On 30 October 1561 the Bourbon princes arrived at court, and Condé was promptly arrested and tried for treason.

Meanwhile at court, Catherine was growing increasingly uneasy with the domination of the government that the Lorraine brothers enjoyed. To this end she reached out to her former enemy Montmorency in September 1561 with a letter expressing considerable friendship, sounding him out to see whether he was someone she could turn to.
==Return to power==
===Death of François II===

With the sudden death of the young François II on 5 December 1560, Catherine negotiated an agreement with the king of Navarre by which she secured the regency for her second son (only 10 years old) Charles IX and Navarre became lieutenant-general of the kingdom. By this appointment, Navarre became the overall authority for the military of the kingdom, indeed the queen hoped that his authority would dilute that of the Constable. It indeed transpired that Navarre&#x27;s authority cut into the prerogatives of the Constable. Montmorency was also an important element in the new order, and had already been marching on court with a large escort upon having heard word of the young king&#x27;s illness. At the coronation ceremony, a dispute in precedence developed between the new king&#x27;s brother the duc d&#x27;Orléans (future Henri III) and Montmorency. Montmorency resented that Catherine gave primary precedence to Orléans over the peers of the realm, and refused to abide it.

Navarre quickly tried to exert his newfound authority, and on 5 February 1561 threatened that if Guise was not removed from court that he, Coligny and Montmorency would depart. He further demanded that Guise be forced to surrender the office of &quot;Grand Maître&quot; through which he held such sway at court. Catherine saw the danger to her position in the move, and acted fast: she got the young king to beg Montmorency not to leave the court, and Montmorency acquiesced. In the new political arrangement, the court was composed of Catherine, Navarre, Montmorency, Coligny and Cardinal de Châtillon. According to the English ambassador state policy was to be decided by Catherine, Navarre and Montmorency. The Lorraine family and their clients were frozen out of the power they had enjoyed during the reign of François.

Returning to the centre of power, Montmorency also regained the capacity to live in the Louvre, and would do so on a regular basis during the 1560s, despite his possession of grand &quot;hôtels&quot; in the capital, of which he had around four.

Saint-André, who like the Lorraine brothers was alienated from the new administration, set to work turning Montmorency against the Protestant aligned grandees. He succeeded in bringing Montmorency into dispute with his nephew Coligny.

===Formation of the &#x27;Triumvirate&#x27;===
During Easter 1561, there was fear among some French nobles that the royal family itself was about to become Protestant, as it was rumoured that Catherine and her son the king had attended Protestant services. This development alongside the entry into the royal council of the Protestant Condé and his nephew Coligny inspired a great fear from Montmorency as to the direction of the kingdom&#x27;s religious policy - these figures being greatly associated with the Protestant cause.

Resultingly, he reached a détente (known to history as the &#x27;Triumvirate&#x27;) with his great rival the duc de Guise, and Saint-André and the three agreed to work together for the preservation of Catholicism and the suppression of &#x27;heresy&#x27; on 8 April 1561, Easter. The reconciliation between Montmorency and his great enemy Guise was overseen by the aged Cardinal de Tournon. He was driven towards this new alignment by the failure of Catherine to &#x27;properly reward&#x27; him for his services to the crown by re-establishing him as the prime courtier upon the death of François, a position which had instead been given to Navarre. Montmorency greatly resented the senior military command granted to the prince which placed Navarre above him.

The alliance was a muddled affair, composed of men with wildly different politics, as typified by the inclusion of Cardinal de Tournon, who was Ultramontane in disposition and Montmorency, an ardent Gallican. According to the Spanish ambassador Chantonnay, the duc de Montpensier and comte de Brissac also affiliated with this new axis in French politics. The main unifier of the &#x27;Catholic party&#x27; was the failure to be given ascendence at court. The Protestants denounced the accord as a &#x27;Triumvirate&#x27;, comparing the men to Octavian, Antony and Lepidus whose arrangement brought about the destruction of the Roman republic and involved the executions of many of their enemies. This name, given by their enemies, has stuck with the accord.

The first manifestation of this new Catholic alliance was seen on Easter Sunday of that year, with Montmorency and Guise learning of who was to deliver the Easter sermon (Jean de Monluc) and mutually agreeing to not attend. Montmorency had particular distaste for Monluc&#x27;s sermons, which often critiqued the church and Catholic practices such as the cult of images that he cherished. Instead the Catholic grandees went down to the servants&#x27; quarter to hear a more conservative mass delivered by an obscure friar. Cardinal de Tournon provided both men their communion and oversaw the kiss of peace between Guise and Montmorency, burying their rivalry. To the ends of their alliance, support from the Spanish king Felipe II was sought.

===Opposition to government===

This new political alignment had the effect of pushing Catherine even closer to her Protestant advisers, in the hopes of offering a counterweight to this newly united opposition. Montmorency for his part broke from his nephews in favour of the Lorraine family. Montmorency gave a stern reprimand to Coligny for allowing Protestant preaching in his quarters at court on Palm Sunday. Montmorency&#x27;s own eldest son Marshal Montmorency tried to dissuade him from his new alliance, arguing that he was discarding long term friends in favour of an alliance with his greatest enemy, however Montmorency was reinforced in his decision by his wife. Madeleine highlighted that Coligny had betrayed Montmorency&#x27;s interests by pushing forward the interests of Navarre and Protestantism at the expense of the Constable. Shimizu argues that through this new alliance, Montmorency&#x27;s religious and political convictions usurped his interests in the political advancement of his family.

The Spanish ambassador believed that Montmorency could use his influence with Navarre to preserve him for the Catholic fold.

The rise to power of Catherine caused Montmorency to lose some members of his fidelity network. For example the rich seigneur de Lanssac (ambassador to Roma, España and the Council of Trent) who had territories in the Angoumois, Poitou and Guyenne defected from his service to her&#x27;s.

Soon after reaching their accord, Montmorency and the Lorraine network departed from court, Montmorency on 7 April then the duc de Guise on 8 April. Saint-André meanwhile was disgraced by Catherine, but refused to depart court for his government of the Lyonnais.

The poor financial state of the kingdom in this period caused some issue for Montmorency, and in 1561 he drew up a list of the various debts owed to him by his clients and &#x27;creatures&#x27;. He calculated himself to be owed 269,000 &quot;livres&quot; in total.

===Toleration policy===

After the failure of the Colloquy of Poissy to establish a unified creed between the Protestants and Catholics as Lorraine and Catherine had hoped, the &#x27;Catholic party&#x27; furthered its divorce from court. With the royal council an increasingly Protestant affair, the duc d&#x27;Aumale departed court on 9 October, followed soon after by the Cardinal de Lorraine. On 19 October a grand procession of 700 notables departed court, among them the duc de Guise, cardinal de Guise, duc de Longueville and duc de Nemours. Montmorency joined this mass exodus on 21 October, leaving the royal council little more than a rump composed of the Protestants, Catherine and Navarre. Catherine sent desperate appeals for the departed nobles to return to court.

Montmorency was present as a member of the assembly of Saint-Germain-en-Laye that was convened by Catherine from 3 to 15 of January 1562 in the hopes of solving the religious question. The assembly was largely dominated by moderate &quot;Parlementaires&quot; such as Paul de Foix and Christophe de Harlay, however it also featured great nobles like Montmorency and Saint-André (though not the Lorraine brothers, who remained absent from court). On the matter of whether to accord the Protestants&#x27; temples, the assembly voted 27-22 against the proposal. A majority of the delegates present however supported allowing Protestant worship. Therefore on 17 January Catherine promulgated the Edict of Saint-Germain by which toleration was granted to Protestantism for the first time, with allowances for worship in the &quot;faubourgs&quot; (suburbs) of towns.

As a mark of Montmorency&#x27;s religious temperament during this period, he was collaborating with the bishop of Paris to ascertain just how many Protestants there were in the capital; the conclusion of their collective research was that there were around 5000.

By early 1562, the king of Navarre had been won for the Catholic opposition. He had been promised the kingdom of Sardinia as compensation for his lost territories in Navarre. When Catherine tried to remove Montmorency from court for his opposition to her religious policy, Navarre insisted that if Montmorency were removed, that his Protestant nephews should also be retired from court. Coligny and Andelot therefore both departed from court on 22 February.

Blamed by Catherine for the defection of Navarre to the opposition, Montmorency departed court.

For Coligny, removed from power, there was little prospect of reconciling with Navarre or Saint-André. A reconciliation with his uncle would require such a radical shift in his policies as to be unrealistic. Moreover he was conscious Montmorency was no longer able to dominate the court alone in the way he had during the 1550s and therefore was of limited utility.

==French Wars of Religion==
===Wassy===

On 1 March 1562, while travelling back from a meeting with the herzog von Württemberg (duke of Württemberg) the duc de Guise passed through Wassy, where a Protestant service was ongoing. He and his men proceeded to kill many of the Protestant worshippers, with both sides blaming the other for inciting his slaughter. He decided to march onto Paris, where he was met by Montmorency and Saint-André on route at Nanteuil, who then accompanied him for a grand entrance through the porte Saint-Denis on 16 March, traditional entrance of kings into the capital with a retinue of 3000 men. The grand party was warmly received by the &quot;prévôt des marchands&quot; (provost of the merchants) and a delegation of the city&#x27;s notables. They were bolstered in their confidence by the presence of Navarre, who as &quot;&quot; (first prince of the blood) carried important legitimacy for their cause. 

This entrance into the capital was despite a request from the regent Catherine that Guise come instead to the court to explain his actions. Having established themselves in the city, the three &#x27;Triumvirs&#x27; wrote to Catherine explaining that they were going to stay in Paris despite her requests to stop the city falling into a state of chaos.

Paris quickly became a powder keg with both the Catholic grandees and Condé present in the city. To this end, the new governor of Paris Cardinal de Bourbon asked both the &#x27;Triumvirs&#x27; and Condé to leave the city before they came to blows in the streets. The radical Catholics of the city begged Guise and his &#x27;Triumvir&#x27; colleagues to stay. Condé departed on 23 March 1562, heading to one of his properties. On 24 March Guise, Montmorency and Saint-André likewise left the city, heading to Fontainebleau to secure the king and Catherine.

===Securing the royal family===
At this moment, Catherine and therefore the king, were wavering between the two sides. For a time she was tempted to entreat with Condé through Jeanne d&#x27;Albret, with the end goal of going to Orléans with him and the king. She sent four letters to this end from Fontainebleau from 16 to 26 of March. Condé however ignored her pleas, and departed from Paris to Meaux. However this ambition became known to Montmorency and Guise, who pressured the king of Navarre into sending his wife away from Catherine on 27 March. That same day a large cavalry force composed of a 1000 horses led by the &#x27;Triumvirs&#x27; arrived at Fontainebleau and brought the king and Catherine to Paris under &#x27;their protection&#x27;. Protestants would denounce their move as making the royal family their prisoners.

Condé&#x27;s failure to impede this effort put him in a position to either submit or formally rebel. He therefore proceeded to Orléans where he raised the standard of revolt on 2 April at the head of a force of 2000 cavalry. Over the following months many cities would rise up in favour of Condé&#x27;s cause, among them Rouen, Lyon, Bourges and Grenoble.

On 4 April 1562, Montmorency returned to the capital. He led an armed force to storm one of the Protestant temples of Paris, known as &#x27;Jerusalem&#x27;. His soldiers broke in, located and confiscated a cache of weapons they found and then sacked the building, leaving it in ashes. With Jerusalem destroyed, they moved on to the other main Protestant church of the capital and repeated the spectacle. The pulpits and other wooden items in the temples piled into great bonfires. Their actions were imitated by elements of the population on the following day, with some Catholics tearing the remaining parts of the house down and crying &#x27;god has not forgotten the people of Paris&#x27;. His soldiers patrolled the streets, conducting house to house searches in hopes of locating Protestant preachers.

As crisis consumed the French crown in the wake of the Massacre of Wassy both Protestant and Catholic grandees began to arm. Condé lead the Protestant efforts, while Guise, Montmorency and Saint-André mobilised armies in opposition to him. Now in rebellion, Condé engaged in an acidic &#x27;war of words&#x27; with Montmorency, Saint-André and Guise. Both sides argued that it was they who were the loyal protectors of the crown and the other who was a disobedient rebel.

Condé published a manifesto outlining the cause of his rebellion on 8 April. In the text he complained about violations of the Edict of January, the duc de Guise&#x27;s culpability for the Massacre of Wassy and the existence of the &#x27;Triumvirate&#x27; of Montmorency, Guise and Saint-André, which Condé charged engaged in illegal actions and formed a shadow government separate from the council of the king. According to Condé the association of Montmorency, Guise and Saint-André with support from Tournon and Lorraine intended nothing less than the extermination of the king&#x27;s natural subjects with the aim of dividing and plundering France among themselves.

Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny ultimately decided to join Condé&#x27;s cause. He wrote to Montmorency, rebuking him for allying with the Lorraines, arguing that he had put himself in bed with a family who desired to rule France and ruin their own houses. On 4 May, Montmorency, Guise and Saint-André petitioned the king to restore a unity of religion in the kingdom.

===First war of religion===
Though there was now a state of war between the Protestant grandees and the crown, both sides remained keen to negotiate. Montmorency was therefore involved in considering the Protestant demands alongside Catherine, walking with her in the gardens of the Louvre while receiving the dispatches from the secretaries, who were actually travelling to Orléans to hear Condé&#x27;s demands. Condé wished for Montmorency, Guise and Saint-André to disband their forces and withdraw from court and for the Edict of January to be enforced. In response Catherine argued that it was not appropriate to send away such important grandees from court during the king&#x27;s minority. Montmorency and Saint-André were more tempted by the various proposals towards peace than their Triumvir colleague once they learned how many cities were defecting to the Protestant cause. Though at times it would appear an acceptable settlement had been reached between the two sides, by late summer it had become clear that no deal could be reached.

On 19 April 1562, with Catherine now on board with the &#x27;Triumvirs&#x27;, Montmorency proposed that they make an appeal via the Papal Nuncio to the Pope, so that he might provide money and troops in support of Catholic France. Catherine was however more interested in support from España and the leading figures of the court would all write to Felipe appealing for aid.

Now at war with the Protestants, the ascendant Catholic grandees could afford to be a little more open in their ambitions. There was conflict in their strategies however and in June 1562, Navarre was content to order the duc d&#x27;Étampes, governor of Bretagne to seize any caches of Protestant arms he located. Montmorency meanwhile ordered Étampes to remove any Protestants from his governate. This contradiction in severity caused Étampes to despair. 

The Protestant rebels meanwhile, entered into accord with the English on 20 September 1562, by which in return for providing Le Havre to the English on a temporary basis (until such time as they could provide Calais), the rebels were to be granted 6,000 soldiers and 100,000 crowns.

Montmorency and Guise were both present at the bombardment of the Protestant held city of Rouen. At first the command of the siege was under the authority of the lieutenant-general of the kingdom Navarre. However he received a mortal wound during the conduct of the siege, and therefore command devolved to the Constable.

With the siege of Rouen successfully brought to its conclusion, if at the loss of the lieutenant-general of the kingdom (Navarre who was fatally wounded during its progress), the royal army prepared to decamp. Therefore on 6 November 1562 Guise and Montmorency led the force from the city in the hopes of bringing the Protestant commander Condé to battle. Condé had decided in the wake of the loss of Rouen that he needed to make a bold play, and therefore advanced on the capital. As he progressed he became bogged down taking surrounding villages and towns and therefore afforded enough time for Montmorency and Guise to hurry a force to bolster the city&#x27;s defences. Condé therefore turned north and marched into Normandie in the hopes that the queen of England Elizabeth could provide troops to support them. It was on his march north into Normandie that Montmorency intercepted the Protestant army at Dreux. The royal army had departed Paris on 11 December and under Montmorency&#x27;s command had a strength of around 19,000 men total. However in terms of cavalry the army was inferior to Condé&#x27;s, with only around 2,500 horses against the Protestants&#x27; 4,500.

The two armies marched parallel, with the superior infantry (and lower amount of cavalry) of the royal army allowing them to cross worse ground than the Protestant army.

===Dreux and captivity===

When it became clear that the Protestants were heading into Normandie, the possibility of intercepting the army became a realistic course of action if the royal force struck west. However at this point Montmorency, and the other &#x27;Triuvmirs&#x27; who were with the army hesitated, unsure of the wisdom of engaging fellow Frenchmen across the battlefield. Therefore they dispatched a representative to Paris, to find out the opinion of Catherine on the course of action. The queen mother was amused that they would turn to her, and deferred to the military captains&#x27; experience. On 19 December 1562 the royal army therefore crossed the river Eure and established themselves south of Dreux. The Protestants accepted the offer of battle and the two forces prepared to fight. The royal position was strong, anchored on both sides by villages, Montmorency commanded a force of Swiss pikeman and a portion of the gendarmes constituting the left of the royal army. Montmorency&#x27;s force was subject to the attacks of the first phases of the battle, the Protestants acutely aware that they were at a disadvantage in terms of artillery and therefore prioritising rash cavalry charges. Coligny&#x27;s cavalry charged into the royal lines, breaking them around Montmorency, and capturing him, the Constable receiving a wound to his mouth during the fighting. With a reiter escort, Montmorency was quickly hurried off the battlefield to captivity in Orléans, where the reiters reported a great Protestant victory. 

In June 1563, Montmorency received a letter from Volpert von Ders, the German cavalrymen who had taken him prisoner at Dreux. He reminded Montmorency of the courtesy with which he had been treated by Ders while in his captivity, including his not having taken Montmorency&#x27;s &quot;collier de l&#x27;ordre de Saint-Michel&quot; (collar of the Order of Saint-Michel) which could have dishonoured the Constable. In return for his good treatment, Ders demanded a chain worth 500 &quot;écus&quot;, which Ders promised he would always wear as a reminder of the Constable, and further that Montmorency would ensure he remained a pensioner of the king.

In the initial rumours that spread after the battle, Montmorency&#x27;s capture was not yet known, and therefore it was reported that he had been killed and the battle lost for the royalists. This was not however true, and the battle represented a victory for the royalists. Montmorency&#x27;s capture was offset for the royalists by the capture of Condé in the combat, leaving Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny in charge of the Protestant war effort. Despite being a royal victory, Montmorency&#x27;s son Montbéron was killed in the course of the combat, as was Saint-André. Guise intended to continue prosecuting the war, and set about the siege of Orléans, hoping to reduce the final Protestant held city on the Loire. However before he could bring the siege to its conclusion he was assassinated. His assassin the sieur de Méré implicated Coligny under torture as being responsible for ordering the hit, before later retracting his testimony. As a result of his death, the hands of the royalist party were freed to begin negotiations.

===Amboise===

With Montmorency in Protestant captivity, and Condé in royal captivity, negotiations began between the two men to bring an end to the civil war at Catherine&#x27;s instigation. They met for their negotiations at the Île aux Bœufs, which had a history of being used as a place for treaties to be signed. Alongside Montmorency for the royalist cause were Catherine, Montmorency&#x27;s son Damville and the bishop of Limoges; meanwhile Condé was joined by Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Andelot, Saint-Cyr, the Protestant governor of Orléans, and Jean d&#x27;Aubigné. The result of their work together was published on 19 March as the Edict of Amboise, which mandated that crimes of the past from the civil war and before be vanquished from memory, that Protestant worship only occur at certain designated sites and that associations that might be the nuclei of opposition to the peace be disbanded. In particular Protestant worship was permitted on the estates of nobility with rights of high justice, while outside of this it was allowed in towns the Protestants held prior to the outbreak of civil war and one town per &quot;baillage&quot;. This peace was greatly favourable to the Protestant nobility at the expense of the general Protestant population who could only worship inside their houses.

As a mark of the newfound peace, the royal court entered the city of Orléans which had resisted the efforts of Guise to besiege it. Montmorency, Catherine, Cardinal de Bourbon and Condé made a solemn entrance to the city on 1 April, with Condé hosting a banquet for the court as a proof of the Catholic and Protestant unity.

With peace established internally, the attentions of the crown turned to rooting out the Protestants&#x27; former ally, to whom they had ceded the town of Le Havre in return for support. Condé and Montmorency jointly led a force that succeeded in securing its reduction on 28 July 1563. In the treaty of Troyes England agreed to France&#x27;s permanent possession of Calais, in return for an indemnity of around 120,000 &quot;couronnes&quot;, far less than the 500,000 outlined at Cateau-Cambrésis.

===Feud with the Guise===

Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Coligny was accused of involvement in the assassination of Guise by the Lorraine family. Montmorency rediscovered his familial interests and came to the defence of his nephew against the attacks of the Lorraines. Indeed the whole Montmorency family gave its backing to Coligny in the dispute, and given the death of the duc de Guise, the Lorraine family lacked the political influence to oppose them at court. In late 1563 he acted as a mediator between the two sides but was unable to achieve a reconciliation. In relation to the feud, Montmorency got into a dispute with the duc d&#x27;Aumale towards the end of 1563. In January 1564, the crown demanded an adjourning of the attempts to prosecute Coligny, a victory for Montmorency and the Châtillon in the feud.

With the war over, Montmorency took his place on the royal councils, and would be a fixture on them for the next four years until his death in 1567. During this period the council contained both radical Catholics and Protestants. By this time Montmorency&#x27;s age was beginning to weight his political influence down, and his experience of captivity after Dreux had moderated his politics. He therefore did not advocate for the religious order he desired as vigorously as he had in previous years. Catherine was therefore able to express her own political program on the court more easily than she might have been able to in prior years.

Montmorency decided in 1563 to resign the charge of governor of Languedoc in favour of his second eldest son the baron de Damville. yielding the office on 12 May. The privilege of a governor to resign in favour of a chosen successor had been incredibly rare in prior generations, only occurring once between 1498 and 1547, however after that point it began to proliferate.

===Grand tour===
In 1564, Catherine decided that the court would conduct a grand tour of the kingdom. It was hoped that this would bring noble support back to the king after the destructions and disunity of the civil war, and pressure obedience to the Edict of Amboise from the regional &quot;Parlements&quot;. Before departing on this tour a great number of festivities were conducted at Fontainebleau, with mock battles, theatre, and tournaments. In these events Montmorency and the Cardinal de Bourbon presided over the festivities. As part of their responsibilities to preside over the events, they both hosted suppers for the various grandees in their lodgings.

As the royal tour began in March of that year, Montmorency was among those who accompanied the court in motion, alongside Bourbon, the young new king of Navarre and Condé. Montmorency indeed had the most important responsibility of the tour, as it was his duty to maintain discipline in the large moving court, gave orders to the local town governors that they passed by and rode ahead of the main force to ensure everything was ready to receive the king. Over the course of their travels the court would conduct three &quot;lit de justice&quot; (bed of justice) to bring the &quot;Parlements&quot; of Dijon, Bordeaux and Toulouse into line. Approaching Lyon, Montmorency ensured that a royal garrison was installed in the various fortifications before the king approached. At La Rochelle the port city had prepared a silk ribbon across the &quot;porte de Cougnes&quot;, and informed the royal party that it was tradition for the king to cut it before entering their city. Montmorency found little amusing in the tradition, and slashed through the ribbon with his sword, inquiring of the city grandees whether it was their plan to stop the king entering La Rochelle.

As the tour continued, Montmorency had a chance to place his clients in positions of authority. In Dauphiné, the lieutenant-general of the province who was loyal to the duc de Guise, Maugiron was replaced by the baron de Gordes who was a client of Montmorency, and the lieutenant of his personal company.

While the court was absent from the capital on the tour, the crisis between the Montmorency and Lorraine families almost exploded in a showdown in Paris. In January of 1565, the Cardinal de Lorraine attempted to enter Paris under arms, and was resisted on his entry by Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son, the governor of Paris. François de Montmorency was even more intense in his hatred of the Lorraine family than his father, but coupled his hatred with a genuine moderate attitude towards Protestantism. Lorraine was supported in this attempted show of force against the capital by the Protestant leader Condé who was nursing resentments against Montmorency at this time. The showdown was an embarrassment for the Lorraines who came out the worse in a skirmish at the gates of the city and were forced to take shelter in one of the family&#x27;s houses. Though civil war between the two families was avoided, the confrontation left lingering resentments.
At Bayonne in June 1565, the court met up with the duque de Alba (duke of Alba) representing the Spanish king Felipe II. In a grand council on 30 June, Montmorency made an argument in favour of the toleration policy the crown was following, arguing it on the grounds that the alternative was civil war, which could present great dangers to the crown.

When the court arrived at Blois it was joined by Navarre&#x27;s mother the queen of Navarre, Coligny and Lorraine. The court then proceeded to Moullins where Catherine engineered a reconciliation in the Montmorency-Lorraine feud. On 27 January 1566 Coligny was declared to be innocent of any involvement in the assassination of the duc. Montmorency was compelled to reconcile with Lorraine, while Coligny was to reconcile with the Guise. Oaths were exchanged that the participants would not attempt to harm each other. The young duc de Guise himself was not present at these exchanges, and when he did arrive at court in February, Montmorency departed in anger, which demonstrated the accords to be somewhat hollow. With this at least nominally accomplished, the court took two final steps on their tour before re-entering the capital on 1 May 1566.

Around this time, as a reward for his loyal service to the crown, Montmorency received the elevation of his second son, Damville to the Marshalate. Alba was unimpressed by the high favour Montmorency was in, and reported it back disapprovingly to Felipe II.

The rivalry between the Montmorency and Lorraine families placed Catholic nobles in the south west in a difficult position, as for example Cardinal d&#x27;Armagnac who had to balance his responsibilities as a subordinate to Montmorency in Languedoc, with his ties of clientage to the Cardinal of Lorraine. As a result many of these men withdrew from their affiliation with grandees entirely.

Despite his long record of anti-Protestantism, Montmorency was not excluded from the paranoid fears of some Catholics reported by Claude Haton, who observed that many felt the king, queen mother and Constable were all secret Protestants, as that could be the only explanation for the peace they had established and were enforcing across France.

===Surprise of Meaux===

Protestant suspicions of the peace were furthered in this period of peace by the various modifications made to the terms of the Peace of Amboise. Montmorency, Morvillier and the secretary of state L&#x27;Aubespine were suspected of pushing Catherine in a more pro-Catholic direction. Further discord between Protestant and Catholic nobles was created by the hiring of Swiss mercenaries by the crown to protect the realm against any potential moves by the passing army under the duque de Alba which was heading to Nederland. In exasperation, Montmorency said to the Protestant nobles at court &quot;The Swiss have their pay; don&#x27;t you expect them to be used?&quot;.

At this time Condé renewed his efforts to compete with Montmorency for supreme command of the French army, but was unsuccessful, his campaign however damaged the relationship between the Bourbon and Montmorency families. Furious at being spurned for the office of lieutenant-general, Condé left court, and was soon joined by Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Andelot who was similarly resentful in his dispute with Marshal Cossé (formerly known as the seigneur de Gonnor) over the office of colonel-general of the infantry. Coligny likewise departed court. They agreed to conduct a coup attempt in line with that of Amboise in 1560, assembling a large cavalry force at Meaux to kidnap the royal family and take charge of the religious direction of the kingdom from the Lorraine. The court was alerted to the plot while staying at Monceaux and were faced with two choices of how to proceed. Montmorency and the chancellor L&#x27;Hôpital favoured holding their ground against any attacks, meanwhile the Lorraine family and duc de Nemours favoured making a retreat to the safety of Paris. The Swiss guard that was with the group confidently asserted that they could provide the appropriate protection for a retreat to the capital. Therefore it was the latter course of action that was agreed on, and they conducted a fighting retreat towards the capital. Montmorency and the king&#x27;s Swiss guard held back the Protestant cavalry while the king and Catherine made for Paris.

===Second war of religion===
With their coup at Meaux a failure, the Protestant leadership decided to besiege the king in Paris. Montmorency organised the royal defence in the capital, and called upon Strozzi to bring his infantry from Picardie, and comte de Brissac to bring forces up from Lyon, such that he could assemble an army able to break the Protestant hold on the capital. As he worked towards building his military force, negotiations flowed back and forth across the siege lines. The Protestants initially demanded Nemours and the Lorraines be excluded from royal council, Catherine to retire from politics and an Estates General be called. On 7 October 1556, the crown presented their counter-offer, Condé and Coligny were to present themselves before the king and admit their rebellion. This damaged the Protestant confidence, and Condé&#x27;s next demands were for the Edict of Amboise to be applied without any worship restrictions. These negotiations were conducted face to face on 10 October, Montmorency and an armed escort, his eldest son Marshal Montmorency, Marshal Cossé meeting with Montmorency&#x27;s three nephews and La Rochefoucauld. During the course of their discussions Montmorency got into a bitter argument with his nephew Cardinal de Châtillon. The religious concessions the princes wanted were intolerable to Montmorency who did not want a religiously divided realm, and therefore the talks collapsed. For Condé the edicts established by the king should be unalterable, while Montmorency believed the crown had the power to modify their edicts as they pleased.

Inside the city the situation was tense and religiously explosive. The city was low on food, even without the besieging army, as the area had not yet recovered from a scarcity which had dominated the last few years. Therefore, when Charenton, a key point in the city&#x27;s grain supply fell to the Protestants during the siege, the populations blamed the leaders of the defence effort, Montmorency and his son François, for the surrender of the garrison. It was even alleged that Montmorency&#x27;s son had engineered the garrisons surrender intentionally. With the capital increasingly against him, Montmorency at first stepped up the efforts to conduct sorties, which reduced the stranglehold on the Parisian food supply. He then took the offensive. He was aided in this more forward posture by Condé&#x27;s overconfidence. The Protestant commander had peeled off part of the besieging army, under the command of Montmorency&#x27;s nephew Andelot to guard the north east approaches to the capital from any reinforcements that might arrive for Montmorency.

===Saint-Denis===

Montmorency engaged the besieging army outside Paris at the Battle of Saint-Denis on 10 November 1567. By this time he had assembled an army that totalled around 25,000 men, both various experienced Swiss forces brought to the capital and a contingent of inexperienced Parisians brought to arms for the sole purpose of the emergency, and boasted 14 artillery pieces. The Swiss under the command of Pfyffer constituted around 6,000 men, while the foot-soldiers were commanded by Brissac and Strozzi. The Protestant army was only around 5,000 strong, led by Coligny and Condé.
===Death===
Royal cavalry under Marshal Cossé and Marshal Biron attempted to charge the entrenched Protestant positions but were repulsed. Ultimately however they succeeded in smashing Condé&#x27;s centre, composed of only a thin line of arquebusiers while Condé&#x27;s cavalry ripped the royal wings apart. With Montmorency&#x27;s forces pierced by Condé the Constable became surrounded and was wounded repeatedly on both his face and on his head, his surrender was therefore demanded. Montmorency, already thrice made prisoner during his career refused, and was shot in the kidney and neck by a man named Robert Stuart. His sons succeeded in breaking through to him, and were able to extract Montmorency from the field. He was taken to his Parisian &quot;hôtel&quot; on the &quot;rue Sainte-Avoye&quot; where he convalesced for two days before dying on 12 November 1567.

Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son Marshal Montmorency therefore led the cavalry of the royal army against the Protestants, it having been galvanised by the wounding of the Constable. In the end the superior numbers of the royal army prevailed and allowed for a victory, with more Protestant casualties than royal. However, the Protestant force was able to disengage in good order and broke off from Paris to seek a rendezvous with their German mercenary allies. 

The king&#x27;s preacher Arnauld Sorbin spoke at Montmorency&#x27;s funeral, as he would later do at the funeral of king himself, thereby making Montmorency&#x27;s funeral royal. Sorbin held the important role of leading the prayers at the service. The royal parallels were accentuated by the route of the &quot;cortège&quot; which travelled to Saint-Denis and buried his coffin at the foot of Henri II&#x27;s. An effigy of the Constable (which even included the face wounds he had received at Saint-Denis) was created as part of the ceremonies and displayed in Notre-Dame de Paris on 25 November 1567. Similar effigies were to be created for the king&#x27;s brother the duc d&#x27;Alençon in 1584 and Henri III&#x27;s deceased favourite Joyeuse in 1587.

So close were Henri and Montmorency, that the king had expressed his desire for both of their hearts to be stored together in an urn in the king&#x27;s Germain Pilon created funerary monument.

===Legacy===
The office of Constable would not be transferred, and the highest military office in the kingdom would become lieutenant-general, which was given to the king&#x27;s eldest brother the duc d&#x27;Anjou on the day of Montmorency&#x27;s death. The crown hoped that by this means important military control would remain in the hands of the royal family as opposed to grandees such as Condé. This was a disappointment to both Aumale and Montmorency&#x27;s eldest son, both of whom had seen the possibility that they might become Constable. The dispute between Anjou and Condé over who would succeed Montmorency as head of the French military left much hatred between the two men.

A few years later, the murderer of the Constable, Stuart would be captured at the Battle of Jarnac by an army led by Anjou. Anjou handed Stuart over to the marquis de Villars, a brother in law of Montmorency. Villars took Stuart a little distance away from the camp, and killed him in cold blood.

==Reputation==

Montmorency&#x27;s military reputation would ultimately be mixed. In his career he lost more battles than he won. A contemporary Venetian opined that Montmorency could not match the calibre of the duc de Guise&#x27;s military skill. The Venetian ambassador nevertheless conceded that he was a &#x27;courageous soldier&#x27; The duc de Nevers held Montmorency&#x27;s political skill in high regard, and would later advise Henri III to imitate Montmorency&#x27;s prudence and strategic behaviour. The &quot;ligueur&quot; (leaguer) archbishop of Lyon would advise the third duc de Guise to look to Montmorency as a model for dominating the court in 1588. Other contemporaries variously described Montmorency&#x27;s domestic behaviour as &#x27;arrogant&#x27;, &#x27;overbearing&#x27; &#x27;of good understanding&#x27; and &#x27;well experienced&#x27;. The historian Sutherland described Montmorency&#x27;s approach to government as &#x27;autocratic&#x27;.

Many contemporaries described him as the first true favourite in French history, by which it was meant a man whose fortune was based on his access to royal favour, as opposed to his control of a particularly powerful feudatory network. Brantôme contrasts his &#x27;military valour&#x27; and &#x27;excellence&#x27; with the favourites of Charles IX and Henri III, who were by contrast unworthy of the great benefits they received in Brantôme&#x27;s estimation. Le Roux observes that many of the families who would provide favourites in the reign of Henri III, such as the Joyeuse, La Guiche and Saint-Sulpice, owed their accession to noteworthiness to the protection of the Montmorency family and the Constable.

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356952" start="0" end="39" title="Anne de Montmorency, 1st Duke of Montmorency" label="Anne de Montmorency, duc de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="155" end="167" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="178" end="201" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="238" end="247" title="Louis XII of France" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="249" end="259" title="François I of France" label="François I"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="261" end="269" title="Henri II of France" label="Henri II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="271" end="282" title="François II of France" label="François II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="287" end="297" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137980" start="379" end="386" title="Battle of Ravenna (1512)" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q683341" start="585" end="595" title="Battle of La Bicocca" label="La Bicocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q506466" start="659" end="676" title="Charles III, Duke of Bourbon" label="Constable Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63468" start="711" end="726" title="Battle of Pavia" label="Battle of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="1050" end="1075" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q131959" start="1160" end="1174" title="Philippe de Chabot" label="Admiral Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1228" end="1250" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="the Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="1259" end="1267" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q346871" start="1390" end="1409" title="Constable of France" label="Constable of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1525" end="1531" title="Milano" label="Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q276010" start="2130" end="2147" title="Diane de Poitiers" label="Diane de Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="2163" end="2179" title="François, Duke of Guise" label="the duc de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="2184" end="2204" title="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157839" start="2233" end="2267" title="Revolt of the Pitauds" label="&amp;quot;gabelle revolt&amp;quot; of 1548"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="2301" end="2309" title="Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q182783" start="2493" end="2509" title="Three Bishoprics" label="Three Bishoprics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524228" start="2804" end="2822" title="Truce of Vaucelles" label="Truce of Vaucelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066129" start="2977" end="3000" title="Battle of Saint-Quentin (1557)" label="battle of Saint-Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="3269" end="3294" title="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q688957" start="3540" end="3561" title="Conspiracy of Amboise" label="Conspiracy of Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q310334" start="3760" end="3779" title="Antoine of Navarre" label="the king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="3854" end="3863" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="3963" end="3982" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Marshal Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q316913" start="4298" end="4313" title="Louis I, Prince of Condé" label="prince de Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q751236" start="4353" end="4358" title="Battle of Dreux" label="Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114840" start="4533" end="4558" title="Charles IX&amp;#x27;s grand tour of France" label="grand tour of the kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035345" start="4639" end="4665" title="Surprise of Meaux" label="new coup against the crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041463" start="4819" end="4840" title="Battle of Saint-Denis (1567)" label="battle of Saint Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126675" start="4930" end="4939" title="Chantilly, Oise" label="Chantilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120397" start="4952" end="4976" title="Guillaume de Montmorency" label="Guillaume de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="5041" end="5062" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne, queen of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="5133" end="5182" title="François I of France" label="François I (at that time, comte d&amp;#x27;Angoulême)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44847358" start="5963" end="5982" title="Madeleine of Savoy" label="Madeleine de Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="6005" end="6015" title="François I of France" label="François I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6255" end="6261" title="España" label="España"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="6463" end="6471" title="Picardy" label="Picardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967081" start="6528" end="6560" title="Claude de Savoie" label="Claude de Savoie, comte de Tende"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6768" end="6791" title="Éléonore de Montmorency" label="Éléonore de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6813" end="6872" title="François III de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne" label="François III de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne, vicomte de Turenne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6897" end="6918" title="Jeanne de Montmorency" label="Jeanne de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049479" start="6940" end="6981" title="Louis III de La Trémoille" label="Louis III de La Trémoille, duc de Thouars"/>
<link wikidata="Q580292" start="7006" end="7029" title="François de Montmorency" label="François de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q113422" start="7132" end="7147" title="Diane de France" label="Diane de France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7172" end="7196" title="Catherine de Montmorency" label="Catherine de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7218" end="7256" title="Gilbert III de Lévis" label="Gilbert III de Lévis, duc de Ventadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605895" start="7267" end="7289" title="Henri I de Montmorency" label="Henri I de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7396" end="7418" title="Antoinette de La Marck" label="Antoinette de La Marck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066589" start="7443" end="7465" title="Charles de Montmorency, Duke of Damville" label="Charles de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7523" end="7537" title="Renée de Cossé" label="Renée de Cossé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7562" end="7584" title="Gabriel de Montmorency" label="Gabriel de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q997352" start="7619" end="7643" title="Guillaume de Montmorency-Thoré" label="Guillaume de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7729" end="7749" title="Marie de Montmorency" label="Marie de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7771" end="7792" title="Henri de Foix" label="Henri de Foix-Candale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7817" end="7838" title="Louise de Montmorency, abbess of Maubuisson" label="Louise de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8812" end="8833" title="Jacqueline de Piennes" label="Jacqueline de Piennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q966628" start="9419" end="9471" title="Henri de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne, Duke of Bouillon" label="the future Marshal of France, the vicomte de Turenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689021" start="9753" end="9774" title="Louise de Montmorency" label="Louise de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q547887" start="9857" end="9877" title="Gaspard I de Coligny" label="Gaspard I de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="10274" end="10297" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204975" start="10299" end="10317" title="Gaspard II de Coligny" label="Gaspard de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q964196" start="10319" end="10334" title="Odet de Coligny" label="Odet de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q588824" start="10339" end="10358" title="François de Coligny d&amp;#x27;Andelot" label="François de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="11157" end="11169" title="Ultramontanism" label="Ultramontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="11188" end="11196" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="11273" end="11281" title="Henri II of France" label="Henri II"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="12048" end="12052" title="Gout" label="Gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q551643" start="13933" end="13944" title="Jean Goujon" label="Jean Goujon"/>
<link wikidata="Q967445" start="14084" end="14096" title="Jean Bullant" label="Jean Bullant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="14229" end="14243" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="14327" end="14335" title="Henri II of France" label="Henri II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="14337" end="14356" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="14904" end="14913" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="14918" end="14928" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q332026" start="15082" end="15099" title="Fère-en-Tardenois" label="Fère-en-Tardenois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879480" start="15561" end="15577" title="Léonard Limousin" label="Léonard Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="15641" end="15648" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q312617" start="15758" end="15774" title="Rosso Fiorentino" label="Rosso Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3904400" start="15803" end="15808" title="Pietà (Rosso Fiorentino)" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15933" end="15937" title="Roma, Italia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="16123" end="16133" title="François I of France" label="François I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131959" start="16214" end="16232" title="Philippe de Chabot" label="Philippe de Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="16351" end="16365" title="Louis XII of France" label="king Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137980" start="16391" end="16408" title="Battle of Ravenna (1512)" label="battle of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="16525" end="16531" title="Milano" label="Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="16646" end="16665" title="battle of Marignano" label="battle of Marignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046" start="16871" end="16877" title="Novara" label="Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="16937" end="16954" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q968929" start="17009" end="17025" title="Guillaume Gouffier, seigneur de Bonnivet" label="Admiral Bonnivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="17239" end="17254" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47383" start="17872" end="17880" title="Charleville-Mézières" label="Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347889" start="18030" end="18075" title="Ordre de Saint-Michel" label="Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q931062" start="18154" end="18176" title="François de Bourbon, Count of Saint-Pol" label="the comte de Saint-Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q536033" start="18217" end="18231" title="Charles, Duke of Vendôme" label="duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q745211" start="18697" end="18719" title="Odet of Foix, Viscount of Lautrec" label="the vicomte de Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q721211" start="19014" end="19030" title="Prospero Colonna" label="Prospero Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="19094" end="19099" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639729" start="19354" end="19361" title="Bicocca (district of Milan)" label="Bicocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q683341" start="19460" end="19476" title="Battle of Bicocca" label="favour of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506466" start="20233" end="20250" title="Charles III, Duke of Bourbon" label="Constable Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q968929" start="21144" end="21160" title="Guillaume Gouffier, seigneur de Bonnivet" label="Admiral Bonnivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="21684" end="21716" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="The Holy Roman Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="22119" end="22128" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="22353" end="22356" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="22488" end="22504" title="Duchy of Milan" label="ducato di Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="22605" end="22616" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q63468" start="23016" end="23031" title="battle of Pavia" label="battle of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317506" start="23086" end="23111" title="Henry II of Navarre" label="Henri II, king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q931062" start="23113" end="23135" title="François de Bourbon, Count of Saint-Pol" label="the comte de Saint-Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563017" start="23137" end="23192" title="René of Savoy" label="the comte de Tende, future father in law of Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131959" start="23425" end="23473" title="Philippe de Chabot" label="the future Admiral of France, Philippe de Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q426024" start="24018" end="24032" title="Ugo de Moncada" label="Ugo de Moncada"/>
<link wikidata="Q695489" start="24174" end="24180" title="Charles de Lannoy, 1st Prince of Sulmona" label="Lannoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233192" start="25064" end="25080" title="Louise of Savoy" label="Louise de Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="25124" end="25130" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q459338" start="25476" end="25495" title="François de Tournon" label="Cardinal de Tournon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="26275" end="26291" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="the duc de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="27909" end="27915" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="27937" end="27966" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary Tudor, daughter of Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="27976" end="27998" title="Henri II of France" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347889" start="28245" end="28290" title="Ordre de Saint-Michel" label="Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="28333" end="28352" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="29809" end="29853" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="his wife, the aunt of the Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233192" start="30465" end="30481" title="Louise of Savoy" label="Louise de Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q157100" start="30486" end="30510" title="Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy" label="Margarete von Österreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q371678" start="30573" end="30590" title="Antoine Duprat" label="Chancellor Duprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190058" start="30595" end="30615" title="Marguerite de Navarre" label="the queen of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043328" start="30699" end="30747" title="Treaty of Cambrai" label="&amp;quot;Paix des Dames&amp;quot; (Peace of the Ladies)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="31132" end="31140" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31142" end="31156" title="Charles de Moy" label="Charles de Moy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068802" start="31994" end="32029" title="Pedro Fernández de Velasco, 3rd Duke of Frías" label="condestable (Constable) de Castilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q156045" start="32067" end="32090" title="Eleanor of Austria" label="the sister of Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="33591" end="33664" title="Henri II of France" label="duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans (as the king&amp;#x27;s second son was known at that time)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33854" end="33862" title="Jean II d&amp;#x27;Humières" label="Humières"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33864" end="33875" title="Jean d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33880" end="33900" title="René de Cossé, Count of Brissac" label="the comte de Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q257557" start="34361" end="34377" title="Anne de Pisseleu d&amp;#x27;Heilly" label="Anne de Pisseleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q536033" start="34971" end="34989" title="Charles, Duke of Vendôme" label="the duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662683" start="35252" end="35279" title="François de Montmorency, sieur de La Rochepot" label="the seigneur de La Rochepot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131959" start="35407" end="35421" title="Philippe de Chabot" label="Admiral Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217768" start="35816" end="35823" title="Péronne, Somme" label="Péronne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="35828" end="35836" title="Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35838" end="35857" title="Jean II de Humières" label="Jean II de Humières"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35969" end="35983" title="Oudard du Biez" label="Oudard du Biez"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="36953" end="36972" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="the duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4490179" start="36977" end="36984" title="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="37122" end="37141" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="37193" end="37207" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="37466" end="37488" title="Henri II of France" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="37524" end="37535" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="37543" end="37602" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine de Medici, duchessa di Urbino (duchess of Urbino)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="37792" end="37801" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q901382" start="37965" end="37971" title="Damask" label="Damask"/>
<link wikidata="Q371678" start="38134" end="38156" title="Antoine Duprat" label="Cardinal Legate Duprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772180" start="38158" end="38177" title="Louis de Bourbon de Vendôme" label="Cardinal de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="38179" end="38199" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094019" start="38204" end="38223" title="Gabriel de Gramont" label="Cardinal de Gramont"/>
<link wikidata="Q276010" start="38799" end="38816" title="Diane de Poitiers" label="Diane de Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q930285" start="39043" end="39048" title="Louis de Brézé" label="Brézé"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="39360" end="39372" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="duc de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q69450" start="40193" end="40209" title="Henry III of Nassau-Breda" label="graaf van Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q378868" start="40313" end="40331" title="Francesco II Sforza" label="the duca di Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q958378" start="40512" end="40563" title="Charles II de Valois, Duke of Orléans" label="the king&amp;#x27;s third son, the duc d&amp;#x27;Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="40568" end="40608" title="Mary I of England" label="the king of England&amp;#x27;s daughter Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="42166" end="42174" title="Piemonte" label="Piemonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750875" start="42339" end="42383" title="Francesco of Saluzzo" label="the marchese di Saluzzo (marquis of Saluzzo)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42481" end="42489" title="Jean II d&amp;#x27;Humières" label="Humières"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="43020" end="43024" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q69450" start="43091" end="43107" title="Henry III of Nassau-Breda" label="graaf van Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="43618" end="43621" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="46695" end="46699" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341" start="46728" end="46732" title="Alba, Piedmont" label="Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946" start="46737" end="46745" title="Cherasco" label="Cherasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q670504" start="47011" end="47020" title="Alfonso d&amp;#x27;Avalos" label="del Vasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="47539" end="47544" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="47546" end="47554" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20489" start="47559" end="47569" title="Savigliano" label="Savigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="48208" end="48210" title="Po River" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="48679" end="48703" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="the Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q459673" start="48738" end="48745" title="Leucate" label="Leucate"/>
<link wikidata="Q958378" start="48827" end="48847" title="Charles II de Valois, Duke of Orléans" label="the duc de Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q378025" start="49425" end="49457" title="Blaise de Monluc" label="Monluc, future Marshal of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="49954" end="49967" title="Île de France" label="Île de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q346871" start="50077" end="50096" title="Constable of France" label="Constable of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190058" start="50295" end="50339" title="Marguerite de Navarre" label="the sister of the king, the queen of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="51192" end="51213" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978302" start="51481" end="51504" title="Claude d&amp;#x27;Annebault" label="Claude d&amp;#x27;Annebault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51509" end="51525" title="René de Montjean" label="René de Montjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q534089" start="51968" end="51980" title="Filippa Duci" label="Filippa Duci"/>
<link wikidata="Q113422" start="52221" end="52236" title="Diane de France" label="Diane de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q932707" start="52263" end="52281" title="Orazio Farnese, Duke of Castro" label="the duca di Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085482" start="52399" end="52406" title="François Olivier" label="Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="52956" end="52977" title="Osmanlı İmparatorluğu" label="Osmanlı İmparatorluğu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="55693" end="55717" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="the Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318593" start="55824" end="55839" title="Revolt of Ghent (1539-1540)" label="revolt of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159660" start="56407" end="56425" title="Maria of Austria, Holy Roman Empress" label="his daughter María"/>
<link wikidata="Q131959" start="57328" end="57342" title="Philippe de Chabot" label="Admiral Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="57406" end="57423" title="François, Duke of Guise" label="duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="59116" end="59146" title="Philip II of Spain" label="the future Felipe II of España"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="60446" end="60504" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret, the daughter of the queen of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62483" start="60509" end="60571" title="William, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg" label="the herzog von Jülich-Cleves-Berg (duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120144" start="61773" end="61778" title="Guillaume Poyet" label="Poyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q257557" start="62192" end="62219" title="Anne de Pisseleu d&amp;#x27;Heilly" label="the duchesse d&amp;#x27;Étampes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="63105" end="63116" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q562982" start="63177" end="63184" title="Charles de Cossé, Count of Brissac" label="Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63844" end="63853" title="Claude de Clermont" label="Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q276010" start="63925" end="63942" title="Diane de Poitiers" label="Diane de Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978302" start="65043" end="65060" title="Claude d&amp;#x27;Annebault" label="Admiral Annebault"/>
<link wikidata="Q459338" start="65065" end="65084" title="François de Tournon" label="Cardinal de Tournon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="66768" end="66781" title="Île de France" label="Île de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190058" start="68440" end="68460" title="Marguerite de Navarre" label="the queen of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q317506" start="68625" end="68644" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="the king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q580292" start="70250" end="70281" title="François de Montmorency" label="the Constable&amp;#x27;s eldest son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347889" start="70379" end="70424" title="Ordre de Saint-Michel" label="Ordre de Saint-Michel (Order of Saint-Michel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346257" start="70507" end="70520" title="Piero Strozzi" label="Piero Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="71504" end="71515" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q251943" start="71517" end="71525" title="Robert IV de La Marck" label="Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71530" end="71535" title="Jean Caraccioli" label="Melfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="71979" end="72000" title="Louis IX of France" label="the times of Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q276010" start="73545" end="73587" title="Diane de Poitiers" label="Diane de Poitiers, duchesse de Valentinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="73745" end="73766" title="François, Duke of Guise" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="73771" end="73790" title="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="archbishop of Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="73905" end="73925" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="the marquis de Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263852" start="73943" end="73958" title="Louise de Brézé" label="Louise de Brézé"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="74053" end="74074" title="François II of France" label="four year old dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="74085" end="74115" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="six year old niece Mary Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="75275" end="75305" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="the elder Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q317506" start="75307" end="75326" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="the king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q310334" start="75328" end="75346" title="Antoine of Navarre" label="the duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q251943" start="75348" end="75364" title="Robert IV de La Marck" label="Marshal Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q964196" start="76110" end="76125" title="Odet de Coligny" label="Odet de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085482" start="76213" end="76229" title="François Olivier" label="François Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175603" start="76325" end="76343" title="Jean de Morvillier" label="Jean de Morvillier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76371" end="76389" title="Louis de Lausignan" label="Louis de Lausignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q781265" start="76546" end="76560" title="Jean de Monluc" label="Jean de Monluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q563042" start="78946" end="78962" title="Gaspard de Saulx" label="Marshal Tavannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q320711" start="78967" end="78986" title="François de Scépeaux" label="Marshal Vielleville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80512" end="80531" title="Jean Caraccioli" label="the prince de Melfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967081" start="81702" end="81720" title="Claude de Savoie" label="the comte de Tende"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348702" start="82225" end="82258" title="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara" label="duca di Ferrara (duke of Ferrara)"/>
<link wikidata="Q444189" start="82403" end="82417" title="Charles III, Duke of Savoy" label="duca di Savoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157839" start="82560" end="82609" title="Revolt of the Pitauds" label="revolt against the &amp;quot;gabelle&amp;quot; (salt tax)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="83493" end="83538" title="François, Duke of Guise" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale, (duc de Guise in 1550)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114348016" start="83812" end="83861" title="Charles de Coucis" label="the sieur de Burie, lieutenant-general of Guyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="83965" end="83985" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="the marquis de Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="84959" end="84967" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q110094988" start="87121" end="87130" title="Saintonge (region)" label="Saintonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q563705" start="87585" end="87601" title="Anne d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Anne d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87805" end="87820" title="Claude de Rieux" label="Claude de Rieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="89173" end="89179" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q729044" start="89641" end="89656" title="Leone Strozzi" label="priore di Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q910957" start="90358" end="90368" title="Hardinghen" label="Hardinghen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291914" start="90830" end="90849" title="Edward Clinton, 1st Earl of Lincoln" label="the earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q204975" start="91219" end="91226" title="Gaspard II de Coligny" label="Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q347125" start="91555" end="91581" title="John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland" label="the duke of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="92648" end="92653" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q969113" start="93282" end="93301" title="Louis de Gonzague, Duke of Nevers" label="Ludovico di Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q898203" start="93858" end="93875" title="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise" label="Cardinal de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159911" start="93880" end="93896" title="Charles, Prince of La Roche-sur-Yon" label="La Roche-sur-Yon"/>
<link wikidata="Q289646" start="94264" end="94283" title="Henriette de Clèves" label="Henriette de Clèves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160268" start="94628" end="94645" title="Jacques, Duke of Nevers" label="Jacques de Clèves"/>
<link wikidata="Q461721" start="96375" end="96387" title="Janet Stewart, Lady Fleming" label="Lady Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="97465" end="97477" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Marie Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322001" start="97778" end="97843" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Angoulême" label="Henri de Valois, who would later be made the duc d&amp;#x27;Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q351610" start="98398" end="98423" title="Matthew II of Montmorency" label="Mathieu II de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="98445" end="98464" title="Philip II of France" label="Philippe II Auguste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346257" start="99199" end="99212" title="Piero Strozzi" label="Piero Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q442497" start="99273" end="99278" title="Ottavio Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q562982" start="99288" end="99308" title="Charles de Cossé, Count of Brissac" label="the comte de Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q181285" start="100556" end="100563" title="Cambrai" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="100565" end="100569" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="100571" end="100575" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="100580" end="100586" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q623374" start="101329" end="101334" title="Vitry-le-François" label="Vitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="101610" end="101614" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="101724" end="101733" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="101842" end="101846" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="101919" end="101950" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="the former Cardinal de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148973" start="102290" end="102300" title="Imbert de La Platière" label="Bourdillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320711" start="102839" end="102850" title="François de Scépeaux" label="Vielleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q562279" start="103263" end="103285" title="Artus de Cossé" label="the seigneur de Gonnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q63775" start="103858" end="103919" title="Wolfgang, Count Palatine of Zweibrücken" label="the pfalzgraf von Zweibrücken (count-palatine of Zweibrücken)"/>
<link wikidata="Q310334" start="104334" end="104352" title="Antoine of Navarre" label="the duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q317710" start="105117" end="105139" title="Maurice of Saxony" label="the elector of Sachsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="106098" end="106119" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485960" start="106704" end="106717" title="Siege of Metz (1552)" label="invested Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q729044" start="108826" end="108839" title="Leone Strozzi" label="Leone Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346257" start="109628" end="109641" title="Piero Strozzi" label="Piero Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110856" end="110874" title="Siege of Thérouanne (1553)" label="Thérouanne in 1553"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111403" end="111409" title="Siege of Hesdin (1553)" label="Hesdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251943" start="111474" end="111490" title="Robert IV de La Marck" label="Marshal Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71469" start="111826" end="111832" title="Corbie" label="Corbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348795" start="113452" end="113459" title="Guillaume de Joyeuse" label="Joyeuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113537" end="113556" title="Raimond de Beccarie" label="Raimond de Beccarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q554600" start="113977" end="113994" title="François I, Duke of Nevers" label="the duc de Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159911" start="113999" end="114029" title="Charles, Prince of La Roche-sur-Yon" label="the prince de La Roche-sur-Yon"/>
<link wikidata="Q768270" start="114382" end="114391" title="Bouvignes-sur-Meuse" label="Bouvignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="114464" end="114473" title="Bruxelles" label="Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q630387" start="114548" end="114575" title="Crèvecœur-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut" label="Crèvecœur-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889763" start="115216" end="115231" title="battle of Renty" label="battle of Renty"/>
<link wikidata="Q276010" start="116046" end="116063" title="Diane de Poitiers" label="Diane de Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="116174" end="116179" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116181" end="116200" title="Jacques du Broullat" label="Jacques du Broullat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086183" start="116419" end="116441" title="François de Dinteville" label="François de Dinteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q167600" start="116457" end="116464" title="Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="116700" end="116722" title="François, Duke of Anjou" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113422" start="117118" end="117133" title="Diane de France" label="Diane de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407824" start="118378" end="118397" title="Prospero Santacroce" label="Prospero Santacroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="118558" end="118579" title="Osmanlı İmparatorluğu" label="Osmanlı İmparatorluğu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="118725" end="118729" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169911" start="118813" end="118821" title="Pope Julius III" label="the Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747641" start="119437" end="119444" title="Honorat II of Savoy" label="Villars"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="119615" end="119622" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="119985" end="120006" title="Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle" label="Cardinal de Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524228" start="122240" end="122258" title="Truce of Vaucelles" label="Truce of Vaucelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q781265" start="123251" end="123257" title="Jean de Monluc" label="Monluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q562982" start="123262" end="123269" title="Charles de Cossé, Count of Brissac" label="Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q721509" start="123972" end="124014" title="Philippe III de Croÿ" label="the hertog van Aarschot (duke of Aarschot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="125418" end="125450" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="the duque de Alba (duke of Alba)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348702" start="126225" end="126258" title="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara" label="duque di Ferrara(duke of Ferrara)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="127050" end="127070" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="the queen of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213763" start="127125" end="127130" title="Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772423" start="127277" end="127301" title="Georges d&amp;#x27;Armagnac" label="Cardinal d&amp;#x27;Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338009" start="127555" end="127573" title="Edict of Compiègne" label="Edict of Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q317506" start="129045" end="129057" title="Henry II of Navarre" label="the old king"/>
<link wikidata="Q76508" start="129213" end="129244" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy" label="duca di Savoia (duke of Savoia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="129292" end="129311" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q332034" start="130565" end="130572" title="La Fère" label="La Fère"/>
<link wikidata="Q927365" start="130681" end="130703" title="Louis de Bourbon, Duke of Montpensier" label="the duc de Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="130705" end="130724" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Marshal Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q629049" start="132415" end="132418" title="Ham, Somme" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q596175" start="132420" end="132430" title="Le Catelet" label="Le Catelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49831" start="132432" end="132437" title="Noyon" label="Noyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269833" start="132442" end="132448" title="Chauny" label="Chauny"/>
<link wikidata="Q180871" start="132537" end="132546" title="Compiègne" label="Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701253" start="133109" end="133126" title="Siege of Calais (1558)" label="capture of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097246" start="133709" end="133718" title="Claude de La Châtre" label="La Châtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q276480" start="134081" end="134094" title="Ambroise Paré" label="Ambroise Paré"/>
<link wikidata="Q176041" start="134463" end="134482" title="Elisabeth de Valois" label="Elisabeth de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q159817" start="134523" end="134533" title="Carlos, Prince of Asturias" label="Don Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="134549" end="134560" title="François II of France" label="the dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170264" start="134602" end="134626" title="Joanna of Austria, Princess of Portugal" label="the princess of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605895" start="136124" end="136173" title="Henri I de Montmorency" label="the duc de Montmorency&amp;#x27;s second son Damville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="137694" end="137700" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q378025" start="140099" end="140115" title="Blaise de Monluc" label="Blaise de Monluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q588824" start="140272" end="140306" title="François de Coligny d&amp;#x27;Andelot" label="François de Coligny d&amp;#x27;Andelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="140622" end="140630" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Süleyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="141000" end="141033" title="William the Silent" label="princ van Oranj (prince of Oranj)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097261" start="141226" end="141242" title="Claude de l&amp;#x27;Aubespine, baron de Châteauneuf" label="L&amp;#x27;Aubespine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960638" start="142489" end="142509" title="Charles de Marillac" label="Archbishop of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q310334" start="144426" end="144445" title="Antoine of Navarre" label="the king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="146282" end="146307" title="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565942" start="148613" end="148626" title="Anne du Bourg" label="Anne du Bourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063190" start="149012" end="149068" title="Trial and execution of Anne du Bourg" label="Anne du Bourg being burned at the stake in December 1559"/>
<link wikidata="Q177046" start="149472" end="149524" title="Gabriel de Lorges, Count of Montgomery" label="the comte de Montgommery, captain of his Scots Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326045" start="149779" end="149788" title="Sébastien de Luxembourg" label="Martigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q310334" start="150805" end="150824" title="Antoine of Navarre" label="the king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476769" start="151376" end="151396" title="Hôtel des Tournelles" label="Hôtel des Tournelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="151511" end="151517" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493903" start="152157" end="152180" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Humières" label="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Humières"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="152277" end="152288" title="Basilica of Saint-Denis" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="152592" end="152600" title="François II" label="François"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326045" start="153464" end="153488" title="Sébastien de Luxembourg" label="the vicomte de Martigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q316913" start="154717" end="154736" title="Louis I, Prince of Condé" label="the prince de Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q688957" start="157951" end="158051" title="Conspiracy of Amboise" label="Protestant conspiracy attempted to seize the king while he was staying at the Château d&amp;#x27;Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051643" start="159588" end="159608" title="Edict of Amboise (1560)" label="promulgated a pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117034831" start="160237" end="160257" title="1560 Assembly of Notables" label="Assembly of Notables"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172642" start="161320" end="161338" title="Jean de Ferrières" label="vidame de Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="162798" end="162808" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="163401" end="163423" title="Henri III of France" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076886" start="165551" end="165562" title="Jacques d&amp;#x27;Albon" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q927365" start="166447" end="166465" title="Louis de Bourbon, Duke of Montpensier" label="duc de Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q562982" start="166470" end="166486" title="Charles de Cossé, Count of Brissac" label="comte de Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="166730" end="166738" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="166740" end="166746" title="Mark Antony" label="Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q105452" start="166751" end="166758" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (triumvir)" label="Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q781265" start="167117" end="167131" title="Jean de Monluc" label="Jean de Monluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="167668" end="167677" title="Felipe II of Spain" label="Felipe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580292" start="168139" end="168158" title="François de Montmorency" label="Marshal Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16661360" start="168951" end="168970" title="Louis de Saint-Gelais" label="seigneur de Lanssac"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="169007" end="169023" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426625" start="169704" end="169722" title="Colloquy of Poissy" label="Colloquy of Poissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="169950" end="169971" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q898203" start="170144" end="170161" title="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise" label="cardinal de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741365" start="170163" end="170181" title="Léonor d&amp;#x27;Orléans, duc de Longueville" label="duc de Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579854" start="170186" end="170200" title="Jacques de Savoie, Duke of Nemours" label="duc de Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194744" start="171124" end="171146" title="Edict of Saint-Germain" label="Edict of Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q694197" start="172585" end="172629" title="Christoph, Duke of Württemberg" label="herzog von Württemberg (duke of Württemberg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q544166" start="173908" end="173927" title="Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon (born 1523)" label="Cardinal de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="174505" end="174525" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="175292" end="175299" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="175486" end="175491" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="175493" end="175497" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="175499" end="175506" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="175511" end="175519" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086489" start="176385" end="176402" title="Massacre of Wassy" label="Massacre of Wassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194744" start="176930" end="176946" title="Edict of January" label="Edict of January"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086489" start="176992" end="177009" title="Massacre of Wassy" label="Massacre of Wassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q359352" start="179486" end="179508" title="Jean IV de Brosse" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Étampes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536736" start="179772" end="179816" title="Treaty of Hampton Court (1562)" label="accord with the English on 20 September 1562"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="179851" end="179859" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="179935" end="179941" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="180100" end="180105" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510354" start="180342" end="180356" title="Siege of Rouen (1562)" label="siege of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="181085" end="181111" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="queen of England Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q142410" start="181243" end="181248" title="Dreux" label="Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372" start="182362" end="182366" title="Eure" label="Eure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="184384" end="184393" title="Gabriel de Montmorency" label="Montbéron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19885891" start="184520" end="184536" title="Siege of Orléans (1563)" label="siege of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="184593" end="184598" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959506" start="184665" end="184677" title="Assassination of the Duke of Guise (1563)" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q258881" start="184692" end="184709" title="Jean de Poltrot" label="the sieur de Méré"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185149" end="185162" title="Île aux Bœufs" label="Île aux Bœufs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605895" start="185320" end="185328" title="Henri I de Montmorency" label="Damville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379398" start="185333" end="185354" title="Sébastien de L&amp;#x27;Aubespine" label="the bishop of Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284627" start="185560" end="185576" title="Edict of Amboise" label="Edict of Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="186708" end="186716" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798298" start="186847" end="186863" title="Treaty of Troyes (1564)" label="treaty of Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605895" start="188622" end="188643" title="Henri I de Montmorency" label="the baron de Damville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114840" start="188962" end="188987" title="Charles IX&amp;#x27;s grand tour of France" label="grand tour of the kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q544166" start="189368" end="189391" title="Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon (born 1523)" label="the Cardinal de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="189686" end="189715" title="Henri IV of France" label="the young new king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="190157" end="190162" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="190164" end="190172" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="190177" end="190185" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="190332" end="190343" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819399" start="190906" end="190914" title="Laurent de Maugiron" label="Maugiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967079" start="190931" end="190950" title="Bertrand-Rambaud de Simiane" label="the baron de Gordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="191985" end="191992" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="192092" end="192101" title="Felipe II of Spain" label="Felipe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160927" start="192360" end="192365" title="Blois" label="Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q184883" start="192477" end="192485" title="Moulins, Allier" label="Moullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="193724" end="193748" title="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="the Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193967" end="193979" title="Claude Haton" label="Claude Haton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097261" start="194405" end="194421" title="Claude de l&amp;#x27;Aubespine, baron de Châteauneuf" label="L&amp;#x27;Aubespine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562279" start="195286" end="195299" title="Artus de Cossé" label="Marshal Cossé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440821" start="195701" end="195709" title="Monceaux" label="Monceaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q551804" start="195792" end="195806" title="Michel de L&amp;#x27;Hôpital" label="L&amp;#x27;Hôpital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579854" start="195892" end="195906" title="Jacques de Savoie, Duke of Nemours" label="duc de Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035345" start="196386" end="196399" title="Surprise of Meaux" label="coup at Meaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414020" start="196547" end="196554" title="Filippo di Piero Strozzi" label="Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="196596" end="196612" title="Timoléon de Cossé" label="comte de Brissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254636" start="197490" end="197506" title="François III de La Rochefoucauld" label="La Rochefoucauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q212793" start="198175" end="198184" title="Charenton-le-Pont" label="Charenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041463" start="199082" end="199103" title="Battle of Saint-Denis (1567)" label="Battle of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q678012" start="199647" end="199660" title="Armand de Gontaut" label="Marshal Biron"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="201276" end="201287" title="Basilica of Saint-Denis" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="201493" end="201512" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="201574" end="201620" title="François, Duke of Anjou" label="the king&amp;#x27;s brother the duc d&amp;#x27;Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q565927" start="201633" end="201684" title="Anne de Joyeuse" label="Henri III&amp;#x27;s deceased favourite Joyeuse in 1587"/>
<link wikidata="Q554943" start="201839" end="201852" title="Germain Pilon" label="Germain Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="202074" end="202094" title="Henri III of France" label="the duc d&amp;#x27;Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042049" start="202652" end="202668" title="Battle of Jarnac" label="Battle of Jarnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747641" start="202726" end="202744" title="Honorat II of Savoy" label="marquis de Villars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="203413" end="203431" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Épinac" label="archbishop of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313700" start="203449" end="203467" title="Henri I, Duke of Guise" label="third duc de Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q733270" start="204073" end="204081" title="Pierre de Bourdeille, seigneur de Brantôme" label="Brantôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="204174" end="204184" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="204189" end="204198" title="Henri III of France" label="Henri III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381835" wikidata="Q1899314" url="?curid=381835" title="Driebergen">
<text>Driebergen is a former village and municipality in the Dutch province of Utrecht. It is first mentioned as Thriberghen in 1159. The former municipality of Driebergen existed until 1931, when it merged with Rijsenburg, to create the new municipality of Driebergen-Rijsenburg. 
In later years, due to growth of the villages of Driebergen and Rijsenburg, the villages themselves also merged, to become the single town of Driebergen-Rijsenburg. 
Since 2006, Driebergen-Rijsenburg has been part of the new municipality of Utrechtse Heuvelrug.Driebergen-Rijsenburg also houses the Driebergen Forest and Rijsenburg Forest in which the renowned Heidetuin is also located.

==Transport==
*Driebergen-Zeist railway station

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1899314" start="0" end="10" title="Driebergen" label="Driebergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="55" end="60" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q776" start="73" end="80" title="Utrecht (province)" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431575" start="206" end="216" title="Rijsenburg" label="Rijsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258901" start="252" end="273" title="Driebergen-Rijsenburg" label="Driebergen-Rijsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10043" start="517" end="536" title="Utrechtse Heuvelrug" label="Utrechtse Heuvelrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q21288355" start="575" end="592" title="Driebergen forest" label="Driebergen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q800688" start="680" end="712" title="Driebergen-Zeist railway station" label="Driebergen-Zeist railway station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381842" wikidata="Q496579" url="?curid=381842" title="OpenMP">
<text>OpenMP is an application programming interface (API) that supports multi-platform shared-memory multiprocessing programming in C, C++, and Fortran, on many platforms, instruction-set architectures and operating systems, including Solaris, AIX, FreeBSD, HP-UX, Linux, macOS, and Windows. It consists of a set of compiler directives, library routines, and environment variables that influence run-time behavior.

OpenMP is managed by the nonprofit technology consortium &quot;OpenMP Architecture Review Board&quot; (or &quot;OpenMP ARB&quot;), jointly defined by a broad swath of leading computer hardware and software vendors, including Arm, AMD, IBM, Intel, Cray, HP, Fujitsu, Nvidia, NEC, Red Hat, Texas Instruments, and Oracle Corporation.

OpenMP uses a portable, scalable model that gives programmers a simple and flexible interface for developing parallel applications for platforms ranging from the standard desktop computer to the supercomputer.

An application built with the hybrid model of parallel programming can run on a computer cluster using both OpenMP and Message Passing Interface (MPI), such that OpenMP is used for parallelism &quot;within&quot; a (multi-core) node while MPI is used for parallelism &quot;between&quot; nodes. There have also been efforts to run OpenMP on software distributed shared memory systems, to translate OpenMP into MPI
and to extend OpenMP for non-shared memory systems.

== Design ==

OpenMP is an implementation of multithreading, a method of parallelizing whereby a &quot;primary&quot; thread (a series of instructions executed consecutively) &quot;forks&quot; a specified number of &quot;sub&quot;-threads and the system divides a task among them. The threads then run concurrently, with the runtime environment allocating threads to different processors.

The section of code that is meant to run in parallel is marked accordingly, with a compiler directive that will cause the threads to form before the section is executed. Each thread has an &quot;ID&quot; attached to it which can be obtained using a function (called codice_1). The thread ID is an integer, and the primary thread has an ID of &quot;0&quot;. After the execution of the parallelized code, the threads &quot;join&quot; back into the primary thread, which continues onward to the end of the program.

By default, each thread executes the parallelized section of code independently. &quot;Work-sharing constructs&quot; can be used to divide a task among the threads so that each thread executes its allocated part of the code. Both task parallelism and data parallelism can be achieved using OpenMP in this way.

The runtime environment allocates threads to processors depending on usage, machine load and other factors. The runtime environment can assign the number of threads based on environment variables, or the code can do so using functions. The OpenMP functions are included in a header file labelled in C/C++.

== History ==
The OpenMP Architecture Review Board (ARB) published its first API specifications, OpenMP for Fortran 1.0, in October 1997. In October the following year they released the C/C++ standard. 2000 saw version 2.0 of the Fortran specifications with version 2.0 of the C/C++ specifications being released in 2002. Version 2.5 is a combined C/C++/Fortran specification that was released in 2005.

Up to version 2.0, OpenMP primarily specified ways to parallelize highly regular loops, as they occur in matrix-oriented numerical programming, where the number of iterations of the loop is known at entry time. This was recognized as a limitation, and various task parallel extensions were added to implementations. In 2005, an effort to standardize task parallelism was formed, which published a proposal in 2007, taking inspiration from task parallelism features in Cilk, X10 and Chapel.

Version 3.0 was released in May 2008. Included in the new features in 3.0 is the concept of &quot;tasks&quot; and the &quot;task&quot; construct, significantly broadening the scope of OpenMP beyond the parallel loop constructs that made up most of OpenMP 2.0.

Version 4.0 of the specification was released in July 2013. It adds or improves the following features: support for accelerators; atomics; error handling; thread affinity; tasking extensions; user defined reduction; SIMD support; Fortran 2003 support.

Version 5.2 of OpenMP was released in November 2021.

Version 6.0 was released in November 2024.

Note that not all compilers (and OSes) support the full set of features for the latest version/s.

== Core elements ==
The core elements of OpenMP are the constructs for thread creation, workload distribution (work sharing), data-environment management, thread synchronization, user-level runtime routines and environment variables.

In C/C++, OpenMP uses #pragmas. The OpenMP specific pragmas are listed below.

=== Thread creation ===
The pragma &quot;omp parallel&quot; is used to fork additional threads to carry out the work enclosed in the construct in parallel. The original thread will be denoted as &quot;master thread&quot; with thread ID 0.

Example (C program): Display &quot;Hello, world.&quot; using multiple threads.
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;omp.h&gt;

int main(void)
 #pragma omp parallel
 printf(&quot;Hello, world.\n&quot;);
 return 0;


Use flag -fopenmp to compile using GCC:

$ gcc -fopenmp hello.c -o hello -ldl
Output on a computer with two cores, and thus two threads:
Hello, world.
Hello, world.
However, the output may also be garbled because of the race condition caused from the two threads sharing the standard output.

Hello, wHello, woorld.
rld.
Whether codice_2 is atomic depends on the underlying implementation unlike C++11&#x27;s codice_3, which is thread-safe by default.

=== Work-sharing constructs ===
Used to specify how to assign independent work to one or all of the threads.
* &quot;omp for&quot; or &quot;omp do&quot;: used to split up loop iterations among the threads, also called loop constructs.
* &quot;sections&quot;: assigning consecutive but independent code blocks to different threads
* &quot;single&quot;: specifying a code block that is executed by only one thread, a barrier is implied in the end
* &quot;master&quot;: similar to single, but the code block will be executed by the master thread only and no barrier implied in the end.
Example: initialize the value of a large array in parallel, using each thread to do part of the work
int main(int argc, char **argv)
 int a[100000];

 #pragma omp parallel for
 for (int i = 0; i &lt; 100000; i++) {
 a[i] = 2 * i;

 return 0;


This example is embarrassingly parallel, and depends only on the value of . The OpenMP flag tells the OpenMP system to split this task among its working threads. The threads will each receive a unique and private version of the variable. For instance, with two worker threads, one thread might be handed a version of that runs from 0 to 49999 while the second gets a version running from 50000 to 99999.

===Variant directives===
Variant directives are one of the major features introduced in OpenMP 5.0 specification to facilitate programmers to improve performance portability. They enable adaptation of OpenMP pragmas and user code at compile time. The specification defines traits to describe active OpenMP constructs, execution devices, and functionality provided by an implementation, context selectors based on the traits and user-defined conditions, and &quot;metadirective&quot; and &quot;declare directive&quot; directives for users to program the same code region with variant directives.
* The &quot;metadirective&quot; is an executable directive that conditionally resolves to another directive at compile time by selecting from multiple directive variants based on traits that define an OpenMP condition or context. 
* The &quot;declare variant&quot; directive has similar functionality as &quot;metadirective&quot; but selects a function variant at the call-site based on context or user-defined conditions.
The mechanism provided by the two variant directives for selecting variants is more convenient to use than the C/C++ preprocessing since it directly supports variant selection in OpenMP and allows an OpenMP compiler to analyze and determine the final directive from variants and context.
// code adaptation using preprocessing directives

int v1[N], v2[N], v3[N];
#if defined(nvptx)
 #pragma omp target teams distribute parallel for map(to:v1,v2) map(from:v3)
 for (int i= 0; i&lt; N; i++) 
 v3[i] = v1[i] * v2[i];
#else 
 #pragma omp target parallel for map(to:v1,v2) map(from:v3)
 for (int i= 0; i&lt; N; i++) 
 v3[i] = v1[i] * v2[i];
#endif

// code adaptation using metadirective in OpenMP 5.0

int v1[N], v2[N], v3[N];
#pragma omp target map(to:v1,v2) map(from:v3)
 #pragma omp metadirective \
 when(device={arch(nvptx)}: target teams distribute parallel for)\
 default(target parallel for)
 for (int i= 0; i&lt; N; i++) 
 v3[i] = v1[i] * v2[i];

=== Clauses ===

Since OpenMP is a shared memory programming model, most variables in OpenMP code are visible to all threads by default. But sometimes private variables are necessary to avoid race conditions and there is a need to pass values between the sequential part and the parallel region (the code block executed in parallel), so data environment management is introduced as &quot;data sharing attribute clauses&quot; by appending them to the OpenMP directive. The different types of clauses are:

; Data sharing attribute clauses:
* &quot;shared&quot;: the data declared outside a parallel region is shared, which means visible and accessible by all threads simultaneously. By default, all variables in the work sharing region are shared except the loop iteration counter.
* &quot;private&quot;: the data declared within a parallel region is private to each thread, which means each thread will have a local copy and use it as a temporary variable. A private variable is not initialized and the value is not maintained for use outside the parallel region. By default, the loop iteration counters in the OpenMP loop constructs are private.
* &quot;default&quot;: allows the programmer to state that the default data scoping within a parallel region will be either &quot;shared&quot;, or &quot;none&quot; for C/C++, or &quot;shared&quot;, &quot;firstprivate&quot;, &quot;private&quot;, or &quot;none&quot; for Fortran. The &quot;none&quot; option forces the programmer to declare each variable in the parallel region using the data sharing attribute clauses.
* &quot;firstprivate&quot;: like &quot;private&quot; except initialized to original value.
* &quot;lastprivate&quot;: like &quot;private&quot; except original value is updated after construct.
* &quot;reduction&quot;: a safe way of joining work from all threads after construct.

; Synchronization clauses:
* &quot;critical&quot;: the enclosed code block will be executed by only one thread at a time, and not simultaneously executed by multiple threads. It is often used to protect shared data from race conditions.
* &quot;atomic&quot;: the memory update (write, or read-modify-write) in the next instruction will be performed atomically. It does not make the entire statement atomic; only the memory update is atomic. A compiler might use special hardware instructions for better performance than when using &quot;critical&quot;.
* &quot;ordered&quot;: the structured block is executed in the order in which iterations would be executed in a sequential loop
* &quot;barrier&quot;: each thread waits until all of the other threads of a team have reached this point. A work-sharing construct has an implicit barrier synchronization at the end.
*&quot;nowait&quot;: specifies that threads completing assigned work can proceed without waiting for all threads in the team to finish. In the absence of this clause, threads encounter a barrier synchronization at the end of the work sharing construct.

; Scheduling clauses:
*&quot;schedule (type, chunk)&quot;: This is useful if the work sharing construct is a do-loop or for-loop. The iterations in the work sharing construct are assigned to threads according to the scheduling method defined by this clause. The three types of scheduling are:
*#&quot;static&quot;: Here, all the threads are allocated iterations before they execute the loop iterations. The iterations are divided among threads equally by default. However, specifying an integer for the parameter &quot;chunk&quot; will allocate chunk number of contiguous iterations to a particular thread.
*#&quot;dynamic&quot;: Here, some of the iterations are allocated to a smaller number of threads. Once a particular thread finishes its allocated iteration, it returns to get another one from the iterations that are left. The parameter &quot;chunk&quot; defines the number of contiguous iterations that are allocated to a thread at a time.
*#&quot;guided&quot;: A large chunk of contiguous iterations are allocated to each thread dynamically (as above). The chunk size decreases exponentially with each successive allocation to a minimum size specified in the parameter &quot;chunk&quot;

; IF control:
*&quot;if&quot;: This will cause the threads to parallelize the task only if a condition is met. Otherwise the code block executes serially.

; Initialization:
* &quot;firstprivate&quot;: the data is private to each thread, but initialized using the value of the variable using the same name from the master thread.
* &quot;lastprivate&quot;: the data is private to each thread. The value of this private data will be copied to a global variable using the same name outside the parallel region if current iteration is the last iteration in the parallelized loop. A variable can be both &quot;firstprivate&quot; and &quot;lastprivate&quot;.
* &quot;threadprivate&quot;: The data is a global data, but it is private in each parallel region during the runtime. The difference between &quot;threadprivate&quot; and &quot;private&quot; is the global scope associated with threadprivate and the preserved value across parallel regions.

; Data copying:
* &quot;copyin&quot;: similar to &quot;firstprivate&quot; for &quot;private&quot; variables, &quot;threadprivate&quot; variables are not initialized, unless using &quot;copyin&quot; to pass the value from the corresponding global variables. No &quot;copyout&quot; is needed because the value of a threadprivate variable is maintained throughout the execution of the whole program.
* &quot;copyprivate&quot;: used with &quot;single&quot; to support the copying of data values from private objects on one thread (the &quot;single&quot; thread) to the corresponding objects on other threads in the team.

; Reduction:
* &quot;reduction (operator | intrinsic : list)&quot;: the variable has a local copy in each thread, but the values of the local copies will be summarized (reduced) into a global shared variable. This is very useful if a particular operation (specified in &quot;operator&quot; for this particular clause) on a variable runs iteratively, so that its value at a particular iteration depends on its value at a prior iteration. The steps that lead up to the operational increment are parallelized, but the threads updates the global variable in a thread safe manner. This would be required in parallelizing numerical integration of functions and differential equations, as a common example.

; Others:
* &quot;flush&quot;: The value of this variable is restored from the register to the memory for using this value outside of a parallel part
* &quot;master&quot;: Executed only by the master thread (the thread which forked off all the others during the execution of the OpenMP directive). No implicit barrier; other team members (threads) not required to reach.

=== User-level runtime routines ===
Used to modify/check the number of threads, detect if the execution context is in a parallel region, how many processors in current system, set/unset locks, timing functions, etc

=== Environment variables ===
A method to alter the execution features of OpenMP applications. Used to control loop iterations scheduling, default number of threads, etc. For example, &quot;OMP_NUM_THREADS&quot; is used to specify number of threads for an application.

== Implementations ==
OpenMP has been implemented in many commercial compilers. For instance, Visual C++ 2005, 2008, 2010, 2012 and 2013 support it (OpenMP 2.0, in Professional, Team System, Premium and Ultimate editions), as well as Intel Parallel Studio for various processors. Oracle Solaris Studio compilers and tools support the latest OpenMP specifications with productivity enhancements for Solaris OS (UltraSPARC and x86/x64) and Linux platforms. The Fortran, C and C++ compilers from The Portland Group also support OpenMP 2.5. GCC has also supported OpenMP since version 4.2.

Compilers with an implementation of OpenMP 3.0:
* GCC 4.3.1
* Mercurium compiler
* Intel Fortran and C/C++ versions 11.0 and 11.1 compilers, Intel C/C++ and Fortran Composer XE 2011 and Intel Parallel Studio.
* IBM XL compiler
* Sun Studio 12 update 1 has a full implementation of OpenMP 3.0
* Multi-Processor Computing

Several compilers support OpenMP 3.1:
* GCC 4.7
* Intel Fortran and C/C++ compilers 12.1
* IBM XL C/C++ compilers for AIX and Linux, V13.1 &amp; IBM XL Fortran compilers for AIX and Linux, V14.1
* LLVM/Clang 3.7
* Absoft Fortran Compilers v. 19 for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux

Compilers supporting OpenMP 4.0:
* GCC 4.9.0 for C/C++, GCC 4.9.1 for Fortran
* Intel Fortran and C/C++ compilers 15.0
* IBM XL C/C++ for Linux, V13.1 (partial) &amp; XL Fortran for Linux, V15.1 (partial)
* LLVM/Clang 3.7 (partial)

Several Compilers supporting OpenMP 4.5:
* GCC 6 for C/C++ 
* Intel Fortran and C/C++ compilers 17.0, 18.0, 19.0 
*LLVM/Clang 12 
Partial support for OpenMP 5.0:

* GCC 9 for C/C++ 
* Intel Fortran and C/C++ compilers 19.1 
* LLVM/Clang 12 

Auto-parallelizing compilers that generates source code annotated with OpenMP directives:
* iPat/OMP
* Parallware
* PLUTO
* ROSE (compiler framework)
* S2P by KPIT Cummins Infosystems Ltd.
* ComPar
* PragFormer

Several profilers and debuggers expressly support OpenMP:

* Intel VTune Profiler - a profiler for the x86 CPU and Xe GPU architectures
*Intel Advisor - a design assistance and analysis tool for OpenMP and MPI codes
*Allinea Distributed Debugging Tool (DDT) – debugger for OpenMP and MPI codes
* Allinea MAP – profiler for OpenMP and MPI codes
* TotalView - debugger from Rogue Wave Software for OpenMP, MPI and serial codes
* ompP – profiler for OpenMP
* VAMPIR – profiler for OpenMP and MPI code

== Pros and cons ==

Pros:
* Portable multithreading code (in C/C++ and other languages, one typically has to call platform-specific primitives in order to get multithreading).
* Simple: need not deal with message passing as MPI does.
* Data layout and decomposition is handled automatically by directives.
* Scalability comparable to MPI on shared-memory systems.
* Incremental parallelism: can work on one part of the program at one time, no dramatic change to code is needed.
* Unified code for both serial and parallel applications: OpenMP constructs are treated as comments when sequential compilers are used.
* Original (serial) code statements need not, in general, be modified when parallelized with OpenMP. This reduces the chance of inadvertently introducing bugs.
* Both coarse-grained and fine-grained parallelism are possible.
* In irregular multi-physics applications which do not adhere solely to the SPMD mode of computation, as encountered in tightly coupled fluid-particulate systems, the flexibility of OpenMP can have a big performance advantage over MPI.
* Can be used on various accelerators such as GPGPU and FPGAs.

Cons:
* Risk of introducing difficult to debug synchronization bugs and race conditions.
* only runs efficiently in shared-memory multiprocessor platforms (see however Intel&#x27;s Cluster OpenMP and other distributed shared memory platforms).
* Requires a compiler that supports OpenMP.
* Scalability is limited by memory architecture.
* No support for compare-and-swap.
* Reliable error handling is missing.
* Lacks fine-grained mechanisms to control thread-processor mapping.
* High chance of accidentally writing false sharing code.

== Performance expectations ==

One might expect to get an &quot;N&quot; times speedup when running a program parallelized using OpenMP on a &quot;N&quot; processor platform. However, this seldom occurs for these reasons:
* When a dependency exists, a process must wait until the data it depends on is computed.
* When multiple processes share a non-parallel proof resource (like a file to write in), their requests are executed sequentially. Therefore, each thread must wait until the other thread releases the resource.
* A large part of the program may not be parallelized by OpenMP, which means that the theoretical upper limit of speedup is limited according to Amdahl&#x27;s law.
* N processors in a symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) may have N times the computation power, but the memory bandwidth usually does not scale up N times. Quite often, the original memory path is shared by multiple processors and performance degradation may be observed when they compete for the shared memory bandwidth.
* Many other common problems affecting the final speedup in parallel computing also apply to OpenMP, like load balancing and synchronization overhead.
* Compiler optimisation may not be as effective when invoking OpenMP. This can commonly lead to a single-threaded OpenMP program running slower than the same code compiled without an OpenMP flag (which will be fully serial).

== Thread affinity ==

Some vendors recommend setting the processor affinity on OpenMP threads to associate them with particular processor cores.
This minimizes thread migration and context-switching cost among cores. It also improves the data locality and reduces the cache-coherency traffic among the cores (or processors).

==Benchmarks==
A variety of benchmarks has been developed to demonstrate the use of OpenMP, test its performance and evaluate correctness.

Simple examples
* OmpSCR: OpenMP Source Code Repository

Performance benchmarks include:
* NAS Parallel Benchmark
* Barcelona OpenMP Task Suite a collection of applications that allow to test OpenMP tasking implementations.
* SPEC series
** SPEC OMP 2012
** The SPEC ACCEL benchmark suite testing OpenMP 4 target offloading API
** The SPEChpc 2002 benchmark
* CORAL benchmarks
* Exascale Proxy Applications
* Rodinia focusing on accelerators.
* Problem Based Benchmark Suite
Correctness benchmarks include:
* OpenMP Validation Suite
* OpenMP Validation and Verification Testsuite
* DataRaceBench is a benchmark suite designed to systematically and quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of OpenMP data race detection tools.
* AutoParBench is a benchmark suite to evaluate compilers and tools which can automatically insert OpenMP directives.

== See also ==

* Concurrency (computer science)
* Heterogeneous System Architecture
* Parallel programming model
* POSIX Threads
* Unified Parallel C
* Bulk synchronous parallel
* Partitioned global address space
* SequenceL
== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Quinn Michael J, Parallel Programming in C with MPI and OpenMP McGraw-Hill Inc. 2004. 
* R. Chandra, R. Menon, L. Dagum, D. Kohr, D. Maydan, J. McDonald, Parallel Programming in OpenMP. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000. 
* R. Eigenmann (Editor), M. Voss (Editor), OpenMP Shared Memory Parallel Programming: International Workshop on OpenMP Applications and Tools, WOMPAT 2001, West Lafayette, IN, USA, July 30–31, 2001. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science). Springer 2001. 
* B. Chapman, G. Jost, R. van der Pas, D.J. Kuck (foreword), Using OpenMP: Portable Shared Memory Parallel Programming. The MIT Press (October 31, 2007). 
* Tom Deakin and Timothy G. Mattson: &quot;Programming Your GPU with OpenMP: Performance Portability for GPUs&quot;, The MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-262547536 (Nov, 7,2023).
* Parallel Processing via MPI &amp; OpenMP, M. Firuziaan, O. Nommensen. Linux Enterprise, 10/2002
* MSDN Magazine article on OpenMP
* SC08 OpenMP Tutorial (PDF) – Hands-On Introduction to OpenMP, Mattson and Meadows, from SC08 (Austin)
* OpenMP Specifications 
* Miguel Hermanns:&quot;Parallel Programming in Fortran 95 using OpenMP&quot; (19th, April, 2002) (PDF) (OpenMP ver.1 and ver.2)
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q496579" start="0" end="6" title="OpenMP" label="OpenMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="13" end="46" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="82" end="95" title="shared memory architecture" label="shared-memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="96" end="111" title="multiprocessing" label="multiprocessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="127" end="128" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="130" end="133" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="139" end="146" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="167" end="195" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction-set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="201" end="217" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="230" end="237" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="239" end="242" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="244" end="251" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="253" end="258" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="260" end="265" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="267" end="272" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="278" end="285" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121492" start="311" end="329" title="compiler directive" label="compiler directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="332" end="348" title="library (computing)" label="library routines"/>
<link wikidata="Q400857" start="354" end="374" title="environment variable" label="environment variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="436" end="445" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="457" end="467" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="636" end="639" title="Arm (company)" label="Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="641" end="644" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="646" end="649" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="651" end="656" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q144060" start="658" end="662" title="Cray" label="Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="664" end="666" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="668" end="675" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="677" end="683" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="685" end="688" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="690" end="697" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="699" end="716" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="722" end="740" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080428" start="757" end="765" title="software portability" label="portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="793" end="803" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="914" end="930" title="desktop computer" label="desktop computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="938" end="951" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="1000" end="1020" title="parallel programming" label="parallel programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="1034" end="1050" title="computer cluster" label="computer cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q127879" start="1073" end="1098" title="Message Passing Interface" label="Message Passing Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229610" start="1293" end="1327" title="distributed shared memory" label="software distributed shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="1464" end="1478" title="Thread (computer science)" label="multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q14675" start="1593" end="1610" title="Fork (system call)" label="&amp;quot;forks&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q128392" start="1720" end="1732" title="Concurrent computing" label="concurrently"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004415" start="1743" end="1762" title="runtime environment" label="runtime environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="2057" end="2065" title="Function (computer science)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q691169" start="2551" end="2567" title="task parallelism" label="task parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124522" start="2572" end="2588" title="data parallelism" label="data parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q400857" start="2806" end="2826" title="environment variable" label="environment variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q98448101" start="2907" end="2918" title="header file" label="header file"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2931" end="2932" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="2933" end="2936" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="3464" end="3485" title="numerical programming" label="numerical programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569373" start="3811" end="3815" title="Cilk" label="Cilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852616" start="3817" end="3820" title="X10 (programming language)" label="X10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036051" start="3825" end="3831" title="Chapel (programming language)" label="Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="4211" end="4223" title="hardware acceleration" label="accelerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q513932" start="4225" end="4232" title="linearizability" label="atomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382169" start="4250" end="4265" title="processor affinity" label="thread affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q951651" start="4300" end="4309" title="fold (higher-order function)" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="4311" end="4315" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="4325" end="4337" title="Fortran 2003" label="Fortran 2003"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4802" end="4810" title="C preprocessor#Compiler-specific preprocessor features" label="#pragmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="5535" end="5549" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070408" start="5590" end="5605" title="standard output" label="standard output"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345894" start="5930" end="5954" title="Map (parallel pattern)" label="split up loop iterations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369501" start="6611" end="6634" title="embarrassingly parallel" label="embarrassingly parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="9162" end="9176" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="11035" end="11049" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q753445" start="15309" end="15330" title="numerical integration" label="numerical integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="15348" end="15369" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041460" start="16486" end="16507" title="Intel Parallel Studio" label="Intel Parallel Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622457" start="16532" end="16553" title="Oracle Solaris Studio" label="Oracle Solaris Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757815" start="16745" end="16763" title="The Portland Group" label="The Portland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="16789" end="16792" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080237" start="17374" end="17398" title="Absoft Fortran Compilers" label="Absoft Fortran Compilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323839" start="17913" end="17931" title="Automatic parallelization" label="Auto-parallelizing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18016" end="18026" title="Parallware" label="Parallware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277413" start="18037" end="18062" title="ROSE (compiler framework)" label="ROSE (compiler framework)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052567" start="18192" end="18197" title="VTune" label="VTune"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="18228" end="18231" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q84077157" start="18240" end="18242" title="Intel Xe" label="Xe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043518" start="18262" end="18275" title="Intel Advisor" label="Intel Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732682" start="18342" end="18376" title="Allinea Distributed Debugging Tool" label="Allinea Distributed Debugging Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351380" start="18421" end="18432" title="Allinea MAP" label="Allinea MAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439723" start="18497" end="18516" title="Rogue Wave Software" label="Rogue Wave Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q127879" start="18849" end="18852" title="Message Passing Interface" label="MPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q127879" start="18959" end="18962" title="Message Passing Interface" label="MPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454956" start="19406" end="19420" title="Granularity (parallel computing)" label="coarse-grained"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454956" start="19425" end="19437" title="Granularity (parallel computing)" label="fine-grained"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289219" start="19540" end="19544" title="SPMD" label="SPMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q127879" start="19695" end="19698" title="Message Passing Interface" label="MPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q971505" start="19746" end="19751" title="GPGPU" label="GPGPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="19756" end="19761" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="FPGAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="19836" end="19850" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229610" start="19970" end="19995" title="distributed shared memory" label="distributed shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q128562" start="20118" end="20134" title="compare-and-swap" label="compare-and-swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432732" start="20281" end="20294" title="false sharing" label="false sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549489" start="20381" end="20388" title="speedup" label="speedup"/>
<link wikidata="Q460419" start="20969" end="20986" title="Amdahl&amp;#x27;s law" label="Amdahl&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178677" start="21008" end="21033" title="symmetric multiprocessing" label="symmetric multiprocessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148339" start="21088" end="21104" title="memory bandwidth" label="memory bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="21366" end="21384" title="parallel computing" label="parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="21412" end="21426" title="load balancing (computing)" label="load balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382169" start="21741" end="21759" title="processor affinity" label="processor affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414548" start="23014" end="23044" title="Concurrency (computer science)" label="Concurrency (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616181" start="23047" end="23080" title="Heterogeneous System Architecture" label="Heterogeneous System Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27929394" start="23083" end="23109" title="Parallel programming model" label="Parallel programming model"/>
<link wikidata="Q928112" start="23112" end="23125" title="POSIX Threads" label="POSIX Threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095090" start="23128" end="23146" title="Unified Parallel C" label="Unified Parallel C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004114" start="23149" end="23174" title="Bulk synchronous parallel" label="Bulk synchronous parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q945818" start="23177" end="23209" title="Partitioned global address space" label="Partitioned global address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452449" start="23212" end="23221" title="SequenceL" label="SequenceL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381844" wikidata="Q46400" url="?curid=381844" title="Suceava">
<text>Suceava () is a city in northeastern Romania. The seat of Suceava County, it is situated in the historical regions of Bukovina and Moldavia, northeastern Romania. It is the largest urban settlement of Suceava County, with a population of 84,308 inhabitants according to the 2021 Romanian census.

During the late Middle Ages, namely between 1388 and 1564 (or from the late 14th century to the late 16th century), this middle-sized town was the capital of the Principality of Moldavia. Later on, it became an important, strategically located commercial town of the Habsburg monarchy, Austrian Empire, and Austria-Hungary (formerly belonging to Cisleithania or the Austrian part of the dual monarchy) on the border with the Romanian Old Kingdom.

Nowadays, the town is known for its reconstructed medieval seat fortress (further rebuilt through the EU-funded Regio programme) and its UNESCO-recognized World Heritage Site Saint John the New Monastery (part of the Churches of Moldavia), both local and national tourist attractions. In addition, the Administrative Palace, a historic and civic building dating to imperial Austrian times and designed by Viennese architect Peter Paul Brang, is located in the historic town centre along with the Roman Catholic Saint John of Nepomuk church (one building faces the other).

Suceava is the 22nd largest Romanian city. The city&#x27;s population increased exponentially during the second half of the 20th century, from just over 10,000 people in the late 1940s to over 100,000 in the early 1990s.

== Historical overview ==
During the late Middle Ages, the town of Suceava was the capital of the Principality of Moldavia, being strategically located at the crossroads of several trade routes linking Central Europe with Eastern Europe, and, more specifically for that period of time, the former Principality of Moldavia with the Kingdom of Poland and the Kingdom of Hungary respectively. The town of Suceava had also operated under the Magdeburg law back in the Middle Ages ().

From 1775 to 1918, Suceava was under the administration of the Habsburg Empire, initially part of its Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, then gradually becoming the third most populous urban settlement of the Duchy of Bukovina, a constituent land of the Austrian Empire and subsequently a crown land within the Austrian part of Austria-Hungary. During this time, Suceava was an important, strategically located commercial border town with the then Romanian Old Kingdom to the south-east (, ).

Throughout the Austrian-ruled period of Bukovina, Suceava was also regarded as a &#x27;miniature Austria&#x27; by native intellectual Rudolf Gassauer given its significant ethnic diversity (which, up until the early 20th century, included an overwhelming majority of ethnic Germans, more specifically Bukovina Germans, as well). An even older ethnic German presence in the town (as well as in the entire region of Bukovina) can be traced back to the end of the 14th century, more specifically during the Late Middle Ages (represented by a relatively small group of Transylvanian Saxons).

In the wake of World War I, after 1918, along with the rest of Bukovina, Suceava became part of the then newly enlarged Kingdom of Romania. After the end of World War II, the town slowly underwent a process of communist systematization which increased its population approximately tenfold throughout the decades prior to the 1989 Romanian Revolution. It became a municipality in 1968. Suceava is also crossed by the namesake river, a tributary of Siret, to the northwest, in the neighbourhood of Ițcani ().

An important market town at the crossroads of several Central and Eastern European commercial routes since the Middle Ages (toward the Kingdom of Hungary to the west and the Kingdom of Poland to the north), Suceava is still an important commercial town nowadays. Furthermore, The CFR 500 highway crosses it, which is a railway junction and thus from here the railway line then branches off to Transylvania to the west.

== Names and etymology ==

Moldavian chronicler Grigore Ureche presumed the name of the town came from the Hungarian &quot;Szűcsvár&quot;, which is combined of the words &quot;szűcs&quot; (i.e. furrier, skinner) and &quot;vár&quot; (i.e. castle). This was taken over by Dimitrie Cantemir, who, in his work Descriptio Moldaviae, gave the very same explanation of the origin of the town&#x27;s name; however, there is neither historical nor vernacular evidence for this. According to another theory, the town bears the name of the river with the same name and that, in turn, is supposed to be of Ukrainian origin.

In Old German, the town was known as &quot;Sedschopff&quot;, in both contemporary German (i.e. Standard German/Hochdeutsch) and Old German sources it can be found under such variations as &quot;Sotschen&quot;, &quot;Sutschawa&quot;, or &quot;Suczawa&quot; (most commonly), in Hungarian as &quot;Szucsáva&quot; () or &quot;Szőcsvásár&quot; (most likely according to his work &quot;Letopisețul Țării Moldovei până la Aron Vodă&quot; written in Romanian), in Polish as &quot;Suczawa&quot;, in Ukrainian as &quot;Сучава&quot; (Sučava), while in Yiddish as שאָץ ().

== History ==

=== Antiquity ===

The present-day territory of the town of Suceava and the adjacent surroundings were already inhabited since the Paleolithic period. Stemming from the late Antiquity, there are also traces of Dacian oppidum of the 2nd century. In stark contrast to several other historical regions of Romania (most notably Transylvania and Oltenia), Suceava (along with the entire region of Bukovina for that matter) was not conquered by the legions of the Roman Empire and consequently was one of the lands of the Free Dacian tribes during ancient times. Nonetheless, according to ancient Roman scholar Ptolemy, at that time in the region also dwelled two likely Celtic-speaking tribes, more specifically the Anartes and the Taurisci, as well as the Germanic Bastarnae, who have also been attested there. The presence of Celtic-speaking tribes in Bukovina is further attested during the late La Tène culture period through archaeological studies.

=== Middle Ages ===

After the fall of Rome and during the Migration Period, the predominantly Carpiani population was successively invaded by East Germanic peoples (such as the Goths or the Gepids), Huns, Slavs, Magyars (i.e. Hungarians), Pechenegs, and ultimately Cumans.

When the town was established and very shortly afterwards, its trade was also facilitated with other Central European towns and markets by a local community of German potters and merchants (quite probably Transylvanian Saxons from Bistrița/Bistritz area) who migrated here during the Ostsiedlung. At the same time, the town had operated under the Magdeburg law (a type of medieval German town law applied mostly in Eastern Europe, but also in several parts of Central Europe), as was the case of Câmpulung Moldovenesc (), Siret (), Baia (), or Târgu Neamț (), all which were also situated on the territory of the Principality of Moldavia (more specifically on its northern area or the highlands).

As it was the case of other medieval towns in which the Magdeburg law held sway, this particular German town law came hand in hand with the medieval municipal law (discernible with the foundation of Freiburg im Breisgau in the early 12th century) and the &quot;Sachsenspiegel&quot; (an important law book during the time of the Holy Roman Empire). The town of Suceava is referred to as &quot;Sotschen&quot; (an Old High German name) in one of the works of Abraham Ortelius on European geography for the 15th and 16th centuries.

During the late Middle Ages, the town of Suceava was the capital of the Principality of Moldavia and the main residence of the Moldavian princes for nearly two centuries (namely between 1388 and 1564). The town was the capital of the lands of Stephen the Great, one of the pivotal royal figures in Romanian history, who died in Suceava in 1504. During the rule of Alexandru Lăpușneanu, the seat was moved to Iași in 1565 and Suceava failed to become the capital again. Michael the Brave captured the town in 1600 during the Moldavian Magnate Wars as he became the ruler of Wallachia, Moldavia, and Transylvania, but he was defeated during the same year. In 1653, Suceava was sieged.

=== Habsburg rule and unification with the Kingdom of Romania ===

Together with the rest of Bukovina, Suceava was under the rule of the Habsburg monarchy (and, subsequently, the Austrian Empire as well as Austria-Hungary) from 1775 to 1918 (with the border of the Habsburg domains passing just south-east of the town).

During the late 19th century and early 20th century, the town was the third largest in the Duchy of Bukovina, after Cernăuți () and Rădăuți (). Throughout this period of time, in the process of the Josephine colonization (), the Habsburgs and, later on, the Austrians, attracted many German-speaking settlers from abroad to settle down in Bukovina and, implicitly, in contemporary Suceava, then just a small market town. Over the passing of time, these newly arrived German settlers and their descendants became collectively known as Bukovina Germans. This community has since dwindled to a very small number.

Nonetheless, despite their current numbers, the Germans from Suceava are still culturally, socially, and politically active. Given its diverse ethnic background during the late Modern Age, Austrian architect Rudolf Gassauer stated that the town of Suceava could have well been perceived back then as a &#x27;miniature Austria&#x27;. Additionally, at that time, on an administrative level, the town of Suceava was part of a namesake bezirk (i.e. district) with a total population of 66,826 inhabitants.

In 1918, the town of Suceava (as well as the entire region of Bukovina) became part of the enlarged and unified Kingdom of Romania (and what is known in Romanian historiography as &quot;Greater Romania&quot;), after an overwhelming vote of the German, Romanian, and Polish representatives of the General Congress of Bukovina. All 7 political representatives of the Bukovina Germans led by Alois Lebouton voted for the union of Bukovina with the Kingdom of Romania.

=== Kingdom of Romania, communist period, and 21st century history ===
Throughout the interwar period, Suceava underwent further infrastructural development within the then enlarged Kingdom of Romania (). Moreover, from an administrative point of view, it had also briefly belonged to Ținutul Suceava (between 1938 and 1940), one of the 10 lands established during King Carol II&#x27;s reign.

In addition, the town had previously had sizeable German, Jewish, and Polish ethnic communities which gradually dramatically dwindled throughout both the late 20th century and early 21st century. With regard to the Jewish population, according to Encyclopaedia Judaica: &quot;The local Jews were persecuted by the Nazi German and Romanian authorities between 1940 and 1941. When deported to Transnistria in 1941, they numbered 3,253. Only 27 remained in the town.&quot; However, various ethnic groups are still present in smaller numbers nowadays and are socially, culturally, and politically active and mostly well integrated through their representative institutions.

Subsequently, from the 1950s onwards (concomitantly with the rise of communism in Romania), Suceava was heavily industrialized and a significant series of historical buildings from its historical centre (including the entire &quot;Franz Josef Straße&quot;) were demolished in order for Plattenbau-like blocks of flats to be constructed at the orders of the former communist officials.

After the 1989 Romanian Revolution, the town had increasingly lost both a significant amount of its population and its former industry which was forged mainly during communism. Therefore, its local economy entered a period of decline for many years. However, during the early 21st century, Suceava&#x27;s population raised, also in part due to the incorporation of several nearby communes in the main town as well as to sparse local economic development which occurred during the late 2010s and early 2020s which attracted new inhabitants from the neighbouring rural areas of Suceava County.

During spring 2020, shortly after the COVID-19 pandemic in Romania began, Suceava was placed under lockdown due to its high rate of infection. The following year, the roof of the Administrative Palace (local landmark) was severely damaged by fire. In March 2022, the government of Romania approved a restoration/rehabilitation plan for the entire building.

The 2022 Romanian census (which could have normally occurred in 2021 but was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic) remains to report the total current population living in Suceava as of early 2022. The data for this census will be later on reported by the Romanian authorities at the end of 2023.

== Geography ==

Suceava is situated in the south-western part of the Suceava County, in a moderately hilly area, and is an important commercial town and regional transport hub with Ukraine to the north, on the one hand, and with Transylvania to the west on the other hand.

The town of Suceava covers two types of geographical areas, the hills (of which the highest is Zamca Hill) and the meadows of the Suceava river valley. The unique setting of the urban settlement includes two groves, Zamca and Șipote, which are both located within the town&#x27;s limits.

Burdujeni, one of the town&#x27;s neighbourhoods, is connected to the rest of the town by a prominent avenue, which makes the neighbourhood appear as a separate satellite town.

Suceava is also crossed by Mitocu and Dragomirna rivers in Ițcani.

== Climate ==
The town of Suceava has a temperate continental climate which is typical to Central and Eastern Europe. In addition, the yearly weather can be described with short springs, usually moderately warm summers as well as prolonged autumns and winters.

== Demographics ==

=== Historical data for the town proper ===


The Austrian census of 1869, which recorded only population in absolute numbers (bereft of ethnicity or religion), indicated that then small town of Suceava had a total population of 7,450 permanent inhabitants. The Austrian census of 1880 indicated that the town of Suceava had a total population of 10,104, of which 5,862 were Germans , 2,652 Romanians, 441 Ruthenians, and 784 inhabitants belonging to other ethnic groups.

The Austrian census of 1890 indicated that the town of Suceava had a total population of 10,221, of which 5,965 were Germans , 2,417 Romanians, 644 Ruthenians, and 905 inhabitants belonging to other ethnic groups.

In 1900, when the town was still under Imperial Austrian administration, its total population amounted to 10,955 inhabitants. Of those, 61.5% declared their native language to be German (i.e. &quot;Hochdeutsch&quot;), followed by Romanian with 25.38%, and Ruthenian (or Ukrainian) with 5.46%. 20 years later, when the town had already switched to the Kingdom of Romania, the 1930 Romanian census recorded a population that amounted to 17,000 inhabitants with the following ethno-linguistic composition:

* Romanians: 61.5%
* Jews: 18.7%
* Germans : 13.9%
* Poles: 2.6%
* Other ethnic groups (most notably Lipovans, Ukrainians, Hungarians, and Armenians): 3.3%

Another census was conducted in the Kingdom of Romania during World War II, namely in 1941, which recorded a total population of 13,744 inhabitants for the town of Suceava. The ethnic composition of the town at that time was the following one:

* Romanians: 8,823 (or 64.19%)
* Germans : 709 (5.15%)
* Hungarians: 28 (or 0.20%)
* Other ethnic groups or undeclared: 4,184 (or 30.44%)

Therefore, the then remaining German community of the town became the second-largest declared ethnic group even after the vast majority of the Bukovina Germans were forcefully resettled by the Nazi German authorities to former Nazi-occupied Poland (or the former General Governorate for the Occupied Polish Region) one year earlier in 1940, as part of the Heim ins Reich population transfer plan.

Shortly after the end of World War II, the ethnic minorities (mainly Germans and Jews but also Poles) considerably and gradually dwindled in the town of Suceava. However, as during communism, the overall population of the town raised (as it was the general case of other cities and towns in Romania as well as the country&#x27;s total population given the pro-natalist policies of the Ceaușescu regime). After the 1989 Romanian Revolution, the population of Suceava fell once more due to constant emigration both abroad or to other more developed towns and cities across Romania.

According to the 2002 Romanian census, the ethnic structure of the town of Suceava can be divided into distinct groups as follows:

* Romanians: 98.17%
* Roma (Gypsies): 0.48%
* Germans : 0.35%
* Ukrainians: 0.27%
* Poles: 0.23%
* Lipovans: 0.20%
* Other ethnic groups (most notably Hungarians, Jews, and Armenians): 0.30%

According to the 2011 census data, Suceava had a population of 92,121, a decrease from the figure recorded at the 2002 census (106,138), making it the 23rd largest urban settlement in Romania at that time. Additionally, the ethnic composition was as follows:

* Romanians: 98.3%
* Roma (Gypsies): 0.7%
* Ukrainians: 0.3%
* Germans : 0.2%
* Poles: 0.1%
* Lipovans: 0.1%
* Other ethnic groups (most notably Hungarians, Jews, and Armenians): 0.3%

=== Historical data for the Ițcani neighborhood ===

According to the 1930 Romanian census, the population of present-day Ițcani neighborhood, which, at the time, was considered a separate commune comprising two villages, namely &quot;Ițcanii Noi&quot; () and &quot;Ițcani Gară&quot; (), amounted to 2,422 residents. By ethnic criterion, those residents were:

* Germans (i.e. Bukovina Germans): 45%
* Romanians: 21.40%
* Jews: 17.84%
* Ukrainians: 6.77%
* Poles: 5.24%
* Russians (i.e. Lipovans): 2.15%
* Hungarians: 1.53%
* Other minor ethnic groups (forming the remainder of 0.07%)

In religious terms, 28.4% of the then residents were Roman Catholic, 22.7% were Evangelical Lutheran, 22.04% were Orthodox, 18.04% belonged to Judaism, 8.17% were Greek Catholic, and the rest either belonged to other smaller cults or were irreligious.

== Administration and local politics ==

=== List of mayors (1990–present) ===
The mayors elected since Romania&#x27;s transition back to democracy and a free market economy in the wake of the 1989 Romanian Revolution have been the following ones:

Notes:

1 

2 

=== Town council ===

==== 1992–1996 ====

Following the 1992 Romanian local elections, the first such type of elections in post-1989 Romania, the town had a new local council.

==== 1996–2000 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 1996–2000 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 1996 Romanian local elections:

==== 2000–2004 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 2000–2004 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2000 Romanian local elections:

==== 2004–2008 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 2004–2008 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2004 Romanian local elections:

==== 2008–2012 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 2008–2012 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2008 Romanian local elections:

==== 2012–2016 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 2012–2016 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2012 Romanian local elections:

==== 2016–2020 ====

The town&#x27;s former local council for the period 2016–2020 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2016 Romanian local elections:

==== 2020–2024 ====
The town&#x27;s former local council between 2020 and 2024 had the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2020 Romanian local elections:

==== 2024–2028 ====
The town&#x27;s current local council has the following multi-party political composition, based on the results of the votes cast at the 2024 Romanian local elections:

==Culture==

=== The Seat Fortress of Suceava ===

Suceava is the place of several medieval sites that are closely linked to the history of the former Principality of Moldavia. By far the most significant (and at the same time the most well preserved one) is the Seat Fortress of Suceava (; ) or Suceava Citadel, a medieval castle situated on the eastern edge of the contemporary town.

The fortress was built during the reign of Petru of Moldavia (1375–1391), also known as Petru Mușat. It was further expanded and strengthened during the reigns of Alexander I of Moldavia (1400–1432) and Stephen the Great (1457–1504). The medieval castle was part of the fortification system built in Moldavia during the late 14th century, given the emergence of the expansionist Ottoman danger. It even became strong enough to hold off an attack by Ottoman sultan Mehmed II (the conqueror of Constantinople) in 1476.

Suceava was the capital of the former Principality of Moldavia between 1388 and 1565. During this period, the castle served as princely residence. Alexandru Lăpușneanu had subsequently moved the Moldavian capital to Iași in 1565, so the castle lost its status. Afterwards, the citadel entered a period of steep decline. In 1675, during the reign of Dumitrașcu Cantacuzino, the fortress was destroyed. Then, for over two centuries, the castle was completely deserted.

During the late 19th century and early 20th century, under the patronage of Austrian architect Karl Adolf Romstorfer, a series of rehabilitation works and archaeological research had been conducted. Between 1961 and 1970 other restoration and consolidation processes were carried out. In 2013, a major reconstruction program was launched, aiming to return the castle to its original architecture and shape.

The Seat Fortress of Suceava consists of two concentric citadels. The inner citadel, known as &quot;fortul mușatin&quot;, has a rectangular shape and a patio (i.e. inner courtyard). It was built by Prince () Petru Mușat during the late 14th century. During the second half of the 15th century, Stephen the Great expanded the structure by adding another citadel that had a circular shape surrounding the old one.

After 1476, new fortifications were added to the outer citadel. Furthermore, the whole castle is encircled by a large defensive ditch. Today, the fortress is a landmark of Suceava and a noteworthy touristic attraction. Since 2011, it has also been used for hosting cultural events such as the rock music festival Bucovina Rock Castle. The festival attracted a series of renowned national and international bands and artists (e.g. guitarist Jan Akkerman, formerly of Dutch jazz fusion and progressive rock band Focus).

=== The Princely Court of Suceava ===

The Princely Court of Suceava () was built and developed along with the Seat Fortress. During the late 14th century, voivode Petru Mușat built the Princely House, a structure made in wood, which included a cellar. After 1400, Alexander I of Moldavia rebuilt the wooden house and added a surrounding stone wall and a complex of buildings also built in stone. During the second half of the 15th century, the Princely Court was severely affected by fire, the wooden house being completely burned out.

During his reign, Stephen the Great (1457–1504) restored the whole complex. A new Princely House was built, this time made of stone, and the other buildings were extended. Vasile Lupu (1634–1653) was the last ruler of Moldavia who took care of the Princely Court. During his time, the cellars were rehabilitated. The complex was abandoned at some point in the late 17th century, the buildings and the walls being gradually dismantled. Currently, on the site of the Princely Court there are only ruins and leftovers of the former buildings. The ruins of the former medieval court are located in the city center of Suceava. Between 14th and 17th centuries, in the proximity of the Princely Court there were built several churches that still exist today and attract tourists.

===Șcheia Fortress===

On the north-western edge of the contemporary city, on a hilltop, there is another medieval citadel known as &quot;Șcheia&quot; Fortress () or the Western Fortress of Suceava (). Unlike the Seat Fortress, &quot;Șcheia&quot; Fortress has left nothing but some ruined walls. The citadel proper was built during the reign of Petru Mușat during the late 14th century, but was short-lived, given that it was dismantled during the early 15th century, in the time of Alexander I of Moldavia. &quot;Șcheia&quot; Fortress, just like the main Seat Fortress, was part of the fortification system built in the medieval Principality of Moldavia during the late 14th century.

=== Museums ===

The first museum in Suceava was opened in 1900, by the initiative of some local intellectuals. In the beginning, the museum included only a few collections that were obtained as a result of the researches and excavation works at the Seat Fortress of Suceava. The museum was expanded and developed over time and became an important cultural institution, currently named Bukovina Museum (). It has several departments and administers the medieval sites of the Seat Fortress, &quot;Șcheia&quot; Fortress and the Princely Court, local museums (Bukovina Village Museum, the history, ethnographic, and natural sciences museums), the memorial houses of Simion Florea Marian in Suceava, Nicolae Labiș in Mălini, Eusebiu Camilar in Udești, Ciprian Porumbescu in Stupca, and two traditional houses located in Solca and Bilca.

The oldest department of Bukovina Museum is the history museum, which was the backbone for creating a county museum at Suceava. This museum presents the local history of Suceava and Moldavia in the context of Romanian national history. The exhibits of the history museum and the offices of Bukovina Museum are located in a historic building, in the city center. The building, which hosted the prefecture of Suceava County during the interwar period, was built between 1902 and 1903. Since 1968, it houses the history museum. In 2014, the building and the museum entered an extensive program of modernization, rehabilitation, and expansion.

At the history museum there is a reconstitution of a scene from the former throne hall located in the Seat Fortress. The scene presents some notable people from the history of Moldavia, made in glass fiber: Stephen the Great (ruler of Moldavia), Maria Voichița (his third wife), Bogdan III the One-Eyed (his son and successor to the throne), officials of that time. The scene chosen to be reconstructed is an allotment of land for peasants. The reconstitution is based on medieval documents, frescoes, and archaeological researches. Furthermore, the history museum periodically organizes a wide range of cultural events, several of which also involve the local branch of the Democratic Forum of Germans in Romania (FDGR/DFDR). Furthermore, the local branch of the FDGR/DFDR () is also in charge of the ACI Bukowina Stiftung, a Romanian-German cultural foundation whose president is Josef-Otto Exner.

Bukovina Village Museum () is an open-air museum that highlights the traditional cultural and architectural heritage of Bukovina region. It is located in the eastern part of Suceava, near the Seat Fortress. It was founded in the 1970s, but its major expansion and development took place after 1990. The museum is designed as a traditional village in Bukovina, containing houses and various objectives from the ethnographic areas of Rădăuți, Humor, Câmpulung Moldovenesc, Dorna, and Fălticeni.

The museum includes among others a water mill from Mănăstirea Humorului, a traditional blacksmith workshop, a pottery workshop from Marginea and one of the many old wooden churches in northern Moldavia: Church of the Ascension, a Romanian Orthodox wooden church built in 1783 in Vama, a village in Suceava County. The bell tower is also made in wood, and dates from 1787. The church and the bell tower were both relocated in 2001, and currently are part of the museum.

Besides Bukovina Village Museum, another museum that reflects the traditional life in this part of Romania is the ethnographic museum. It was opened in 1968 and includes old collections and exhibits that are housed in a medieval inn located in the center of Suceava, known as the Princely Inn of Suceava (). This landmark dates from the late 16th and early 17th century. It was built of stone and has two floors and a cellar. During the Austrian rule (1775–1918), the inn operated as a hunting lodge for the imperial family. Since 1968, it hosts the ethnographic museum. The Princely Inn is the oldest civic building in Suceava which had not been seriously affected by time and maintained its original architecture.

The natural sciences museum was founded in 1976–1977, being the newest museum in Suceava. It highlights the flora and fauna of the surrounding area. The museum&#x27;s rare exhibits and collections are housed in an old building, located in the central park of the city and built between 1811 and 1814. In the past, before being an attraction for visitors, the building operated as a school for boys.

Along with all these museums, Bukovina Museum includes memorial houses of some writers and artists born in this area of the country. The memorial house of Simion Florea Marian () is the only one located in Suceava, the other ones being in the surrounding area. The memorial house operates as a museum. It was opened in 1974 in the home where Romanian priest and writer Simion Florea Marian lived, from 1884 until 1907, when he died. The museum hosts a collection that contains over 10,000 volumes, over 450 collections of magazines and newspapers, of which 150 are from Bukovina, manuscripts, letters, cultural and historical documents, old photos. In front of the memorial house it was opened a small park with a statue dedicated to Simion Florea Marian.

=== Historical buildings ===


&quot;Colegiul de Artă Ciprian Porumbescu&quot; () is a high school which is hosted in a historic building, built in 1859, in the city center of Suceava. The building had several destinations in the past: Suceava Town Hall (until 1904) and &quot;Școala primară română de fete&quot; (Primary Romanian school for girls). Romanian jazz singer Anca Parghel taught music for a living in Suceava at this local Arts high school before turning to a professional singing career in 1989.


&quot;Gara Suceava Nord-Ițcani&quot; (Suceava North railway station, also known as &quot;Ițcani&quot;) is a train station built in 1871 in the village of Ițcani (today district of Suceava). Between 1871 and 1918, it was a train station at the Austro-Hungarian border. The historic building of Ițcani railway station was built in the Gothic style of the Central European railway stations of that period.

&quot;Palatul de Justiție&quot; (The Palace of Justice) is a historic building which was built in 1885 to serve as the seat of Suceava Tribunal and Court. The building has four sides and a patio, and was designed by Viennese architect Ferdinand Fellner. Later, during the communist regime, the city hall was moved in this palace and operated here until 2000.

&quot;Spitalul Vechi&quot; (The Old Hospital) is a complex of buildings built between 1891 and 1903 which originally hosted the district hospital. The hospital ensemble consists of four pavilions of historic value and was built in the southwestern end of Suceava, in Areni neighborhood. In 1964 a new hospital building (known as &quot;Spitalul Nou&quot;) was inaugurated nearby.

&quot;Colegiul Național Ștefan cel Mare&quot; (Ștefan cel Mare National College) is the oldest and most prestigious high school in Suceava County, established in 1860. The baroque style building which houses the high school was built between 1893 and 1895, downtown Suceava, and today is considered a historical monument.


&quot;Gara Suceava-Burdujeni&quot; (Suceava railway station, also known as &quot;Burdujeni&quot;) is a train station built between 1892 and 1902 in the village of Burdujeni (today district of Suceava). Between 1902 and 1918, it was a train station at the Austro-Hungarian border. The historic building of Burdujeni railway station was built in the architectural style of Fribourg railway station, located in Switzerland.

&quot;Palatul Administrativ&quot; (The Administrative Palace) is a historic building which was built between 1903–1904 to serve as the seat of Suceava City Hall. The building originally had only two sides of the four current sides, and was designed by Viennese architect Peter Paul Brang. It was designed in the baroque style. Currently, the palace houses the prefecture and the county council of Suceava County.

&quot;Casa Polonă&quot; (The Polish House) is a building made between 1903 and 1907 by the Polish community in the city of Suceava. The building was designed by architect Alojz Friedel. During the communist regime, The Polish House was nationalized, and since 1954, it housed &quot;Ansamblul Artistic Ciprian Porumbescu&quot; (Ciprian Porumbescu Artistic Ensemble). In 1984 the building was restored, and then hosted a local theatre, until 1990. In 1996, the building was returned to the Polish community of the city.

&quot;Uzina de Apă&quot; (The Water Plant) is a set of industrial heritage buildings, designed in 1908 by engineer G. Thiem from Leipzig and built between 1910 and 1912. The water plant operated in these buildings between 1912 and 1960, and then it was moved into a modern building. In 2012, in celebration of 100 years since its establishment, in the former water plant buildings there was inaugurated the Centre for Architecture, Urban Culture and Landscape in Suceava.

&quot;Biblioteca Bucovinei I.G. Sbiera&quot; (I.G. Sbiera Bukovina Library) is the first public library in Suceava, inaugurated on 12 December 1923. It is also the largest library in Suceava County, with over 350,000 bibliographic units. Currently, the library is hosted by two historic buildings located in downtown Suceava and built between 1925 and 1926, respectively 1929–1930.

&quot;The County Forestry Department&quot; in Suceava is an institution which operates in a heritage building located in Areni neighborhood, in the city of Suceava. The building dates from the first half of the 20th century.

&quot;The Unions House&quot; in Suceava is a heritage building, located in downtown Suceava, which houses the unions offices, along with some shops. The building is also known as Samuil Isopescu House.

&quot;Casa Costin Tarangul&quot; (Costin Tarangul House) is a heritage house dating from the 19th century (1886). The building is located next to Simion Florea Marian Memorial House, in the center of Suceava.

&quot;Casa Ciprian Porumbescu&quot; (Ciprian Porumbescu House) is a heritage house dating from the 19th century, where Romanian composer Ciprian Porumbescu lived and created some of his works. The house is located in Prunului street, downtown Suceava.

&quot;School No. 5 Jean Bart&quot; in Burdujeni (Suceava) is a school built in 1902 in the village Burdujeni, today a town district of Suceava. The building that houses the school has historic value.

&quot;School No. 6 in Burdujeni-Sat&quot; (Suceava) is a school built in 1911 in the village Burdujeni, today a town district of Suceava. The building that houses the school has historic value.

&quot;Former Burdujeni Town Hall&quot; in Suceava is a building that was built in 1902 in the village Burdujeni and initially was the town hall of the locality. In 1926 Burdujeni became a district of Suceava, and so the town hall was abolished. The historic building currently houses the headquarters of Electrica company.

==== Ițcani neighbourhood ====

Ițcani is a neighbourhood located several miles northwest of the city centre. Initially established as a small village in the 15th century under the rulership of Alexăndrel of Moldavia, it expanded as a German-speaking colony starting in the late 19th century, seeing an influx of German settlers during the Josephine colonization which took place in the time of the Austrian Empire. The north railway station (which depicts architectural elements of both Gothic revival and Neo-romanticist styles, also the oldest in the city) is situated in this neighbourhood as well.

=== Monuments ===

Near the fortress, in Șipote-Cetate Park, there is an equestrian statue of Stephen the Great, designed and made by the local sculptor Iftimie Bârleanu in 1977. The monument has 23 meters in height, being the tallest equestrian statue in Romania. In the town centre there&#x27;s also a statue dedicated to Petru Mușat, Prince of Moldavia between 1375 and 1391 and to Petru Rareș, twice Prince of Moldavia, firstly between 1527 and 1538 then secondly and for the last time between 1541 and 1546.

=== Religious buildings ===

==== Romanian Orthodox churches ====

One of the most important cultural sites in Suceava is Saint John the New Monastery which includes the monumental Church of Saint George, built between 1514 and 1522. The construction began during the reign of voivode Bogdan III the One-Eyed of Moldavia, after the nearby Mirăuți Church (the metropolitan cathedral of Moldavia at that moment) was devastated in 1513. The construction was completed by Stephen IV of Moldavia (also known as Ștefăniță). The monastery church served as metropolitan cathedral of Moldavia until 1677. It has frescoes painted on the outside, typical of the region, and is one of eight buildings that make up the churches of Moldavia UNESCO World Heritage Site. Since 1991 Saint John the New Monastery serves as the cathedral of the Archdiocese of Suceava and Rădăuți. Saint John the New was a Moldavian monk who preached during Turkish occupation and was subsequently martyred in Cetatea Albă, present-day Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi in Ukraine. Alexander I of Moldavia brought his relics to Suceava in 1402.

Mirăuți Church, dedicated to Saint George, is the oldest religious building in Suceava, founded by Petru II of Moldavia in late 14th century, in the same period with the Seat Fortress, when he moved the capital from Siret to Suceava. The church established the city as a see of it. Mirăuți was the metropolitan cathedral of Moldavia between 1402 and 1522, when the church of Saint John the New Monastery was completed. In 1402, the relics of Saint John the New were transferred to this church from Cetatea Albă, and then, in 1589 transferred again to the nearby monastery church by voivode Peter the Lame. The name &quot;Mirăuți&quot; derives from the fact that it was the coronation church of Moldavia until 1522. Stephen the Great was crowned in here in 1457. After the church was devastated, it was rebuilt in early 17th century, and then, in the 18th century, abandoned.

Church of Saint Demetrius was founded by Peter IV Rareș, ruler of Moldavia (1527–1538, 1541–1546), and the son of Stephan the Great. The church was built in 1534–1535, with a bell tower added in 1560–1561 by Alexandru Lăpușneanu. The bell tower is 40 meters high, being the tallest bell tower in Suceava and a landmark of the city. The church had frescoes painted on the outside, that are still visible on one side wall. The frescoes inside were restored recently. Church of Saint Demetrius is located near the ruins of the former Princely Court of Suceava.

Furthermore, there is another old church near these ruins. Church of Saint John the Baptist, also known as Coconilor Church or Domnițelor Church, was founded in 1643 by Vasile Lupu, voivode of Moldavia between 1632 and 1653. It has no exterior frescoes and a short bell tower that has its roof linked with the roof above the church. In its early days, the church functioned as a chapel for the Princely Court.

Church of the Resurrection (located in the proximity of Saint John the New Monastery) dates from 1551, and was founded by Elena Rareș, the wife of voivode Peter IV Rareș. The church has no tower above the naos, its architecture reflecting the urban style of the medieval period. Instead of the bell tower, the church has a zvonnitsa, an architectural form especially used in the Russian architecture of the 14th–17th centuries. Church of the Resurrection was used by the local Roman Catholic community during the Habsburg occupation, and then by the Ruthenian Greek Catholic community, until 1936. It is also known as &quot;Văscresenia Church&quot; or &quot;Elena Doamna&quot; Church.

Church of Saint Nicholas (Prăjescu) is another religious building in Suceava that features the medieval Moldavian architectural style. The present church was rebuilt by treasurer Nicoară Prăjescu in 1611, during the reign of Constantin Movilă (1607–1611). Throughout its history, the church functioned as a necropolis for the local boyars.

Between the city center and Ițcani neighborhood, on the slopes that descend to the Suceava river valley, there is Church of the Assumption, another old Romanian Orthodox church, founded in the first half of the 17th century (1639). The church was built on the place where Ițcani Monastery existed before. It functioned as a nunnery until late 18th century. Today it is parish church, and has a zvonnitsa similar to that of Church of the Resurrection, located downtown.

In Burdujeni neighborhood, north-east of the city center, there is Teodoreni Monastery, founded in 1597 by local boyar Teodor Movilă, the elder brother of Ieremia Movilă, ruler of Moldavia (1595–1600, 1600–1606). Burdujeni village (now a district of Suceava) was established and developed around this monastery. The set of buildings includes Church of Ascension, the bell tower, living quarters for nuns and a surrounding wall. Just north of Teodoreni Monastery, in the old district of Burdujeni, there is Church of the Holy Trinity, founded by archimandrite Filaret Scriban in 1851.

Ițcani neighborhood has two Romanian Orthodox churches founded in the first half of the 20th century: Church of the Holy Archangels (built near Suceava North railway station, in 1933–1938) and Church of the Holy Apostles (located on European route E85 and built in 1905–1908 by the German community of Ițcani, initially as a Lutheran church).

Church of the Holy Cross, located in Pătrăuți village (a few miles north-west of Ițcani), was founded in 1487 by Stephen the Great, and is one of the monuments that make up the churches of Moldavia UNESCO World Heritage Site. Also not far away from Ițcani, there is Dragomirna Monastery, established by clergyman Anastasie Crimca in 1609. Voroneț Monastery is located west of Suceava, in the town of Gura Humorului.

==== German Roman Catholic and Evangelical Lutheran churches ====

During the late Modern Age up until the early 1940s, a sizeable ethnic German community lived in the town of Suceava. They were of both Roman Catholic and Lutheran faith. These German-speaking colonists who were settled by the Austrian Empire in the town proper can trace their origins most notably to the territories of present-day southern Germany, Austria, and the Czech Republic (more specifically Bohemia or the Bohemian Forest), being thus both Roman Catholics and Protestants (more specifically Lutherans).

Several religious buildings that served both aforementioned religious denominations can still be found today both in the town proper and in the Ițcani neighbourhood, where a bygone community of ethnic Germans (stemming from the contemporary Rhineland-Palatinate land in Germany) once lived in sizeable numbers.

==== Armenian Orthodox churches ====


In the past, Suceava used to have an important Armenian community as well. Their cultural and historical legacy is highlighted by a series of well preserved religious buildings that still exist to this today.

The most representative ecclesiastical landmark established by the local Armenian population is Zamca Monastery (the term Zamca can actually trace its linguistic origin to Polish, denoting as such a &#x27;fortified place&#x27; and being named this way by King Jan Sobieski of Poland in 1691), a fortified complex of buildings located on a plateau at the western point of the contemporary city.

Zamca Monastery was constructed between 1551 and 1606 and its church is dedicated to Saint Auxentius. Along with the church, the monastery includes several buildings made of stone and a defensive wall that surrounds the whole medieval complex.

Between Zamca Monastery and the city center there are two more Armenian Orthodox churches. Church of Saint Simon (also known as The Red Tower Church because of its bell tower) was founded in 1513. The bell tower was constructed in 1551.

The church has an old Armenian cemetery in the proximity and a chapel that was built in 1902 (Pruncul Chapel). Church of the Holy Cross was established in 1521 and was renovated several times in its history. The Armenian parsonage is located near the church, along with several old tomb stones.

Hagigadar Monastery is another medieval complex built by the local Armenians. It was founded in 1512–1513, and is located on the south-western proximity of the town, on a valley near European route E85.

== Tourism ==

In the past few years Suceava started to evolve more rapidly. The most important sights in the town date from its time as a princely capital (i.e. the Middle Ages). There are numerous museums in the city proper including, most notably, the Bucovina History Museum, the Bucovina Village Museum, Bucovina Ethnographic Museum (housed in an inn dating back to the 17th century), or the Natural History Museum.

== Shopping centres ==

Suceava is renowned in Romania for having the most modern shopping centres (i.e. malls) and commercial spaces per capita. The most significant and also largest shopping centres of the town are Iulius Mall Suceava (situated closer to Ițcani), Galleria Shopping Center (outside the town proper), and Bucovina Shopping Center (located closer in the town centre). The latter was built during communist times whereas the former were both built after 1989.

The biggest and most representative shopping centre in Suceava is Iulius Mall and remains as such to this day, given the total volume of customers coming there for their needs as well as for the total amount of commercial spaces which the mall includes.

== Sports ==

=== Football ===

ACS Foresta Suceava (), formerly known as Rapid CFR Suceava, currently plays in Liga III, the third tier of the Romanian football system.

The town has also had other significant football clubs competing in either Liga I or Liga II such as CSM Suceava, FC Cetatea Suceava, or Foresta Suceava, the last initially based in the city of Fălticeni from the same county. The town also used to have another Liga III side, Sporting Suceava, but it went bankrupt.

All the major sporting events are hosted on the Areni Stadium, a multi-purpose stadium with a capacity of 12,500 people. It is currently the home ground of ACS Foresta Suceava. The stadium was initially opened in 1963 as the &quot;Municipal Stadium&quot;.

=== Handball ===

CS Universitatea Bucovina Suceava is the town&#x27;s men&#x27;s handball team which currently competes in the Romanian Handball League (). It was founded in 2002 and it started playing in the first tier of the Romanian handball system in 2006. In 2011, it achieved its greatest performance to date, namely finishing 3rd in the national handball division.

== Education ==

The only university of the town is the Ștefan cel Mare University of Suceava (, USV) which was established in 1990. However, this institution of higher education was initially founded as the &quot;Institute of Pedagogy&quot; as early as 1963.

The most prominent high schools with theoretical pathways of the town are the following ones:

National College &quot;Mihai Eminescu&quot; Suceava
* Named after the most well-known Moldavian and Romanian poet, Mihai Eminescu
* Main study offers are: Social Sciences, Mathematics and Computer Science, and Philology

National College &quot;Petru Rareș&quot; Suceava
* Named after the voievod of Moldavia, Peter IV Rareș
* Main study offers are: English, Philology, Mathematics and Computer Science.

National College &quot;Ștefan cel Mare&quot; Suceava
* Named after the prince of Moldavia between the years 1457 and 1504, Stephen III of Moldavia (also known as Stephen the Great)
* Main study offers are: Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Computer Science.

Economical College &quot;Dimitre Cantemir&quot; Suceava
* Named after the twice Prince of Moldavia and the famous writer of &quot;Descriptio Moldavie&quot;, Dimitrie Cantemir.
* It is the only economics high-school in Suceava.
* Main study offers are Tourism, Gastronomy, Alimentation, Economy, Countability, and Trade.
* The main profile which the school promovates is the Technical profile.

== Transportation ==

=== Public transport ===

In terms of public transportation, the Municipality of Suceava currently has a series of green electric buses within its public transportation fleet with the support of Switzerland. In the past, there were both buses and trolleybuses in circulation across the town and in the neighbouring localities. The trolleybus system of the town was officially opened on 15 August 1987 and was officially closed on 2 April 2006.

Nowadays, public transportation is mostly modern and meets efficient technical standards. The type of buses which were in service and operated across the town before the arrival of the green buses were of Irisbus type. As of 2023, the town&#x27;s fleet of electric buses stops around various stations both across the town and outside of it in the nearby localities (e.g. in Șcheia). The main operator of public transportation in Suceava is SC Transport Public Local SA (TPL).

=== Air ===

Suceava is served by the Suceava International &quot;Ștefan cel Mare&quot; Airport (SCV), located east of the town centre, in the nearby small town of Salcea. The airport initially opened in 1962 when commercial services started with TAROM, the oldest operating Romanian airline. In 1963, the runway was paved, and an apron was built. Services by TAROM were discontinued in 2001, but resumed in 2004. During this period, the airport was only served by Angel Airlines. In March 2005, the airport was renamed &quot;Ștefan cel Mare Airport&quot;, and opened to international traffic.

In 2013, Suceava International Airport started a plan (worth €39 million) to rebuild and extend the old runway of , to construct a new control tower and to install a new ILS system. In August 2013, the construction works commenced, and on 12 January 2014, the airport closed in order to allow the runway works to resume. The old concrete runway was completely removed, and a new asphalt runway was constructed.

On 25 October 2015, the airport was officially reopened. As of 2019, Suceava International Airport had an annual traffic of 430,064 passengers, a local record thus far, making it the 8th busiest airport in Romania.

==Natives==


== International relations ==

=== Consulates and embassies ===
* Consulate general of Ukraine

=== Twin towns – sister cities ===

Suceava is twinned with:

* Bethlehem, Palestine
* Chernivtsi, Ukraine
* Chișinău, Moldova
* Karavas, Cyprus
* Laval, France
* Mahala, Ukraine
* Soroca, Moldova
* Sosnowiec, Poland
* Yinchuan, China
=== Other partnerships ===
In addition to the town twinning, Suceava shares a series of regional, cultural, and economic partnerships with the following urban settlements or regions:

* Germany, Baden-Württemberg, and Bavaria – economic, cultural, and touristic contacts with the historical region of Swabia. Furthermore, there is also an academic partnership with the Bukowina Institut of the University of Augsburg from Augsburg.
* Denmark – local development partnership with the town of Aalborg, North Jutland
* Italy – local development partnership with the city of Naples, Campania
* United Kingdom – local development partnership with the city of Liverpool, North West England
* France – local development partnership with the city of Lyon, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Founding of Moldavia
* List of rulers of Moldavia (between the 14th and 19th centuries)
* Churches of Moldavia
* Duchy of Bukovina
* Germans of Romania (including, most notably, Bukovina Germans)

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Suceava City Hall Official Site
* suceava.online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46400" start="0" end="7" title="Suceava" label="Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="16" end="20" title="Municipiu" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="37" end="44" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="58" end="72" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava County"/>
<link wikidata="Q934951" start="96" end="113" title="Historical regions of Romania" label="historical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="118" end="126" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209754" start="131" end="139" title="Western Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="154" end="161" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="274" end="294" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="308" end="312" title="Late Middle Ages" label="late"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="313" end="324" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034" start="373" end="385" title="14th century" label="14th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="398" end="410" title="16th century" label="16th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="459" end="483" title="Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="564" end="581" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="583" end="598" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="604" end="619" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="643" end="655" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994894" start="684" end="697" title="dual monarchy" label="dual monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="722" end="742" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Romanian Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463736" start="795" end="817" title="Medieval Seat Fortress of Suceava" label="medieval seat fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="847" end="856" title="European Union" label="EU-funded"/>
<link wikidata="" start="857" end="872" title=":ro:Programul Operațional Regional" label="Regio programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="882" end="888" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="900" end="919" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q717842" start="920" end="948" title="Saint John the New Monastery" label="Saint John the New Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q387687" start="962" end="982" title="Churches of Moldavia" label="Churches of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724706" start="1000" end="1028" title="Tourism in Romania" label="national tourist attractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18549607" start="1047" end="1068" title="Suceava Administrative Palace" label="Administrative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1150" end="1158" title="Vienna" label="Viennese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962253" start="1169" end="1185" title="Peter Paul Brang" label="Peter Paul Brang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1241" end="1255" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221522" start="1262" end="1277" title="John of Nepomuk" label="John of Nepomuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188448" start="1329" end="1359" title="List of cities and towns in Romania" label="the 22nd largest Romanian city"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="1577" end="1593" title="late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="1638" end="1662" title="Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="1742" end="1756" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1762" end="1776" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="1871" end="1888" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1897" end="1915" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="1978" end="1991" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2004" end="2015" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2084" end="2099" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="2123" end="2155" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137588" start="2229" end="2246" title="Duchy of Bukovina" label="Duchy of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="2274" end="2289" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="2331" end="2339" title="Cisleithania" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2348" end="2363" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="2468" end="2488" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Romanian Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2529" end="2550" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian-ruled period"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2611" end="2618" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="2781" end="2795" title="Germans of Romania" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q458444" start="2815" end="2831" title="Bukovina Germans" label="Bukovina Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2857" end="2870" title="Germans" label="ethnic German"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="3018" end="3034" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="3079" end="3099" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Transylvanian Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3118" end="3129" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18549809" start="3143" end="3174" title="Union of Bukovina with Romania" label="along with the rest of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="3223" end="3241" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3260" end="3272" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551089" start="3313" end="3338" title="Systematization (Romania)" label="communist systematization"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="3428" end="3452" title="Romanian Revolution" label="1989 Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="3466" end="3478" title="municipiu" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415681" start="3519" end="3533" title="Suceava (river)" label="namesake river"/>
<link wikidata="Q208302" start="3550" end="3555" title="Siret (river)" label="Siret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731261" start="3599" end="3605" title="Ițcani" label="Ițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="3746" end="3764" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="3785" end="3802" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="3891" end="3894" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="4004" end="4016" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q592030" start="4079" end="4093" title="Grigore Ureche" label="Grigore Ureche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="4138" end="4147" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="4301" end="4318" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415681" start="4560" end="4565" title="Suceava (river)" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="4625" end="4634" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="4647" end="4657" title="Old High German" label="Old German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4726" end="4732" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="4739" end="4754" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="5100" end="5106" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="5185" end="5192" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5352" end="5363" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="5395" end="5404" title="Ancient history" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759854" start="5431" end="5437" title="Dacian tribe" label="Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="5438" end="5445" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q934951" start="5501" end="5530" title="historical regions of Romania" label="historical regions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="5545" end="5557" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="5562" end="5569" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5679" end="5691" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741654" start="5737" end="5755" title="Free Dacians" label="Free Dacian tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="5826" end="5833" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5886" end="5892" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q699194" start="5932" end="5939" title="Anartes" label="Anartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q589858" start="5948" end="5956" title="Taurisci" label="Taurisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="5973" end="5981" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="5982" end="5991" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="6115" end="6130" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="6202" end="6214" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="6230" end="6246" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q908469" start="6266" end="6274" title="Carpi people" label="Carpiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="6319" end="6335" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="6349" end="6354" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="6362" end="6368" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="6371" end="6375" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="6377" end="6382" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="6384" end="6391" title="Hungarians" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="6411" end="6420" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035516" start="6437" end="6443" title="Cumans" label="Cumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="6651" end="6671" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Transylvanian Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q187205" start="6677" end="6685" title="Bistrița" label="Bistrița"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="6730" end="6741" title="Ostsiedlung" label="Ostsiedlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="6793" end="6806" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="6827" end="6842" title="German town law" label="German town law"/>
<link wikidata="Q652802" start="6942" end="6963" title="Câmpulung Moldovenesc" label="Câmpulung Moldovenesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q587746" start="6968" end="6973" title="Siret" label="Siret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044072" start="6978" end="6982" title="Baia" label="Baia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756593" start="6990" end="7001" title="Târgu Neamț" label="Târgu Neamț"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7059" end="7083" title="Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="7343" end="7363" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg im Breisgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061" start="7377" end="7389" title="12th century" label="12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q166489" start="7405" end="7419" title="Sachsenspiegel" label="Sachsenspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7472" end="7489" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="7555" end="7570" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q232916" start="7600" end="7616" title="Abraham Ortelius" label="Abraham Ortelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="7684" end="7700" title="late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7745" end="7769" title="Principality of Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q915576" start="7810" end="7817" title="List of rulers of Moldavia" label="princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="7916" end="7933" title="Stephen III of Moldavia" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q216672" start="7971" end="7987" title="History of Romania" label="Romanian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060836" start="8037" end="8057" title="Alexandru Lăpușneanu" label="Alexandru Lăpușneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="8081" end="8085" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="8142" end="8159" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q897720" start="8197" end="8219" title="Moldavian Magnate Wars" label="Moldavian Magnate Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="8246" end="8255" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="8257" end="8265" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="8271" end="8283" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134924" start="8348" end="8354" title="Siege of Suceava (1653)" label="sieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="8450" end="8458" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8494" end="8511" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="8536" end="8551" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="8563" end="8578" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137588" start="8769" end="8786" title="Duchy of Bukovina" label="Duchy of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="8794" end="8802" title="Chernivtsi" label="Cernăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q431347" start="8810" end="8817" title="Rădăuți" label="Rădăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443254" start="8876" end="8898" title="Josephine colonization" label="Josephine colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8962" end="8968" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q458444" start="9212" end="9228" title="Bukovina Germans" label="Bukovina Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q264441" start="9721" end="9727" title="bezirk" label="bezirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="9904" end="9922" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="9978" end="9993" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531800" start="10088" end="10116" title="General Congress of Bukovina" label="General Congress of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="10440" end="10458" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447471" start="10543" end="10558" title="Ținutul Suceava" label="Ținutul Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="10623" end="10636" title="Carol II of Romania" label="King Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="11043" end="11055" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="11392" end="11412" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communism in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095072" start="11609" end="11619" title="Large panel system-building" label="Plattenbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="11687" end="11706" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="communist officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="11719" end="11743" title="Romanian Revolution" label="1989 Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250752" start="12340" end="12368" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Romania" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18549607" start="12481" end="12502" title="Suceava Administrative Palace" label="Administrative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528718" start="12569" end="12590" title="government of Romania" label="government of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="12664" end="12684" title="2022 Romanian census" label="2022 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415681" start="13365" end="13378" title="Suceava (river)" label="Suceava river"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="13685" end="13699" title="satellite city" label="satellite town"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="14427" end="14434" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="14443" end="14452" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="14458" end="14468" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ruthenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="14642" end="14649" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="14658" end="14667" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="14673" end="14683" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ruthenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="14779" end="14796" title="Cisleithania" label="Imperial Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14919" end="14925" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="14970" end="14978" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211" start="14996" end="15005" title="Ruthenian language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="15010" end="15019" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="15091" end="15109" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15115" end="15135" title="Demographic history of Romania#29 December 1930 census" label="1930 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="15246" end="15255" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="15265" end="15269" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="15279" end="15286" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395424" start="15297" end="15302" title="Poles in Romania" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989342" start="15311" end="15330" title="Minorities of Romania" label="Other ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="15345" end="15353" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="15355" end="15365" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="15367" end="15377" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793348" start="15383" end="15392" title="Armenians of Romania" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15463" end="15475" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739148" start="15487" end="15491" title="1941 Romanian census" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="15648" end="15657" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="15679" end="15686" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="15703" end="15713" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="15978" end="15989" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="16012" end="16032" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="Nazi-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="16048" end="16098" title="General Government" label="General Governorate for the Occupied Polish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q636261" start="16141" end="16155" title="Heim ins Reich" label="Heim ins Reich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16781" end="16801" title="Demographic history of Romania#18 March 2002 census" label="2002 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="16898" end="16907" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="16918" end="16922" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="16924" end="16931" title="Romani people" label="Gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="16942" end="16949" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="16960" end="16970" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395424" start="16980" end="16985" title="Poles in Romania" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="16995" end="17003" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989342" start="17013" end="17032" title="Minorities of Romania" label="Other ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="17047" end="17057" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="17059" end="17063" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793348" start="17069" end="17078" title="Armenians of Romania" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="17105" end="17116" title="2011 Romanian census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q188448" start="17244" end="17268" title="List of cities and towns in Romania" label="largest urban settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="17350" end="17359" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="17369" end="17373" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="17375" end="17382" title="Romani people" label="Gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="17392" end="17402" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="17411" end="17418" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395424" start="17428" end="17433" title="Poles in Romania" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="17442" end="17450" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989342" start="17459" end="17478" title="Minorities of Romania" label="Other ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="17493" end="17503" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="17505" end="17509" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793348" start="17515" end="17524" title="Armenians of Romania" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17603" end="17623" title="Demographic history of Romania#29 December 1930 census" label="1930 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731261" start="17655" end="17661" title="Ițcani" label="Ițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="17896" end="17903" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q458444" start="17910" end="17926" title="Bukovina Germans" label="Bukovina Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="17935" end="17944" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="17955" end="17959" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="17970" end="17980" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395424" start="17990" end="17995" title="Poles in Romania" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="18005" end="18013" title="Lipovans" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="18039" end="18049" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18172" end="18186" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="18199" end="18219" title="Lutheranism" label="Evangelical Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="18233" end="18241" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="18262" end="18269" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="18282" end="18296" title="Romanian Greek Catholic Church" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="18358" end="18369" title="irreligion" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="18510" end="18519" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="18531" end="18545" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="18570" end="18589" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362635" start="18694" end="18723" title="1992 Romanian local elections" label="1992 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720221" start="18997" end="19026" title="1996 Romanian local elections" label="1996 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362638" start="19211" end="19240" title="2000 Romanian local elections" label="2000 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362640" start="19425" end="19454" title="2004 Romanian local elections" label="2004 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q651881" start="19639" end="19668" title="2008 Romanian local elections" label="2008 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647998" start="19853" end="19882" title="2012 Romanian local elections" label="2012 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362639" start="20067" end="20096" title="2016 Romanian local elections" label="2016 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251607" start="20277" end="20306" title="2020 Romanian local elections" label="2020 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q105494567" start="20466" end="20495" title="2024 Romanian local elections" label="2024 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="20649" end="20673" title="Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463736" start="20761" end="20785" title="Medieval Seat Fortress of Suceava" label="Seat Fortress of Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203075" start="20928" end="20945" title="Petru II of Moldavia" label="Petru of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q435994" start="21048" end="21071" title="Alexander I of Moldavia" label="Alexander I of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="21088" end="21105" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="21185" end="21193" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="21264" end="21271" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="21349" end="21358" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="21377" end="21391" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060836" start="21550" end="21570" title="Alexandru Lăpușneanu" label="Alexandru Lăpușneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="21619" end="21623" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q358562" start="21752" end="21774" title="Dumitrașcu Cantacuzino" label="Dumitrașcu Cantacuzino"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21966" end="21987" title=":ro:Karl Romstorfer" label="Karl Adolf Romstorfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267709" start="22487" end="22498" title="Petru Mușat" label="Petru Mușat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="22985" end="22995" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q943804" start="23132" end="23144" title="Jan Akkerman" label="Jan Akkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="23164" end="23175" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="23180" end="23196" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q288918" start="23202" end="23207" title="Focus (band)" label="Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220653" start="23921" end="23932" title="Vasile Lupu" label="Vasile Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q435994" start="25006" end="25029" title="Alexander I of Moldavia" label="Alexander I of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736089" start="25595" end="25610" title="Bukovina Museum" label="Bukovina Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740868" start="25872" end="25892" title="Simion Florea Marian" label="Simion Florea Marian"/>
<link wikidata="Q923614" start="25905" end="25918" title="Nicolae Labiș" label="Nicolae Labiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724973" start="25922" end="25928" title="Mălini" label="Mălini"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25930" end="25945" title=":ro:Eusebiu Camilar" label="Eusebiu Camilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725234" start="25949" end="25955" title="Udești" label="Udești"/>
<link wikidata="Q389000" start="25957" end="25975" title="Ciprian Porumbescu" label="Ciprian Porumbescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975175" start="25979" end="25985" title="Ciprian Porumbescu, Suceava" label="Stupca"/>
<link wikidata="Q602184" start="26025" end="26030" title="Solca" label="Solca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724545" start="26035" end="26040" title="Bilca" label="Bilca"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="26891" end="26908" title="Stephen III of Moldavia" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048126" start="26963" end="26986" title="Bogdan III the One-Eyed" label="Bogdan III the One-Eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q698997" start="27359" end="27397" title="Democratic Forum of Germans in Romania" label="Democratic Forum of Germans in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="27705" end="27713" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q431347" start="28017" end="28024" title="Rădăuți" label="Rădăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q837170" start="28026" end="28031" title="Gura Humorului" label="Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q652802" start="28033" end="28054" title="Câmpulung Moldovenesc" label="Câmpulung Moldovenesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q750239" start="28056" end="28061" title="Vatra Dornei" label="Dorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q303015" start="28067" end="28076" title="Fălticeni" label="Fălticeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724978" start="28130" end="28150" title="Mănăstirea Humorului" label="Mănăstirea Humorului"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724925" start="28211" end="28219" title="Marginea" label="Marginea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053568" start="28358" end="28362" title="Vama, Suceava" label="Vama"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="28377" end="28391" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava County"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="30236" end="30244" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q292036" start="30794" end="30806" title="Anca Parghel" label="Anca Parghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271034" start="30972" end="31001" title="Suceava North railway station" label="Suceava North railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731261" start="31088" end="31094" title="Ițcani" label="Ițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q694854" start="31573" end="31590" title="Fellner &amp;amp; Helmer" label="Ferdinand Fellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="32209" end="32223" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12728820" start="32438" end="32461" title="Suceava railway station" label="Suceava railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="32773" end="32781" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18549607" start="32859" end="32884" title="Suceava Administrative Palace" label="The Administrative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962253" start="33095" end="33111" title="Peter Paul Brang" label="Peter Paul Brang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33409" end="33422" title="Alojz Friedel" label="Alojz Friedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="33886" end="33893" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q389000" start="35389" end="35407" title="Ciprian Porumbescu" label="Ciprian Porumbescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731261" start="36257" end="36263" title="Ițcani" label="Ițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q926509" start="36419" end="36441" title="Alexăndrel of Moldavia" label="Alexăndrel of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443254" start="36565" end="36587" title="Josephine colonization" label="Josephine colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="36624" end="36639" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271034" start="36641" end="36666" title="Suceava North railway station" label="The north railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="36713" end="36727" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q397469" start="36732" end="36747" title="Neo-romanticism" label="Neo-romanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="36902" end="36919" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q267709" start="37153" end="37164" title="Petru Mușat" label="Petru Mușat"/>
<link wikidata="Q249558" start="37214" end="37225" title="Petru Rareș" label="Petru Rareș"/>
<link wikidata="Q717842" start="37465" end="37493" title="Saint John the New Monastery" label="Saint John the New Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="37534" end="37546" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048126" start="37628" end="37651" title="Bogdan III the One-Eyed" label="Bogdan III the One-Eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q897671" start="37811" end="37833" title="Stephen IV of Moldavia" label="Stephen IV of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387687" start="38049" end="38069" title="churches of Moldavia" label="churches of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="38070" end="38096" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785690" start="38169" end="38203" title="Archdiocese of Suceava and Rădăuți" label="Archdiocese of Suceava and Rădăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q672990" start="38343" end="38364" title="Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi" label="Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q435994" start="38377" end="38400" title="Alexander I of Moldavia" label="Alexander I of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203075" start="38540" end="38560" title="Petru II of Moldavia" label="Petru II of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q587746" start="38657" end="38662" title="Siret" label="Siret"/>
<link wikidata="Q672990" start="38939" end="38951" title="Cetatea Albă" label="Cetatea Albă"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064882" start="39031" end="39045" title="Peter the Lame" label="Peter the Lame"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="39156" end="39173" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q310633" start="39327" end="39342" title="Saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki" label="Saint Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q249558" start="39358" end="39372" title="Peter IV Rareș" label="Peter IV Rareș"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="39945" end="39967" title="Saint John the Baptist" label="Saint John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q220653" start="40045" end="40056" title="Vasile Lupu" label="Vasile Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q827125" start="40492" end="40496" title="cella" label="naos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972616" start="40610" end="40619" title="zvonnitsa" label="zvonnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65197983" start="40666" end="40686" title="Russian architecture" label="Russian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="40983" end="40997" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="41305" end="41310" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415681" start="41397" end="41417" title="Suceava (river)" label="Suceava river valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q666499" start="41939" end="41953" title="Ieremia Movilă" label="Ieremia Movilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271034" start="42513" end="42542" title="Suceava North railway station" label="Suceava North railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q926976" start="42602" end="42620" title="European route E85" label="European route E85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243513" start="42713" end="42737" title="Church of the Holy Cross, Pătrăuți" label="Church of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427542" start="42750" end="42758" title="Pătrăuți" label="Pătrăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q387687" start="42890" end="42910" title="churches of Moldavia" label="churches of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="42911" end="42937" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q289153" start="42979" end="42999" title="Dragomirna Monastery" label="Dragomirna Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076749" start="43026" end="43042" title="Anastasie Crimca" label="Anastasie Crimca"/>
<link wikidata="Q384463" start="43052" end="43069" title="Voroneț Monastery" label="Voroneț Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q837170" start="43113" end="43127" title="Gura Humorului" label="Gura Humorului"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495391" start="43208" end="43212" title="Late modern period" label="late"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="43213" end="43223" title="Modern era" label="Modern Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q458444" start="43268" end="43274" title="Bukovina Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="43333" end="43347" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="43352" end="43360" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="43374" end="43380" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="43424" end="43439" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="43539" end="43546" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="43548" end="43555" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="43565" end="43579" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="43599" end="43606" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157290" start="43614" end="43629" title="Bohemian Forest" label="Bohemian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731261" start="43856" end="43862" title="Ițcani" label="Ițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="43953" end="43973" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="44445" end="44451" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="44528" end="44532" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="44533" end="44545" title="John III Sobieski" label="Jan Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="44549" end="44555" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q926976" start="45630" end="45648" title="European route E85" label="European route E85"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650834" start="46836" end="46855" title="ACS Foresta Suceava" label="ACS Foresta Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707697" start="46916" end="46924" title="Liga III" label="Liga III"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="47050" end="47056" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057672" start="47076" end="47087" title="CSM Suceava" label="CSM Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057672" start="47089" end="47107" title="FC Cetatea Suceava" label="FC Cetatea Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q522772" start="47112" end="47127" title="Foresta Fălticeni" label="Foresta Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q303015" start="47169" end="47178" title="Fălticeni" label="Fălticeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650826" start="47251" end="47267" title="ACS Sporting Suceava" label="Sporting Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596363" start="47340" end="47353" title="Stadionul Areni" label="Areni Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014500" start="47567" end="47600" title="CSU Suceava" label="CS Universitatea Bucovina Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="47631" end="47639" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q260997" start="47677" end="47701" title="Liga Națională (men&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="Romanian Handball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q653439" start="47979" end="48016" title="Ștefan cel Mare University of Suceava" label="Ștefan cel Mare University of Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q184935" start="48394" end="48408" title="Mihai Eminescu" label="Mihai Eminescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249558" start="48588" end="48602" title="Petru Rareș" label="Peter IV Rareș"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="48806" end="48829" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen III of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="49099" end="49116" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q926499" start="49479" end="49491" title="electric bus" label="electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="49553" end="49564" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="49605" end="49615" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29755" start="50008" end="50015" title="Iveco Bus" label="Irisbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427566" start="50177" end="50183" title="Șcheia, Suceava" label="Șcheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303153" start="50318" end="50375" title="Suceava Ștefan cel Mare International Airport" label="Suceava International &amp;quot;Ștefan cel Mare&amp;quot; Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q253825" start="50444" end="50450" title="Salcea" label="Salcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="50527" end="50532" title="TAROM" label="TAROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762070" start="50745" end="50759" title="Angel Airlines (Romania)" label="Angel Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q464020" start="51045" end="51055" title="Instrument landing system" label="ILS system"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905185" start="51470" end="51500" title="List of the busiest airports in Romania" label="8th busiest airport in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="51604" end="51611" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="51660" end="51667" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="51677" end="51686" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="51700" end="51710" title="Chernivtsi" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="51722" end="51730" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560200" start="51742" end="51749" title="Karavas" label="Karavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184154" start="51760" end="51765" title="Laval, Mayenne" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q180732" start="51776" end="51782" title="Mahala, Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Mahala"/>
<link wikidata="Q853785" start="51794" end="51800" title="Soroca" label="Soroca"/>
<link wikidata="Q105060" start="51812" end="51821" title="Sosnowiec" label="Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q211243" start="51832" end="51840" title="Yinchuan" label="Yinchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="52043" end="52060" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="52066" end="52073" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="52149" end="52155" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616905" start="52242" end="52264" title="University of Augsburg" label="University of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="52270" end="52278" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="52339" end="52346" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26067" start="52348" end="52361" title="North Denmark Region" label="North Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="52419" end="52425" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="52427" end="52435" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="52502" end="52511" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="52513" end="52531" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="52590" end="52594" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338206" start="52596" end="52616" title="Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes" label="Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338106" start="52649" end="52669" title="Founding of Moldavia" label="Founding of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q915576" start="52672" end="52698" title="List of rulers of Moldavia" label="List of rulers of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387687" start="52739" end="52759" title="Churches of Moldavia" label="Churches of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137588" start="52762" end="52779" title="Duchy of Bukovina" label="Duchy of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="52782" end="52800" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q458444" start="52827" end="52843" title="Bukovina Germans" label="Bukovina Germans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381846" wikidata="Q469627" url="?curid=381846" title="Louis Paul Boon">
<text>Lodewijk Paul Aalbrecht (Louis Paul) Boon (15 March 1912, in Aalst – 10 May 1979, in Erembodegem) was a Belgian writer of novels, poetry, pornography, columns and art criticism. He was also a painter. He is best known for the novels &quot;My Little War&quot; (1947), the diptych &quot;Chapel Road&quot; (1953) / &quot;Summer in Termuren&quot; (1956), &quot;Menuet&quot; (1955) and &quot;Pieter Daens&quot; (1971).

==Biography==

He was born in 1912 as Lodewijk Paul Aalbrecht Boon in Aalst, Belgium, the oldest son in a working-class family. Although he was still very young during the First World War, memories of a German soldier shooting a prisoner would end up in later autobiographical work. Boon left school at age 16 to work for his father as a car painter. He was expelled from school for possession of forbidden books. During evenings and weekends he studied art at the Academy of Fine Arts, but soon had to abandon his studies due to lack of funds. In 1936 he married Jeanneke De Wolf. Three years later, their son Jo was born. 

=== World War II ===
In September 1939, Boon was mobilised and stationed as a soldier in Gooik and Tessenderlo. Boon was moved to Veldwezelt at the outbreak of World War II in May 1940 in order to defend the Albert Canal. However, he was captured as a prisoner of war on the first day and eventually sent home, after a few weeks in a prisoner camp. His experiences during the War and mostly the Occupation are the subject of Boon&#x27;s fourth book, &quot;My Little War&quot; (1947).

After writing an unpublished novel, Boon&#x27;s official debut came in 1942 with &quot;De voorstad groeit&quot; (&quot;The suburb grows&quot;). It was awarded the Leo J. Krynprijs award at the recommendation of Willem Elsschot. His next novel was loosely based on the life of Vincent van Gogh, &quot;Abel Gholarts&quot; (1944, not available in translation).

===After World War II===
Boon started working as a journalist for the communist dailies &quot;De Rode Vaan&quot; (1945–1946), &quot;Front&quot; (1946–1947) and &quot;De Vlaamse Gids&quot; (1948). Together with Maurice Roggeman, he also made a comic strip, &quot;Proleetje &amp; Fantast&quot;, for &quot;De Rode Vaan&quot;, for which he wrote storylines. Later he contributed to the newspaper &quot;Vooruit&quot; with which he established himself as a freelancer. In subsequent years, Boon continued to combine newspaper and literary work, and even added painting and sculpture to his activities. His literary output ranges from short prose, longer experimental novels, one man magazines, documentary and historical novels, poetry, erotic works and fairy tales. 

Boon died in his home in Erembodegem in 1979 at the age of 67.

== My Little War ==
His experiences during World War II and the Occupation are the subject of Boon&#x27;s fourth book, &quot;My Little War&quot; (1947, translation 2010 by Paul Vincent, Dalkey Archive Press). With this title Boon emerged for the first time as an important innovator of the novel. Rather than containing one story, &quot;My Little War&quot; contains over thirty loosely interrelated chapters, each containing a story that can be read as an independent piece. Most stories describe the difficult circumstances of life during the Occupation, such as finding food and fuel to warm the house, some deal with the deteriorating sexual mores, and some treat more direct war experiences such as bombings. Yet the overarching structure, though well hidden, makes for a coherent whole as well. The stories are interspersed with numerous raw fragments about equally raw incidents during the Occupation as the short stories: rape, theft, treason, humiliation. Boon admitted that the work of John Dos Passos provided the inspiration for this literary device. In this book, the term &#x27;enemy&#x27; by no means signifies Germans exclusively, even though one story tells of the extermination of a Jewish girl and another of a camp prisoner&#x27;s experiences. People are just as likely, if not more, to be robbed of food, money, or even their spouse&#x27;s fidelity by their neighbours as they are by the Germans.

==Chapel Road ==
In 1953 he published the work that now stands as his greatest masterpiece, &quot;Chapel Road&quot; (&quot;De Kapellekensbaan&quot;, translated by Adrienne Dixon), which he began to write as early as 1943. Its dazzling construction combines several narrative threads, including an almost postmodern one where the writer and his friends discuss how the story should develop further. Another one is an extensive reworking of the most classic medieval work in the Dutch language, the twelfth-century story of Reynard the fox. There are several references to &quot;Chapel Road&quot; in Boon&#x27;s lengthy 1956 novel &quot;Zomer te Ter-muren&quot; (&quot;Summer in Termuren&quot;), which picks up where the earlier novel left off.

==Legacy==

Boon&#x27;s literary legacy is a versatile, ranging from journalistic pieces on Belgian politics and society to erotic novelas. In historical novels such as &quot;De Bende van Jan de Lichte&quot;, &quot;De zoon van Jan de Lichte&quot;, &quot;De Zwarte Hand&quot;, and &quot;Daens&quot;, he depicted the oppression of the working class in 18th century Flanders; in his controversial &quot;Geuzenboek&quot;, he wrote about the Spanish domination of the Low Countries in the 16th century. Nearly all of Boon&#x27;s work was infused by his profound commitment to socialism; in experimental, modernistic works such as &quot;Vergeten straat&quot;, Boon projected an ideal society but at the same time shared his doubts as to whether human nature could achieve utopia.
==Nobel Prize==
Boon was thought to have been shortlisted for a Nobel Prize in Literature in the late 1970s, and even received an invitation to appear at the Swedish Embassy, probably to be told that the Prize had been awarded to him. The day before the appointment he died at his writing table of a heart attack. Very little of his writing has been translated into English, but &quot;De Kapellekensbaan&quot; and &quot;Zomer in Ter-Muren&quot; are both available in English translation from Dalkey Archive Press as &quot;Chapel Road&quot; and &quot;Summer in Termuren&quot;, and Paul Vincent&#x27;s translation of &quot;Mijn kleine oorlog&quot; (as &quot;My Little War&quot;) was published by Dalkey in 2009.

==Selected bibliography==

=== Translated in English ===

* My Little War (1946), translated by Paul Vincent, Dalkey Archive Press
* Chapel Road (1953), translated by Adrienne Dixon, Dalkey Archive Press
* Summer in Termuren (1956), translated by Paul Vincent, Dalkey Archive Press 

=== Other selected works, not translated ===

* De voorstad groeit (1942), novel
* Abel Gholaerts (1944), novel
* Vergeten straat (1946), novel
* Boontje&#x27;s reservaat (1954-1957), one-man magazine with documentary reports, stories, memories and essays
* Menuet (1955), novella
* De kleine Eva uit de Kromme Bijlstraat (1956), long-form, narrative poem. Awarded the Henriette Roland Holst-prize
* De bende van Jan de Lichte (1957), modern picaresque novel
* De paradijsvogel (1958), novel
* Blauwbaardje in Wonderland en andere grimmige sprookjes voor verdorven kinderen (1962), fairy tales
* Geniaal, maar met korte beentjes (1967), essays
* Pieter Daens of hoe in de negentiende eeuw de arbeiders van Aalst vochten tegen armoede en onrecht (1971), historical novel. Awarded the Multatuli-prize
* Mieke Maaike&#x27;s obscene jeugd (1972), pornographic novella
* De zwarte hand, of het anarchisme van de negentiende eeuw in het industriestadje Aalst (1976), historical novel
* Het geuzenboek (1979), historical novel

==See also==
* Flemish literature

==References==
==External links==

*Discovering Louis Paul Boon (English)
*A Boon overview by Eric Dickens (English)
*Louis Paal Boon at the Digital Library for Dutch Literature (in Dutch)
*&quot;The First of May&quot;, Tr. A. Giridhar Rao, Research and Practice Blog, Azim Premji University, 30 April 2024.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q469627" start="0" end="41" title="Louis Paul Boon" label="Lodewijk Paul Aalbrecht (Louis Paul) Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="61" end="66" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="85" end="96" title="Erembodegem" label="Erembodegem"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="485" end="490" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="492" end="499" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="587" end="602" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945922" start="1497" end="1510" title="My Little War" label="My Little War"/>
<link wikidata="Q554105" start="1737" end="1752" title="Willem Elsschot" label="Willem Elsschot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="1802" end="1818" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="2336" end="2346" title="freelancer" label="freelancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="2673" end="2684" title="Erembodegem" label="Erembodegem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945922" start="2837" end="2850" title="My Little War" label="My Little War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211071" start="2898" end="2918" title="Dalkey Archive Press" label="Dalkey Archive Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q312407" start="3707" end="3722" title="John Dos Passos" label="John Dos Passos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4228" end="4239" title="Chapel Road" label="Chapel Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894774" start="4293" end="4307" title="Adrienne Dixon" label="Adrienne Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675513" start="4652" end="4659" title="Reynard" label="Reynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5237" end="5245" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="5337" end="5350" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="5445" end="5454" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384425" start="5459" end="5471" title="Experimental literature" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="5473" end="5484" title="Modernism" label="modernistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="5640" end="5646" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="5712" end="5737" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211071" start="6140" end="6160" title="Dalkey Archive Press" label="Dalkey Archive Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q834293" start="7679" end="7697" title="Flemish literature" label="Flemish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832590" start="7968" end="7990" title="Azim Premji University" label="Azim Premji University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381849" wikidata="Q1180863" url="?curid=381849" title="Serapis (disambiguation)">
<text>Serapis is a Greco-Egyptian god.

Serapis may also refer to:

* , various British ships
* , several US ships</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214554" start="0" end="7" title="Serapis" label="Serapis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381852" wikidata="Q177186" url="?curid=381852" title="Edward Walter Maunder">
<text>Edward Walter Maunder (12 April 1851 – 21 March 1928) was a British astronomer. His study of sunspots and the solar magnetic cycle led to his identification of the period from 1645 to 1715 that is now known as the Maunder Minimum.

==Early and personal life==
Maunder was born in 1851, in London, the youngest child of a minister of the Wesleyan Society. He attended King&#x27;s College London but never graduated. He took a job in a London bank to finance his studies.

In 1873 Maunder returned to the Royal Observatory, taking a position as a spectroscopic assistant. Shortly after, in 1875, he married Edith Hannah Bustin, who gave birth to six children: four sons (one of whom died in infancy) and two daughters. Following the death of Edith in 1888, in 1890 he met Annie Scott Dill Russell (later Annie Russell Maunder, 1868–1947), a mathematician and astronomer educated at Girton College in Cambridge, with whom he collaborated for the remainder of his life. She worked as a &quot;lady computer&quot; at the Observatory from 1890 to 1895.

In 1895 Maunder and Russell married. In 1916 Annie Maunder became one of the first women accepted by the Royal Astronomical Society.

==Solar observations==


Part of Maunder&#x27;s job at the Observatory involved photographing and measuring sunspots, and in doing so he observed that the solar latitudes at which sunspots occur varies in a regular way over the course of the 11-year cycle. After 1891, he was assisted in his work by his wife Annie Maunder. In 1904, he published their results in the form of the &quot;butterfly&quot; diagram.

After studying the work of Gustav Spörer, who examined old records from the different observatories archives looking for changes of the heliographic latitude of sunspots, Maunder presented a paper on Spörer&#x27;s conclusions to the Royal Astronomical Society in 1890 and analyzed the results to show the presence of a prolonged sunspot minimum in the 17-18th century in a paper published in 1894. The period, recognised initially by Spörer, now bears the name Maunder minimum.

He travelled extensively for observations going to places such as the West Indies, Lapland, India, Algiers, Mauritius. His last eclipse expedition was to Labrador for the Solar eclipse of 30 August 1905 at the invitation of the Canadian government.

==Other astronomical observations==

In 1882 Maunder (and some other European astronomers) observed what he called an &quot;auroral beam&quot;; as yet unexplained, it had some similarity in appearance to either a noctilucent cloud or an upper tangent arc. However, Maunder wrote that the phenomenon moved rapidly from horizon to horizon, which would rule out a noctilucent cloud or upper tangent arc. Further, upper tangent arc cannot occur during nighttime when the observation was made. Since he made his observation during highly intense auroral activity, he assumed it was some extraordinary auroral phenomenon, though one he had never observed again before or after.

He observed Mars and was a sceptic of the notion of Martian canals. He conducted visual experiments using marked circular disks which led him to conclude, correctly, that the viewing of canals arose as an optical illusion. Also he was convinced that there cannot be life &quot;as in our world&quot; on Mars, as there are no temperature-equating winds and too low mean temperatures. Craters on Mars and the Moon were named in his and his wife Annie&#x27;s honour.

==Establishment of the British Astronomical Association==

In 1890, Maunder was a driving force in the foundation of the &quot;British Astronomical Association&quot;. Although he had been fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society since 1875, Maunder wanted an association of astronomers open to every person interested in astronomy, from every class of society, and especially open for women.

Maunder was the first editor of the Journal of the BAA, an office later taken by his wife Annie Maunder. He was also director of its Mars Section 1892–1893, the Star Colour Section 1900–1901, President 1894-1896 and finally Solar Section director 1910–1925. His older brother, Thomas Frid Maunder (1841–1935), was a co-founder and secretary of the Association for 38 years.

==Publications==
* Maunder, E. Walter (1900). &quot;The Royal Observatory, Greenwich&quot;—Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society
* 
* 
* 

== Commemoration ==
In 2022 English Heritage announced that Annie and Walter Maunder would be commemorated with a blue plaque at their former home in Brockley, London, later that year. The Maunders wrote &quot;The Heavens and their Story&quot; while they were living in Brockley.

==References==


==Further reading==

* by Hector Macpherson, London: Gall &amp; Inglis, 1905

* A. J. Kinder &quot;Edward Walter Maunder: His Life and Times&quot; &quot;Journal of the British Astronomical Association&quot; Vol. 118 (1) 21–42 (2008).

* Willie Wei-Hock Soon and Steven Haywood Yaskell &quot;The Maunder Minimum and the Variable Sun Earth Connection (World Scientific Publishers: 2003)

==External links==

* Online catalogue of Maunder&#x27;s personal and working papers (part of the Royal Greenwich Observatory Archive held at Cambridge University Library)
* 
* J. E. Evans and E. W. Maunder, &quot;Experiments as to the Actuality of the &#x27;Canals&#x27; observed on Mars&quot;, MNRAS, 63 (1903) 488
* Drawing of the butterfly plot</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177186" start="0" end="21" title="Edward Walter Maunder" label="Edward Walter Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="68" end="78" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="93" end="100" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="214" end="229" title="Maunder Minimum" label="Maunder Minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="337" end="353" title="John Wesley" label="Wesleyan Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="367" end="393" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="503" end="520" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="545" end="558" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q539093" start="802" end="823" title="Annie Russell Maunder" label="Annie Russell Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q797846" start="880" end="894" title="Girton College" label="Girton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="898" end="907" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="988" end="1001" title="human computer" label="lady computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="1236" end="1251" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="the Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1336" end="1341" title="sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60902" start="1619" end="1632" title="Gustav Spörer" label="Gustav Spörer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124097542" start="1728" end="1749" title="heliographic latitude" label="heliographic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="2053" end="2068" title="Maunder minimum" label="Maunder minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556241" start="2242" end="2273" title="Solar eclipse of 30 August 1905" label="Solar eclipse of 30 August 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q192794" start="2534" end="2551" title="noctilucent cloud" label="noctilucent cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682870" start="2558" end="2575" title="upper tangent arc" label="upper tangent arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3006" end="3010" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q875660" start="3046" end="3060" title="Martian canals" label="Martian canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="3199" end="3215" title="optical illusion" label="optical illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="3376" end="3383" title="Impact crater" label="Craters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3387" end="3391" title="List of craters on Mars: H-N#M" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138481" start="3396" end="3404" title="Maunder (lunar crater)" label="the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q539093" start="3436" end="3441" title="Annie Scott Dill Maunder" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q918776" start="3585" end="3617" title="British Astronomical Association" label="British Astronomical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="3660" end="3686" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q918776" start="3902" end="3905" title="British Astronomical Association" label="BAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q539093" start="3941" end="3954" title="Annie Scott Dill Maunder" label="Annie Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q918776" start="4195" end="4210" title="British Astronomical Association" label="the Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="4413" end="4429" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="4499" end="4510" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216536" start="4535" end="4543" title="Brockley" label="Brockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474219" start="5246" end="5257" title="Joseph Edward Evans" label="J. E. Evans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381854" wikidata="Q15131019" url="?curid=381854" title="Transport aircraft">
<text>Transport aircraft is a broad category of aircraft that includes:

* Airliners, aircraft, usually large and most often operated by airlines, intended for carrying multiple passengers or cargo in commercial service
* Cargo aircraft or freighters, fixed-wing aircraft designed or converted for the carriage of goods, rather than passengers, lacking in passenger amenities and generally featuring one or more large doors for loading cargo; also known as freight aircraft, freighters, airlifters, or cargo jets.
* Mail planes, airplanes used for carrying mail
* Military transport aircraft, airplanes or helicopters used to deliver troops, weapons, and military equipment, usually outside of the commercial flight routes in uncontrolled airspace, and employed historically to deliver airborne forces and tow military gliders; sometimes also called military cargo aircraft.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="69" end="77" title="Airliner" label="Airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="216" end="230" title="Cargo aircraft" label="Cargo aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570679" start="510" end="520" title="Mail plane" label="Mail plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445518" start="558" end="585" title="Military transport aircraft" label="Military transport aircraft"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381857" wikidata="Q192758" url="?curid=381857" title="Râmnicu Vâlcea">
<text>Râmnicu Vâlcea (formerly &quot;Râmnic&quot;, ) is a city in Romania. Located in the south-central part of the country, in the historical province of Oltenia, it is the seat of Vâlcea County and its main urban settlement. According to the 2021 Romanian census, it has a population of 93,151.

== Geography ==
Râmnicu Vâlcea is situated in the central-southwestern area of Romania and is the county capital of Vâlcea County. Set at the foothills of the Southern Carpathians, the town is located at about from the Cozia Mountains and about from the Făgăraș and Lotrului Mountains. The southern limit of the city is formed by the Getic Plateau () and the Olt River valley.

The city is crossed by national roads DN7 (part of European route E81), , and . The serves the CFR Line 201, which runs along the Olt River from Podu Olt, Sibiu County, to Piatra-Olt, Olt County. 

=== Climate ===
According to Köppen climate classification, the climate of the town is defined as Dfa (humid continental with hot summers) bordering Cfa (humid subtropical). Precipitation amount is higher in the summer, although not high enough in order to be a &quot;Dwa&quot; type climate, winters are not dry enough for Dwa classification, either. There are on average 30.3 days annually with snow depth reaching or exceeding .

The table below highlights climate data for Râmnicu Vâlcea between 1991 and 2020, detailing the average high temperature, the average low temperature, the average precipitation (in mm/inches) as well as the sum of mean monthly sunshine hours.

== History ==



The area has been inhabited since Dacian and Roman times, and was the site of a castrum (known as &quot;Buridava&quot; or &quot;Burridava&quot;, previously a Dacian town). A new fortress was built on the location during the Middle Ages. Râmnicu Vâlcea was first attested during the rule of Prince Mircea cel Bătrân, as &quot;the princely town of Râmnic&quot; (4 September 1388), and confirmed as the seat of a Vâlcea County during the same period (8 January 1392).

The town seal dates to 1505. &quot;Cetățuia&quot;, the actual fortress, served as the residence of Oltenian Bans and, from 1504, of the Orthodox bishops of the Râmnic Diocese; in 1529, Prince Radu of Afumați was killed in &quot;Cetățuia&quot; by a boyar conspiracy.

During the rules of Matei Basarab and Constantin Brâncoveanu, it became an important cultural center. It was here where the first paper mill and printing press in Romania were built (&quot;see Anthim the Iberian&quot;). The town was heavily damaged during the Habsburg monarchy&#x27;s takeover of Oltenia which lasted between 1718 and 1739, and its purpose was again reduced to that of a fortress.

During the Wallachian Revolution, on 29 July 1848, &quot;Deșteaptă-te, române!&quot; (the current national anthem of Romania), with lyrics written by Andrei Mureșanu and music composed by Anton Pann (whose memorial house lies in the center of the town), was sung for the first time in Râmnicu Vâlcea. 

Gheorghe Magheru gathered his military force in Râureni, now part of the town, in an attempt to face the anti-revolutionary forces of Imperial Russia and the Ottoman Empire.

In the 1980s, the town was completely rebuilt in a style combining socialist realism with local vernacular architecture of Brâncovenesc style. 

The town was the center and peak point of the path of total darkness of the Solar eclipse of 11 August 1999. Around 2005, the town gained notoriety as a centre of cybercrime.

== Politics ==
The mayor of Râmnicu Vâlcea is Mircia Gutău of the Romanian Ecologist Party (PER), following the 2020 Romanian local elections. The Râmnicu Vâlcea Municipal Council, elected at the 2020 local elections, consists of 23 councillors, with the following party composition:

== Sports ==
Râmnicu Vâlcea is home to SCM Râmnicu Vâlcea, which is a women&#x27;s handball club that competes traditionally in the EHF Champions League. At football, the town was previously known for its now dissolved local football club Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea which won one Romanian cup in 1973. It briefly participated in the UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup/European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup during one season (namely in 1973–1974) for just one round (more specifically the first one) against Northern Irish side Glentoran F.C. which subsequently went on to the quarter-finals.

== Villages ==

The city administers thirteen villages: Aranghel, Căzănești, Copăcelu, Dealu Malului, Fețeni, Goranu, Lespezi, Poenari, Priba, Râureni, Săliștea, Stolniceni, and Troian. Goranu, Fețeni, Lespezi, and Săliștea were a separate commune, &quot;Goranu&quot;, until 1996, when they were merged into the town.

== Notable people ==
* Radu Berceanu (born 1953), engineer and politician
* Dan Burghelea (born 1943), mathematician
* Florin Cîțu (born 1972), politician who served as Prime Minister
* Bogdan-Daniel Deac (born 2001), chess grandmaster
* Doru Dudiță (born 1977), footballer 
* Ion Emanuel Florescu (1819–1893), general who served as Chief of the General Staff and Prime Minister
* Gheorghe I. Lahovary (1838–1909), engineer and writer
* Gabriel Liiceanu (born 1942), philosopher
* Nicolae Manolescu (born 1939), literary critic
* Marian-Jean Marinescu (born 1952), politician
* Maria Marinela Mazilu (born 1991), skeleton racer 
* Horia Moculescu (born 1937), pianist and composer
* Mihail Oromolu (1875–1945), magistrate and politician
* Alexandru Papadopol (born 1975), actor
* Napoleon Pop (1945–2023), economist and politician
* Ilie Purcaru (1933–2008), journalist and poet
* Dem Rădulescu (1931–2000), theatre, film, and television actor, and academic
* Peter Stoica (born 1949), electrical engineering professor
* Dorel Zugrăvescu (1930–2019), geophysicist

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

* Oltchim S.A.
* Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea

== References ==
== External links ==

* Râmnicu Vâlcea City Hall official site </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192758" start="0" end="14" title="Râmnicu Vâlcea" label="Râmnicu Vâlcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="60" end="67" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="149" end="156" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186838" start="176" end="189" title="Vâlcea County" label="Vâlcea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="238" end="258" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="451" end="471" title="Southern Carpathians" label="Southern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q847604" start="546" end="553" title="Făgăraș Mountains" label="Făgăraș"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="651" end="660" title="Olt (river)" label="Olt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858152" start="693" end="707" title="Roads in Romania" label="national roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205677" start="708" end="711" title="DN7" label="DN7"/>
<link wikidata="Q987350" start="721" end="739" title="European route E81" label="European route E81"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="765" end="768" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413434" start="769" end="777" title="Căile Ferate Române Line 200" label="Line 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q679428" start="815" end="823" title="Tălmaciu" label="Podu Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q591285" start="842" end="852" title="Piatra-Olt" label="Piatra-Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="897" end="926" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="966" end="969" title="Humid continental climate" label="Dfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1017" end="1020" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="Cfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="1595" end="1600" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1606" end="1611" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="1641" end="1648" title="Castra" label="castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1785" end="1796" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="1851" end="1857" title="List of rulers of Wallachia" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q322043" start="1858" end="1875" title="Mircea cel Bătrân of Wallachia" label="Mircea cel Bătrân"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="2135" end="2139" title="Ban (title)" label="Bans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="2163" end="2171" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="2172" end="2178" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785837" start="2187" end="2201" title="Archdiocese of Râmnic" label="Râmnic Diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q113217" start="2219" end="2234" title="Radu of Afumați" label="Radu of Afumați"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="2275" end="2280" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719546" start="2314" end="2327" title="Matei Basarab" label="Matei Basarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q461926" start="2332" end="2354" title="Constantin Brâncoveanu" label="Constantin Brâncoveanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="2424" end="2434" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="2439" end="2453" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q572436" start="2487" end="2505" title="Anthim the Iberian" label="Anthim the Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2554" end="2571" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104523212" start="2579" end="2598" title="Banat of Craiova" label="takeover of Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175943" start="2704" end="2725" title="1848 Wallachian Revolution" label="Wallachian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184540" start="2750" end="2771" title="Deșteaptă-te, române!" label="Deșteaptă-te, române!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="2791" end="2806" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q502292" start="2843" end="2858" title="Andrei Mureșanu" label="Andrei Mureșanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q592355" start="2881" end="2891" title="Anton Pann" label="Anton Pann"/>
<link wikidata="Q973203" start="2996" end="3012" title="Gheorghe Magheru" label="Gheorghe Magheru"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3130" end="3145" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3154" end="3168" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="3238" end="3255" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q460596" start="3294" end="3306" title="Brâncovenesc art" label="Brâncovenesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281799" start="3392" end="3423" title="Solar eclipse of 11 August 1999" label="Solar eclipse of 11 August 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="3479" end="3489" title="cybercrime" label="cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733751" start="3558" end="3582" title="Ecologist Party of Romania" label="Romanian Ecologist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251607" start="3604" end="3633" title="2020 Romanian local elections" label="2020 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q938762" start="3816" end="3834" title="SCM Râmnicu Vâlcea (handball)" label="SCM Râmnicu Vâlcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="3847" end="3868" title="Handball" label="women&amp;#x27;s handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q330395" start="3909" end="3929" title="EHF Champions League" label="EHF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073122" start="4016" end="4037" title="Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea" label="Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138388" start="4052" end="4064" title="Cupa României" label="Romanian cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144255" start="4068" end="4072" title="1972–73 Cupa României" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="4105" end="4131" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q729725" start="4192" end="4201" title="1973–74 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1973–1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q249533" start="4284" end="4298" title="Glentoran F.C." label="Glentoran F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7281707" start="4692" end="4705" title="Radu Berceanu" label="Radu Berceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q102161710" start="4745" end="4758" title="Dan Burghelea" label="Dan Burghelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035183" start="4788" end="4799" title="Florin Cîțu" label="Florin Cîțu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27524449" start="4855" end="4873" title="Bogdan-Daniel Deac" label="Bogdan-Daniel Deac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299028" start="4907" end="4918" title="Doru Dudiță" label="Doru Dudiță"/>
<link wikidata="Q711113" start="4946" end="4966" title="Ion Emanuel Florescu" label="Ion Emanuel Florescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12729160" start="5050" end="5070" title="Gheorghe I. Lahovary" label="Gheorghe I. Lahovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q821752" start="5106" end="5122" title="Gabriel Liiceanu" label="Gabriel Liiceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q535151" start="5150" end="5167" title="Nicolae Manolescu" label="Nicolae Manolescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q345794" start="5199" end="5220" title="Marian-Jean Marinescu" label="Marian-Jean Marinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q525101" start="5247" end="5268" title="Maria Marinela Mazilu" label="Maria Marinela Mazilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903195" start="5300" end="5315" title="Horia Moculescu" label="Horia Moculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18541863" start="5352" end="5366" title="Mihail Oromolu" label="Mihail Oromolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515779" start="5408" end="5427" title="Alexandru Papadopol" label="Alexandru Papadopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736393" start="5449" end="5461" title="Napoleon Pop" label="Napoleon Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q52669422" start="5502" end="5514" title="Ilie Purcaru" label="Ilie Purcaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254991" start="5550" end="5563" title="Dem Rădulescu" label="Dem Rădulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191062" start="5629" end="5641" title="Peter Stoica" label="Peter Stoica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12726933" start="5690" end="5706" title="Dorel Zugrăvescu" label="Dorel Zugrăvescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q907571" start="5767" end="5779" title="Oltchim S.A." label="Oltchim S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1073122" start="5782" end="5803" title="Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea" label="Chimia Râmnicu Vâlcea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381860" wikidata="Q858346" url="?curid=381860" title="Big Wing">
<text>The Big Wing, also known as a Balbo, was an air fighting tactic proposed during the Battle of Britain by 12 Group commander Air Vice-Marshal Trafford Leigh-Mallory and Acting Squadron Leader Douglas Bader. In essence, the tactic involved meeting incoming Luftwaffe bombing raids in strength with a wing-shaped formation of three to five squadrons. In the Battle, this tactic was employed by the Duxford Wing, under Bader&#x27;s command.

The name &quot;Balbo&quot; refers to Italo Balbo, an Italian air force officer and fascist political leader famous for leading large formations of aircraft on long distance flights before the war.

==See also==
* British military history of World War II

==References==
Notes
== Further reading ==
* Bungay, Steven. &quot;The Most Dangerous Enemy: A History of the Battle of Britain&quot;. (Aurum Press, 2001).
* Davison, Martin and Taylor, James.&quot;Spitfire Ace: Flying the Battle of Britain&quot;. (Pan Books, 2004).
* Dixon, Jack. Dowding &amp; Churchill. (Pen and Sword Books, 2008)
* Fisher, David E. &quot;A Race On The Edge Of Time&quot;. New York, Athena Books 1989 .
* James, T.C.G.&quot;The Battle of Britain. Royal Air Force Official Histories, Air Defence of Great Britain, vol2&quot;. (Frank Cass, 2000)
* 
* Ray, John. &quot;The Battle of Britain: Dowding and the First Victory, 1940&quot; (aka &quot;The Battle of Britain: New Perspectives&quot;). (Cassell, 2000).
* Sarkar, Dilip. &quot;Bader&#x27;s Duxford Fighters: The Big Wing Controversy&quot;. (Victory Books International, 2006).
* Turner, John Frayn. &quot;The Bader Wing&quot;. (Pen and Sword Books, 2007).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q858346" start="4" end="12" title="Big Wing" label="Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633226" start="30" end="35" title="Balbo (aircraft formation)" label="Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="84" end="101" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q503384" start="141" end="163" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory" label="Trafford Leigh-Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="191" end="204" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="255" end="264" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364" start="298" end="302" title="Wing (military aviation unit)" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="475" end="486" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="651" end="691" title="British military history of World War II" label="British military history of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234069" start="1546" end="1564" title="John Frayn Turner" label="Turner, John Frayn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381862" wikidata="Q21683804" url="?curid=381862" title="Werewolf fiction">
<text>Werewolf fiction denotes the portrayal of werewolves and other shapeshifting therianthropes, in the media of literature, drama, film, games and music. Werewolf literature includes folklore, legend, saga, fairy tales, Gothic and horror fiction, fantasy fiction and poetry. Such stories may be supernatural, symbolic or allegorical.

A classic cinematic example of the theme is &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; (1941) which in later films joins with the Frankenstein Monster and Count Dracula as one of the three famous icons of modern day horror. However, werewolf fiction is an exceptionally diverse genre, with ancient folkloric roots and manifold modern re-interpretations.

==Literary origins==

In Greek mythology, there is a story of an Arcadian King called Lycaon who tested Zeus by serving him a dish of his slaughtered and dismembered son to see if Zeus was really all-knowing. As punishment for his trickery, Zeus transformed Lycaon into a wolf and killed his 50 sons by lightning bolts, but supposedly revived Lycaon&#x27;s son Nyctimus, who the king had slaughtered and who succeeded his father in the kingdom of Arcadia.

In medieval romances, such as &quot;Bisclavret&quot; and &quot;Guillaume de Palerme,&quot; the werewolf is relatively benign, appearing as the victim of evil magic and aiding knights errant.&quot;&quot;

However, in most legends influenced by medieval theology, the werewolf was a Satanic beast with a craving for human flesh. This appears in such later fiction as &quot;The White Wolf of the Hartz Mountains&quot;: an episode in the novel &quot;The Phantom Ship&quot; (1839) by Marryat, featuring a demonic femme fatale who transforms from woman to wolf.

Sexual themes are common in werewolf fiction; the protagonist kills his girlfriend as she walks with a former lover in &quot;Werewolf of London&quot; (1935), suggesting sexual jealousy. The writers of &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; (1941) were careful in depicting killings as motivated out of hunger.

The wolf in the fairy tale &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot; has been reinterpreted as a werewolf in many works of fiction, such as &quot;The Company of Wolves&quot; (1979) by Angela Carter (and its 1984 &quot;film adaptation&quot;) and the film &quot;Ginger Snaps&quot; (2000), which address female sexuality. 2011 also saw the release of &quot;Red Riding Hood&quot; with Amanda Seyfried in the main role, with the character name of Valerie.

==Folklore==
In folk and fairy tale traditions all over the world, humans who can shapeshift at will into both human and lupine forms appear in several fairy tales. According to the Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index, they can appear in this capacity in the following tale types:

* Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index tale type ATU 409, &quot;&quot;: a tale type more commonly found in the folklore of Estonia and Finland, a human hunter finds a woman in the woods and hides her animal (wolf) skin. Years later, after the wolf-maiden has given birth to children, one of them finds her wolf skin and returns it to her. She puts it back and disappears, never to return.
* Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index tale type ATU 425, &quot;The Search for the Lost Husband&quot; and ATU 425A, &quot;&quot;The Animal Bridegroom&quot;&quot;: a maiden is betrothed to an animal bridegroom (a wolf, in several variants), who comes at night to the bridal bed in human form. The maiden breaks a taboo and her enchanted husband disappears. She is forced to search for him. Example: &quot;The White Wolf&quot;, Belgian fairy tale; &quot;Prince Wolf&quot;, Danish fairy tale.
* Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index tale type ATU 425C, &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot;: a father has three daughters, the youngest the most beautiful and the most loved by her parent. He needs to go on a journey and asks his daughter what presents should he bring them, the youngest suggest something simple, but very or nearly impossible to find. Near the end of his journey, he finds the wished-for object in the garden of a (seemingly) abandoned castle, when a booming voice interrupts him. The voice belongs to a fierce creature (sometimes explicitly described as a wolf by the narrative) who demands &quot;his most precious gift&quot; in return: the youngest daughter. She willingly offers herself to the beast and discovers he is an enchanted prince. She helps him break the curse and they both live happily ever after.
* Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index tale type ATU 552, &quot;The Girls who married Animals&quot;: a bankrupt nobleman or a poor farmer is forced to wed his daughters to three animal suitors, who are actually enchanted princes under a curse. In some variants, one of the suitors is a wolf.

==19th century==

Nineteenth-century Gothic horror stories drew on previous folklore and legend to present the theme of the werewolf in a new fictional form. An early example is &quot;Hugues, the Wer-Wolf&quot; by Sutherland Menzies, published in 1838. The year after in 1839, Frederick Marryat&#x27;s book &quot;The Phantom Ship&quot; was published, which included one of the first stories about a female werewolf, and is often reprinted as a stand-alone short story called &quot;The White Wolf of the Hartz Mountains&quot;. In another, &quot;Wagner the Wehr-Wolf&quot; (1847) by G. W. M. Reynolds, we find the classic subject of a man who, although a kind-hearted man himself, accepts a Deal with the Devil to become a werewolf for 18 months accompanying Dr. Faustus and killing humans, in exchange for youth and wealth. &quot;The Man-Wolf&quot; (1831) by Leitch Ritchie yields the werewolf in an 11th-century setting, while Catherine Crowe penned what is believed to be the first werewolf short story by a woman: &quot;A Story of a Weir-Wolf&quot; (1846). Other werewolf stories of this period include &quot;The Wolf Leader&quot; (1857) by Alexandre Dumas and &quot;Hugues-le-Loup&quot; (1869) by Erckmann-Chatrian.

A later Gothic story, Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s &quot;Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde&quot; (1886), has an implicit werewolf subtext, according to Colin Wilson. This has been made explicit in some recent adaptations of this story, such as the BBC TV series &quot;Jekyll&quot; (2007). Stevenson&#x27;s &quot;Olalla&quot; (1887) offers more explicit werewolf content, but, like &quot;Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde&quot;, this aspect remains subordinate to the story&#x27;s larger themes.

Charles De Coster&#x27;s 1867 novel &quot;The Legend of Thyl Ulenspiegel and Lamme Goedzak&quot; includes an extensive episode where the Flemish town of Damme is terrorized by what seems a rampaging werewolf, the numerous victims&#x27; bodies bearing what seems the mark of a wolf&#x27;s fangs - thought ultimately they turn out to have been killed by a completely mundane serial killer, clever and ruthless, who used metal blades to simulate these wolf&#x27;s tooth marks.

A rapacious female werewolf who appears in the guise of a seductive femme fatale before transforming into lupine form to devour her hapless male victims is the protagonist of Clemence Housman&#x27;s acclaimed &quot;The Were-wolf&quot; published in 1896.

==20th and 21st centuries==
===In literature===
The 20th century saw an explosion of werewolf short stories and novels published in both England and America. The famed English supernatural story writer Algernon Blackwood wrote a number of werewolf short stories. These often had an occult aspect to them. English author Gerald Biss published the 1919 werewolf novel &quot;The Door of the Unreal&quot;. American pulp magazines of the 1920 to 1950s, such as &quot;Weird Tales&quot;, include many werewolf tales, written by such authors as H. Warner Munn, Seabury Quinn and Manly Wade Wellman. Robert E. Howard made his own contribution to the genre in &quot;Wolfshead&quot;.

The most renowned werewolf novel of the 20th century was &quot;The Werewolf of Paris&quot; (1933) by American author Guy Endore. This novel has been accorded classic status and is considered by some to be the &quot;Dracula&quot; of werewolf literature. It was adapted as &quot;The Curse of the Werewolf&quot; in 1961 for Hammer Film Productions. The novel &quot;The Wolf&#x27;s Bride: A Tale from Estonia&quot; written by the Finnish author Aino Kallas was published in 1928 and it tells the story of the forester&#x27;s wife living in Hiiumaa in the 17th century who became a werewolf under the influence of a malevolent forest spirit. A more recent example is &quot;Moon of the Wolf&quot; (1967) by Les Whitten, which the 1972 movie of the same name, &quot;Moon of the Wolf&quot;, was based on.

In the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; stories (1997 to 2007), the characters Remus Lupin (Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher during Harry&#x27;s third year at Hogwarts, who becomes one of Harry&#x27;s friends), and Fenrir Greyback (a villain), are werewolves.

===In films===
In cinema during the silent era, werewolves were portrayed in canine form in such films as &quot;The Werewolf&quot; (1913) and &quot;Wolf Blood&quot; (1925). The first feature film to portray an anthropomorphic werewolf was &quot;Werewolf of London&quot; in 1935 (not to be confused with the 1981 film of a similar title), establishing the canon that the werewolf always kills what he loves the most. The main werewolf of this film was a dapper London scientist who retained some of his style and most of his human features after his transformation.

However, he lacked warmth, and it was left to the tragic character Laurence Stewart &quot;Larry&quot; Talbot played by Lon Chaney Jr. in 1941&#x27;s &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; to capture the public imagination. This catapulted the werewolf into public consciousness. The theme of lycanthropy as a disease or curse reached its standard treatment in the film, which contained the now-famous rhyme:

This movie draws on elements of traditional folklore and fiction, such as the vulnerability of the werewolf to a silver bullet (as seen for instance in the legend of Beast of Gévaudan), though at the climax of the film, the Wolf Man is actually dispatched with a silver-handled cane.

While the process of transmogrification is sometimes portrayed in such films and works of literature to be painful, other works omit this aspect in favor of a loss of consciousness during the change and even an inability to recall the event. Regardless, the resulting wolf is typically cunning but merciless, and prone to killing and eating people without compunction, regardless of the moral character of the person when human.

Lon Chaney Jr. himself became somewhat typecast as the Wolf Man and reprised his role in several sequels for Universal Studios. In these films, the werewolf lore of the first film was clarified. In &quot;Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man&quot; (1943) it is firmly established that the Wolf Man is revived from the dead at a night of the full moon after his grave was disturbed. In &quot;House of Frankenstein&quot; (1944), silver bullets are used for the first time to dispatch him. Further sequels were &quot;House of Dracula&quot; (1945) and the parodic &quot;Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein&quot; (1948).

The success of Universal&#x27;s &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; prompted rival Hollywood film companies Columbia Pictures and Fox Studios to bring out their own, now somewhat obscure, werewolf films. The first of these was &quot;The Undying Monster&quot; produced by Fox in 1942, adapted from a werewolf novel of the same name by Jessie Douglas Kerruish, published in 1936.

In 1981, two prominent werewolf films, &quot;The Howling&quot; and &quot;An American Werewolf in London&quot;, both drew on themes from the Universal series. While the werewolves in &quot;The Howling&quot; resembled bipedal wolves, the one in &quot;An American Werewolf in London&quot; had a more quadrupedal form with longer claws, a short tail, and finger-like structures on its front paws. The later had a follow-up called &quot;An American Werewolf in Paris&quot;.

===In television===

===In games===
As a well-known and iconic creature type, lycanthropes, and particularly werewolves, are central to a variety of games, including board games, role-playing games, and video games.

These include a number of games where lycanthropes are either incidental villains, or the primary villain of the game, as well as games that allow players to play as a lycanthrope. It has been noted with respect to video games in particular that werewolves are &quot;most often presented in videogames as mindless, slavering enemies&quot;, though some games do provide a more nuanced presentation.

In more rare cases, they feature as NPCs, such as the character Witherfang from &quot;Dragon Age: Origins&quot; (2009), who is not strictly evil and was created as an act of revenge, or even the game&#x27;s protagonist, as in the case of Bigby Wolf from &quot;The Wolf Among Us&quot; (2013), a noir adventure game based on the eponymous comic book series that includes characters inspired by fairy tales. &quot;The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess&quot; (2006) causes the series&#x27; recurring main character, Link, to become a werewolf, a transformation induced by a magical &quot;Twilight&quot; that has spread across the realm. In wolf form, he is ridden and guided by the imp Midna. While the idea was praised as fun to control, it also proved divisive, seen as a &quot;gimmick&quot; in comparison to controlling Link as a sword-wielding human.

Werewolves have long been a race in the tabletop game &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. In the game&#x27;s 5th edition, its most recent version, werewolves are weak to silver, and can shift between human, wolf, and hybrid humanoid forms, being able to use weapons in both human and hybrid form.

====&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;====
In &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, a lycanthrope ( or ) is a humanoid shapeshifter based on various legends of lycanthropes, werecats, and other such beings. In addition to the werewolf, in &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, weretigers, wereboars, werebears and other shapeshifting creatures similar to werewolves and related beings are considered lycanthropes, although traditionally, the term &quot;lycanthrope&quot; refers to a wolf-human combination exclusively. The presence of lycanthropes in the gaming system is one of the elements that has led Christian fundamentalists to condemn &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; and to associate it with the occult.

===== Description =====
In the standard &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; rules, lycanthropy is both hereditary (the children of lycanthropes are lycanthropes of the same type) and infectious (victims of lycanthrope bites become lycanthropes themselves, of the same type as the attacker). The rules distinguish between natural and afflicted lycanthropes, according to the cause of lycanthropy, and handle them by different rules.

Hereditary lycanthropes can change shape at will, and retain their personality, being in control of their actions. Infected lycanthropes&#x27; shapechanges are affected by the full moon. They usually are not aware of their actions and act as aggressive predators. Lycanthropes can assume the form of an animal/humanoid hybrid, in addition to their animal form. Most lycanthropes in animal form can communicate with animals of their type. In humanoid form, they can use any weapon, and in animal form they use natural weapons like the corresponding animals, but each type has a different fighting style in hybrid form. An illustration in one edition of the Monster Manual implied that the beast in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; was a lycanthrope, with a creature having a resemblance to the Beast attacking a human resembling that film&#x27;s antagonist, Gaston.

&quot;Screen Rant&quot; has described the operation of lycanthropy in the game as an aspect that &quot;makes no sense&quot; because it is often a positive development for a character. &quot;It is possible for a character to be infected with lycanthropy in Dungeons &amp; Dragons and it comes highly recommended, as the benefits outweigh the negatives&quot;. It notes that &quot;[i]n exchange for learning how to control your condition, you gain Damage Reduction, +2 to your Wisdom stat, the Scent ability, Low-Light Vision, a new Hit Dice, the Iron Will feat, and the ability to transform into a more powerful form&quot;. Like many examples of werewolves in modern fiction, &quot;D&amp;D&quot;&#x27;s werewolves and other lycanthropes are vulnerable to silver and highly resistant to other kinds of harm.

The archetypal lycanthrope, the werewolf, was ranked sixth among the ten best low-level monsters by the authors of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons For Dummies&quot;. The authors described the werewolf as &quot;a classic monster&quot; and &quot;the best illustration of a monster with damage reduction; unless characters have a silver weapon, they will have a hard time hurting this creature&quot;. The authors also note that &quot;Werewolves are shapechangers, which means players can never be entirely sure whether that surly villager might indeed be the great black wolf who attacked their characters out in the forest.&quot; The werewolf is also fully detailed in Paizo Publishing&#x27;s book &quot;Classic Horrors Revisited&quot; (2009), on pages 58–63.

====&quot;Werewolf: The Apocalypse&quot;====
Another role-playing game featuring the creature is &quot;&quot; from the &quot;Classic World of Darkness&quot; line by White Wolf Publishing. Other related products include the Collectible card games named &quot;Rage&quot; and several novels (including one series). In the game, players take the role of werewolves known as &quot;Garou&quot; (from the French &quot;loup garou&quot;). These werewolves are locked in a two-front war against both the spiritual desolation of urban civilization and supernatural forces of corruption that seek to bring about the Apocalypse. Game supplements detail other shapeshifters.

Along with the other titles in the &quot;World of Darkness&quot;, &quot;Werewolf&quot; was discontinued in 2004. Its successor title within the &quot;Chronicles of Darkness&quot; line, &quot;&quot;, was released on March 14, 2005. A fifth edition is in development. The books have been reprinted since 2011 as part of the &quot;Classic World of Darkness&quot; line.

====Video games====
Numerous video games have featured lycanthropes, both as antagonists of the player, and as playable characters.

*&quot;Knight Lore&quot; (1984)
*&quot;Altered Beast&quot; (1988) allows the player to take various creature forms over the course of the game, including a wolf, dragon, bear, tiger, and golden wolf.
*&quot;&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Shining Force&quot; (1992)
*&quot;&quot; (1994) features a &quot;cyborg werewolf&quot; wearing &quot;rad sunglasses&quot; and named Brad Fang
*&quot;Darkstalkers&quot; (1994), features a playable werewolf named Jon Talbain
*&quot;Nightmare Creatures&quot; (1997)
*&quot;&quot; (1999)
*&quot;The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Wolf Team&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Sonic Unleashed&quot; (2008) is another of the few games to feature another form of lycanthrope, with the protagonist turning into a werehog
*&quot;Dragon Age: Origins&quot; (2009)
*&quot;&quot; (2010)
*&quot;The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Keyboard Drumset Fucking Werewolf&quot; (2011), a promotional video game made for the band Fucking Werewolf Asso
*&quot;Blood of the Werewolf&quot; (2013)
*&quot;The Wolf Among Us&quot; (2013–2014)
*&quot;Bloodborne&quot; (2015)
*&quot;The Order: 1886&quot; (2015)
*&quot;Werewolves Within&quot; (2016)
*&quot;&quot; (2021)
*&quot;The Quarry&quot; (2022)

Some games have been noted to feature werewolf-like creatures, but without the element of lycanthrope. For example, in &quot;Pokémon&quot;, Zoroark has such an appearance as the final form of what previously appears as another creature.

====Other kinds of games====
&quot;Ultimate Werewolf&quot;, a card game designed by Ted Alspach and published by Bézier Games, is based on the social deduction game, &quot;Werewolf&quot;, which is Andrew Plotkin&#x27;s reinvention of Dimitry Davidoff&#x27;s 1987 game, &quot;Mafia&quot;. The &quot;Werewolf&quot; game appeared in many forms before Bézier Games published &quot;Ultimate Werewolf&quot; in 2008.

==See also==
*List of werewolves
*Werewoman

==References==
==Further reading==
*Black, George Fraser. &quot;A List of Works Relating to Lycanthropy&quot;. New York: New York Public Library Publications, 1919. (earliest published list of werewolf fiction)
*Du Coudray, Chantal Bourgault. &quot;The Curse of the Werewolf&quot;. London : I. B. Tauris, 2006. (book on literary symbolism of the werewolf)
*Flores, Nona C. &quot;Animals in the Middle Ages: A Book of Essays&quot;. New York: Garland, 1996. (contains learned commentary on William of Palerne)
*Frost, Brian J. &quot;The Essential Guide to Werewolf Literature&quot;. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press 2003. (contains long lists of novels and short stories, especially pre-1970s ones, with excerpts)
*Steiger, Brad. &quot;The Werewolf Book: The Encyclopedia of Shapeshifting Beings&quot;. Visible Ink Press, 1999. (contains long list of films, medium-sized list of novels)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21683804" start="0" end="16" title="Werewolf fiction" label="Werewolf fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="42" end="52" title="Werewolf" label="werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="63" end="91" title="Shapeshifting" label="shapeshifting therianthropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="180" end="188" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="190" end="196" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="198" end="202" title="saga" label="saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="204" end="215" title="fairy tales" label="fairy tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="217" end="223" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="228" end="242" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="244" end="259" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q431873" start="382" end="394" title="The Wolf Man (1941 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="444" end="464" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="469" end="482" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="694" end="709" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="755" end="761" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="773" end="777" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="1138" end="1145" title="Romance (heroic literature)" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q866273" start="1162" end="1172" title="Bisclavret" label="Bisclavret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120413" start="1189" end="1209" title="Guillaume de Palerme" label="Guillaume de Palerme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737172" start="1301" end="1315" title="Knight errant" label="knights errant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1369" end="1377" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1378" end="1386" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="1407" end="1414" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q919581" start="1572" end="1588" title="The Phantom Ship" label="The Phantom Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692850" start="1605" end="1612" title="Marryat" label="Marryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="1634" end="1646" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q933339" start="1808" end="1826" title="Werewolf of London" label="Werewolf of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q431873" start="1890" end="1902" title="The Wolf Man (1941 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="1996" end="2006" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="2013" end="2035" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2119" end="2140" title="The Bloody Chamber#The Company of Wolves" label="The Company of Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q234519" start="2157" end="2170" title="Angela Carter" label="Angela Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q609936" start="2191" end="2206" title="The Company of Wolves" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475136" start="2233" end="2245" title="Ginger Snaps (film)" label="Ginger Snaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q815608" start="2327" end="2342" title="Red Riding Hood (2011 film)" label="Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189226" start="2354" end="2369" title="Amanda Seyfried" label="Amanda Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q301545" start="2607" end="2633" title="Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index" label="Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179360" start="3189" end="3222" title="Animal as Bridegroom" label="&amp;quot;The Animal Bridegroom&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q113269566" start="3465" end="3491" title="The White Wolf (fairy tale)" label="&amp;quot;The White Wolf&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q108803822" start="3519" end="3530" title="Prince Wolf" label="Prince Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q495442" start="3612" end="3632" title="Beauty and the Beast" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="4698" end="4711" title="Gothic horror" label="Gothic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q467770" start="4938" end="4955" title="Frederick Marryat" label="Frederick Marryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q919581" start="4974" end="4990" title="The Phantom Ship" label="The Phantom Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102010" start="5242" end="5259" title="G. W. M. Reynolds" label="G. W. M. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506690" start="5350" end="5369" title="Deal with the Devil" label="Deal with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="5418" end="5429" title="Faust" label="Dr. Faustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520344" start="5519" end="5533" title="Leitch Ritchie" label="Leitch Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537956" start="5588" end="5603" title="Catherine Crowe" label="Catherine Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376560" start="5772" end="5787" title="The Wolf Leader" label="The Wolf Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="5804" end="5819" title="Alexandre Dumas" label="Alexandre Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348668" start="5861" end="5878" title="Erckmann-Chatrian" label="Erckmann-Chatrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="5903" end="5925" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="5939" end="5976" title="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" label="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q368831" start="6038" end="6050" title="Colin Wilson" label="Colin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="6134" end="6140" title="BBC TV" label="BBC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686621" start="6154" end="6160" title="Jekyll (TV series)" label="Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710832" start="6198" end="6204" title="Olalla (short story)" label="Olalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="6273" end="6310" title="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" label="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q315176" start="6386" end="6403" title="Charles De Coster" label="Charles De Coster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6428" end="6476" title="The Legend of Thyl Ulenspiegel and Lamme Goedzak#The Werewolf Murders" label="The Legend of Thyl Ulenspiegel and Lamme Goedzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q323408" start="6539" end="6544" title="Damme" label="Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="6929" end="6941" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131232" start="7036" end="7052" title="Clemence Housman" label="Clemence Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q507991" start="7318" end="7336" title="Algernon Blackwood" label="Algernon Blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711670" start="7436" end="7447" title="Edwin Gerald Jones Biss" label="Gerald Biss"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="7527" end="7540" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="7578" end="7589" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q784797" start="7653" end="7667" title="H. Warner Munn" label="H. Warner Munn"/>
<link wikidata="Q951250" start="7669" end="7682" title="Seabury Quinn" label="Seabury Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981210" start="7687" end="7705" title="Manly Wade Wellman" label="Manly Wade Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207640" start="7707" end="7723" title="Robert E. Howard" label="Robert E. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q27940692" start="7772" end="7781" title="Wolfshead" label="Wolfshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774250" start="7853" end="7874" title="The Werewolf of Paris" label="The Werewolf of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q586776" start="7907" end="7917" title="Guy Endore" label="Guy Endore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="8005" end="8012" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193475" start="8067" end="8092" title="The Curse of the Werewolf" label="The Curse of the Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="8111" end="8134" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Film Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8216" end="8223" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q261223" start="8231" end="8242" title="Aino Kallas" label="Aino Kallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q146530" start="8326" end="8333" title="Hiiumaa" label="Hiiumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090951" start="8491" end="8502" title="Les Whitten" label="Les Whitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907619" start="8549" end="8565" title="Moon of the Wolf" label="Moon of the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="8601" end="8613" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208657" start="8659" end="8670" title="Remus Lupin" label="Remus Lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174097" start="8672" end="8701" title="Defence Against the Dark Arts" label="Defence Against the Dark Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q181291" start="8800" end="8815" title="Fenrir Greyback" label="Fenrir Greyback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628318" start="8958" end="8970" title="The Werewolf (1913 film)" label="The Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q165932" start="8994" end="9004" title="Wolf Blood" label="Wolf Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="9056" end="9071" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q933339" start="9091" end="9109" title="Werewolf of London" label="Werewolf of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q467290" start="9153" end="9162" title="An American Werewolf in London" label="1981 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006190" start="9479" end="9520" title="Larry Talbot" label="Laurence Stewart &amp;quot;Larry&amp;quot; Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q318261" start="9531" end="9545" title="Lon Chaney Jr." label="Lon Chaney Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q431873" start="9567" end="9579" title="The Wolf Man (1941 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="9690" end="9701" title="lycanthropy" label="lycanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841402" start="9920" end="9933" title="silver bullet" label="silver bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211453" start="9973" end="9990" title="Beast of Gévaudan" label="Beast of Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="10113" end="10131" title="Shapeshifting" label="transmogrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="10631" end="10648" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444712" start="10726" end="10757" title="Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man" label="Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444746" start="10907" end="10928" title="House of Frankenstein (film)" label="House of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254460" start="11030" end="11046" title="House of Dracula" label="House of Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q306791" start="11082" end="11119" title="Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein" label="Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="11232" end="11249" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="11254" end="11265" title="20th Century Studios" label="Fox Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771431" start="11357" end="11376" title="The Undying Monster" label="The Undying Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170554" start="11548" end="11559" title="The Howling (film)" label="The Howling"/>
<link wikidata="Q467290" start="11576" end="11606" title="An American Werewolf in London" label="An American Werewolf in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q467283" start="11935" end="11964" title="An American Werewolf in Paris" label="An American Werewolf in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="12051" end="12062" title="lycanthrope" label="lycanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="12082" end="12092" title="werewolves" label="werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="12139" end="12149" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="12152" end="12169" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="12176" end="12186" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="12625" end="12629" title="NPCs" label="NPCs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12675" end="12694" title="Dragon Age: Origins" label="Dragon Age: Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834311" start="12827" end="12837" title="Bigby Wolf" label="Bigby Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427938" start="12849" end="12866" title="The Wolf Among Us" label="The Wolf Among Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940294" start="12883" end="12887" title="Noir fiction" label="noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="12888" end="12902" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="12981" end="12991" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13000" end="13038" title="The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess" label="The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q568553" start="13102" end="13106" title="Link (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266278" start="13268" end="13271" title="imp" label="imp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="13502" end="13524" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="13792" end="13814" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="13848" end="13856" title="Humanoid (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="13898" end="13910" title="lycanthropes" label="lycanthropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093615" start="13912" end="13919" title="werecat" label="werecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q113443316" start="13964" end="13972" title="Werewolf (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="14189" end="14200" title="lycanthrope" label="lycanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="14219" end="14223" title="wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="14224" end="14229" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559802" start="15690" end="15695" title="Beast (Disney character)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269136" start="15754" end="15760" title="Gaston (Beauty and the Beast)" label="Gaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="15769" end="15780" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889043" start="17233" end="17249" title="Paizo Publishing" label="Paizo Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506136" start="17450" end="17475" title="Old world of darkness" label="Classic World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433597" start="17490" end="17511" title="White Wolf Publishing" label="White Wolf Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="17548" end="17569" title="Collectible card game" label="Collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282845" start="17583" end="17587" title="Rage (collectible card game)" label="Rage"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17598" end="17612" title="List of Werewolf: The Apocalypse books#Novels" label="several novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="17675" end="17685" title="werewolf" label="werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="17971" end="17983" title="shapeshifter" label="shapeshifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506136" start="18137" end="18159" title="Chronicles of Darkness" label="Chronicles of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422991" start="18494" end="18505" title="Knight Lore" label="Knight Lore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355850" start="18526" end="18539" title="Altered Beast" label="Altered Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929072" start="18715" end="18728" title="Shining Force" label="Shining Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633506" start="18864" end="18876" title="Darkstalkers" label="Darkstalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354865" start="18926" end="18937" title="Jon Talbain" label="Jon Talbain"/>
<link wikidata="Q536833" start="18945" end="18964" title="Nightmare Creatures" label="Nightmare Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19006" end="19044" title="The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess" label="The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19065" end="19074" title="Wolf Team (video game)" label="Wolf Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150928" start="19095" end="19110" title="Sonic Unleashed" label="Sonic Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q191626" start="19197" end="19212" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (character)" label="the protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19243" end="19262" title="Dragon Age: Origins" label="Dragon Age: Origins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19304" end="19331" title="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim" label="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389836" start="19352" end="19385" title="Keyboard Drumset Fucking Werewolf" label="Keyboard Drumset Fucking Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874475" start="19472" end="19493" title="Blood of the Werewolf" label="Blood of the Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427938" start="19514" end="19531" title="The Wolf Among Us" label="The Wolf Among Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154554" start="19557" end="19567" title="Bloodborne" label="Bloodborne"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19588" end="19603" title="The Order: 1886" label="The Order: 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859350" start="19624" end="19641" title="Werewolves Within" label="Werewolves Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q111358923" start="19683" end="19693" title="The Quarry (video game)" label="The Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="19833" end="19840" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426042" start="19848" end="19855" title="Zoroark" label="Zoroark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880272" start="19981" end="19998" title="Ultimate Werewolf" label="Ultimate Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="20008" end="20017" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692957" start="20030" end="20041" title="Ted Alspach" label="Ted Alspach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005072" start="20059" end="20071" title="Bézier Games" label="Bézier Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q85801811" start="20089" end="20110" title="social deduction game" label="social deduction game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17265" start="20118" end="20126" title="Werewolf (social deduction game)" label="Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758285" start="20143" end="20157" title="Andrew Plotkin" label="Andrew Plotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17265" start="20221" end="20226" title="Mafia (party game)" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17265" start="20244" end="20252" title="Mafia (party game)" label="Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005072" start="20294" end="20306" title="Bézier Games" label="Bézier Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619799" start="20371" end="20389" title="List of werewolves" label="List of werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016142" start="20391" end="20400" title="Werewoman" label="Werewoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120413" start="20890" end="20908" title="William of Palerne" label="William of Palerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896633" start="20992" end="21021" title="University of Wisconsin Press" label="University of Wisconsin Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381864" wikidata="Q1788342" url="?curid=381864" title="Robert Gordon University">
<text>Robert Gordon University, commonly called RGU (), is a public university in the city of Aberdeen, Scotland. It became a university in 1992, and originated from an educational institution founded in the 18th century by Robert Gordon, an Aberdeen merchant, and various institutions which provided adult and technical education in the 19th and early 20th centuries. It is one of two universities in the city, the other being the University of Aberdeen. RGU is a campus university in Garthdee, in the south-west of the city.

The university awards degrees in a wide range of disciplines from BA/BSc to PhD, primarily in professional, technical, health and artistic disciplines and those most applicable to business and industry. A number of traditional academic degree programmes are also offered, such as in the social sciences. In addition, the university&#x27;s academic and research staff produce research in a number of areas.

==History==

The university derives from Robert Gordon&#x27;s Hospital, an institution set up in the mid-18th century to provide the poor with a basic education and reasonable start in life, and the various educational institutions which developed in Aberdeen to provide adults with technical, vocational and artistic training, mostly in the evenings and part-time. Following numerous mergers between these establishments, it became Robert Gordon&#x27;s Technical College in 1910, then following further developments became Robert Gordon&#x27;s Institute of Technology in 1965 and began to conduct increasing amounts of research and provide degree-level education. It became a university in 1992, and now mostly offering day classes to full-time students.

===1720s–1881: Founding institutions===
Robert Gordon was a Scottish merchant, who had grown up in Aberdeen and graduated from Marischal College. Following a successful career, mostly in Danzig where he amassed a fortune, he retired to Aberdeen around 1720. In the last decade of his life, he prepared plans for a Hospital similar to that founded in Edinburgh by George Heriot. The purpose of Robert Gordon&#x27;s Hospital was &quot;the Maintenance, Aliment, Entertainment and Education of young boys whose parents are poor and indigent... and to put them to Trades and Employment&quot;. Gordon died in 1731, and left his entire fortune to the project. However, it took nearly two decades for buildings to be completed, with the first boys admitted in 1750. The aim was not a sophisticated education, but to provide the poor with a reasonable start in life. Boys were taken in between 8 and 11 years old and received food, accommodation and a basic education including English, Latin, writing and arithmetic. They left the Hospital between 14 and 16 years old as an apprentice in a trade or to a merchant. The Hospital expanded through the 18th and 19th centuries.

Meanwhile, in the early 19th century, the Industrial Revolution led to a greater need for scientific and technical education for working-class adults, with Mechanics&#x27; Institutes spreading through Scotland, patterned on that founded by George Birkbeck at Glasgow (he would later found Birkbeck College, the University of London&#x27;s night school). The Aberdeen Mechanic&#x27;s Institution opened in 1824 providing evening classes in subjects such as physics, chemistry, mathematics, book-keeping, maritime navigation and art. By 1855 it was receiving government funding as the School of Science and Art, with a Technical School founded two years later.

===1881–1910: Robert Gordon&#x27;s College===

Government education reforms in the 1870s saw the Hospital system fall out of favour and encouraged mergers with other educational establishments. As part of these reforms, the Aberdeen Mechanic&#x27;s Institute and Technical School merged with Robert Gordon&#x27;s Hospital in 1881. The resulting institution was known as Robert Gordon&#x27;s College. It provided an education for boys but as a day school only, and evening and later coeducational day classes for adults in science, technology, commerce and general subjects. Art classes offered by the Mechanic&#x27;s Institution were transferred to Gray&#x27;s School of Art which opened in 1885.

===1910–1965: Robert Gordon&#x27;s Technical College===

By the end of the 19th century, Robert Gordon&#x27;s College was a major provider of technical education, receiving large government grants. Following further reforms, in 1903 the adult education part of the college was designated a Central Institution along with Gray&#x27;s School of Art (which had become a Central Institution two years earlier), allowing the adult education activities to develop independently rather than under the control of the local School Board. However, even this was not sufficient to meet demand for technical education, and dedicated Technical Colleges were being set up in other Scottish cities. As a result, in 1910 adult education activities were split from the school and became Robert Gordon&#x27;s Technical College. Also merged into the new Technical College was the city&#x27;s School of Domestic Economy which provided classes in domestic science. The day school for boys continued as Robert Gordon&#x27;s College, and the two institutions shared a campus, buildings and until 1981, a Board of Governors and administrative staff.

During the 1920s, the first Ordinary and Higher Certificates and Diplomas were awarded, and by the 1930s Robert Gordon&#x27;s Technical College was made up of Schools of Engineering, Chemistry, Maths &amp; Physics, Pharmacy, Art (including architecture), Domestic Science, and Navigation. Around this time the first students began to be prepared for external degree examinations – for the University of Aberdeen&#x27;s BSc in engineering. A system of student governance also developed, with a Student Representative Council formed in 1931. In the closing years of World War II, candidates started to be prepared to sit exams for external degrees of the University of London, in subjects such as Chemistry and Engineering, but only via part-time and/or evening classes. After 1945, to aid with settling large numbers of returning soldiers into a career, the Government backed a Business Training Scheme which allowed the Technical College to introduce courses in Business Administration.

===1965–1992: Robert Gordon&#x27;s Institute of Technology===

In 1955, the Technical College received a large area of land. The architect Tom Scott Sutherland, purchased Garthdee House in 1953 and subsequently donated it and the estate in 1955 for a new school of architecture. These classes had taken place at Gray&#x27;s School of Art, but had been expanding in the 1940s and 1950s and much more space was needed. Following completion of an extension to the house, the new Scott Sutherland School of Architecture opened in 1957. In 1966, Gray&#x27;s School of Art also moved to a new building on this estate with its Schoolhill building being repurposed for administrative use. By 2013, all activities had transferred to Garthdee, with the addition of land immediately adjacent purchased from Aberdeen City Council in the 1990s.

The 1963 Robbins Report on the future of UK higher education recommended major expansion, which led to the renaming of the institution to Robert Gordon&#x27;s Institute of Technology to suggest its increasing role in higher education rather than further education. As well as new &quot;plate-glass&quot; universities, reforms following the report created the polytechnics in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. It also created the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA) to allow non-university institutions (like the polytechnics and Scottish central institutions) to run programmes that graduated students with CNAA degrees. The institute&#x27;s first CNAA degree programmes began in pharmacy in 1967, then in engineering, chemistry and physics in 1969, and expanded at undergraduate and postgraduate level to all disciplines. Around this time, the government also began to transfer non-degree teaching (e.g. certificate courses in navigation) to local-authority colleges.

During the 1960s, an academic committee structure was set up, headed from 1969 by an Academic Council. During the 1970s, these committees underwent expansion and reform to improve participation by academic staff in decision-making. For the first time, a faculty structure was introduced, with Faculties of Art &amp; Architecture, Engineering, Arts, and Sciences, led by deans. A department dedicated to providing computer services to the institute was also established in 1974, and the first professorships were introduced in 1975. In 1981, the separation of the Board of Governors and administration staff from Robert Gordon&#x27;s College was completed, although the school and Institute continued to share some buildings. Beginning in the 1970s, the institute also began to provide consultancy and training for the North Sea oil industry, particularly in engineering and offshore safety and survival.

===1992–present: The Robert Gordon University===

Following the reforms of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992, the institute was awarded university status as &quot;The Robert Gordon University&quot; on 12 June 1992. The new university inherited numerous small campuses, and during the late 1990s and 2000s embarked on large building projects to consolidate teaching at its City Centre and Garthdee campuses, assisted by a large purchase of land at Garthdee from Aberdeen City Council in the mid-1990s. As new Garthee facilities were completed, the majority of these previous campuses were sold as land for housing development (such as at Kepplestone and King Street), while City Centre facilities that were no longer required were often sold to Robert Gordon&#x27;s College, with the sale proceeds paying for the expansion and new construction at Garthdee. In the 1990s and 2000s student numbers also increased considerably, requiring new and larger facilities. A merger with the University of Aberdeen was discussed in 2002, but was rejected in favour of remaining separate but working in closer collaboration.

By 2000, the university had consolidated to two campuses, at Garthdee and a city centre campus at Schoolhill and St. Andrew Street in central Aberdeen. However, it had been planned since the early 1990s to eventually move all facilities to a single campus at Garthdee and additional land was purchased to enable buildings to be constructed to house academic departments which had been at the city centre campus. The first phase was completed in summer 2013 with the opening of the Sir Ian Wood building (formally opened in July 2015). As of August 2017, all academic and administrative departments are located at the Garthdee Campus, with the university retaining a space within the previous Administrative Building to host events and activities offering staff, students and alumni training and funding to develop business ideas.

===Controversies===
====Donald Trump honorary degree====
In 2010, RGU gained international attention for awarding an honorary degree to controversial American businessman Donald Trump. This was featured in the 2012 documentary film &quot;You&#x27;ve Been Trumped&quot; which documented the progress of the construction of Trump&#x27;s golf course near Aberdeen from the point of view of local residents. In the film Dr David Kennedy, former Principal of the university, is shown handing back his own honorary degree in protest at the university&#x27;s action in awarding the degree to Trump.

In December 2015 the university&#x27;s then Principal, Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski, announced he was reviewing the honorary degree and expressed his alarm at statements made by Donald Trump. Then on 9 December 2015 the honorary degree was revoked. RGU publicly stated: &quot;In the course of the current US election campaign (2016), Mr Trump has made a number of statements that are wholly incompatible with the ethos and values of the university. The university has therefore decided to revoke its award of the honorary degree&quot;. The revoking of Donald Trump&#x27;s honorary doctorate came in excess of 4 years after the businessman accused the then-incumbent US President Barack Obama of illegitimacy on the basis of unsubstantiated accusations that Obama was born in Kenya and therefore not a US citizen.

==== Vice Principal appointment ====
In May 2018 an internal probe was launched after an anonymous whistleblower noted that RGU&#x27;s newly appointed Vice-Principal for Commercial and Regional Innovation, Gordon McConnell, was co-director with Principal Ferdinand von Prondzynski in Knockdrin Estates Limited, a non-trading micro-company holding von Prondzynski&#x27;s family castle and estate. Published on 4 July 2018, the investigation found that McConnell &quot;did not declare in his declaration of interest form (completed in September 2017, following his appointment) that he was a director of Knockdrin Estates Limited&quot; as well as revealing that this form was co-signed by von Prondzynski as his line manager. The inquiry found that whilst the Principal failed to declare this link at the time of Gordon McConnell&#x27;s appointment, it also expressed the view of the board that he did not deliberately conceal any information.

The finding led to a letter of resignation from another of the three Vice-Principals, Paul Hagan, who condemned RGU for failing to punish the pair, stating that this damaged the institution. Hagan later withdrew his resignation in response to Prondzynski&#x27;s departure.

On 9 August 2018, von Prondzynski announced that he would voluntarily step down from his post on 31 August. In the same press release, RGU announced that Deputy Principal John Harper had already been appointed to succeed Prondzynski.

==Campus==

RGU operates a single campus in Garthdee, Aberdeen. For much of its history it was a greenfield site, with parts used as the gardens and estate of the Victorian manor of Garthdee House, farmland, and open meadows. The first university buildings were in use from the 1950s.
The Garthdee campus has seen more development in recent years, with new buildings constructed since the late 1990s.

The campus extends to , although some of this is currently landscaped parkland, undeveloped, or under construction. In addition, the university owns a further of land to the west (primarily woodland) and at Waterside Farm on the opposite bank of the River Dee.

===Former city centre facilities===
Until 2017 the university continued to operate one non-academic facility in the city-centre. The building at Schoolhill is situated next to the Aberdeen Art Gallery and Robert Gordon&#x27;s College, a private school which is no longer affiliated to the university but shares a common heritage and motto. The Administration Building is a listed building, constructed from granite like many buildings in Aberdeen.

Also located there was the old city centre campus. Many of these buildings were sold over the years to Robert Gordon&#x27;s College for school use, while others have been sold for redevelopment. In July 2014, the St. Andrew Street building (which had been replaced by the Sir Ian Wood building at the Garthdee campus) was sold to the Canadian hotel Sandman Hotels group to be converted to a four-star hotel. The 12,000 square metre building was constructed around 1908 and had served as the Aberdeen College of Education until purchased in 1968; the university claimed it to be the third-largest granite building in Europe, after the Spanish Escorial palace near Madrid, and Marischal College.

====Administration building====
The former Administration Building is located on Schoolhill. It initially housed Gray&#x27;s School of Art and was designed by the Aberdeen architect Alexander Marshall Mackenzie.
As the school grew in size, the building was extended in 1896 and again between 1928 and 1931. However, it eventually became too small and when the school moved to a new building at Garthdee in the 1960s, the building was converted for administrative use. From then until 2013 it housed the Principal&#x27;s office, which moved to Garthdee House at the Garthdee campus, followed by the administrative staff in 2017.

In 2019, the Administration building was redeveloped with Robert Gordon University retaining part of the building to host events and activities.

==Organisation and governance==
===Academic faculties===
Academic activities at the university are divided into 11 schools. Each school is led by a head of school and is sub-divided into departments. There are also numerous administrative departments which support the university&#x27;s activities. All academic Schools and Departments are based at the main Garthdee campus.

* Aberdeen Business School
* School of Applied Social Studies
* School of Computing
* School of Creative and Cultural Business
* School of Engineering
* Gray&#x27;s School of Art
* School of Health Sciences
* The Law School
* School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedic Practice
* School of Pharmacy and Life Sciences
* The Scott Sutherland School of Architecture &amp; Built Environment

===Governance===

Under the terms of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 and &quot;The Robert Gordon University (Scotland) Order of Council 1993&quot;, the university&#x27;s governing body comprises a Board of Governors, consisting of 23 governors appointed to exercise the functions of management and control. The official head of the university is the Chancellor, although in practice he or she acts mainly in a ceremonial or symbolic role. At an operational level, most of the day-to-day management and control of the institution is delegated to the Principal and Vice Chancellor (commonly known simply as the Principal). The Board of Governors also delegates functions relating to the overall planning, co-ordination, development and supervision of academic affairs to the university&#x27;s Academic Council. Both the Board of Governors and the Academic Council are supported by a wide range of committees.

Chancellors

* Sir Bob Reid (1992–2005)
* Sir Ian Wood KT (2005–2021)
*Dame Evelyn Glennie CH (2021–present)
At Scottish universities, the Principal of the university is its general chief executive and is the administrative head of the institution, second in precedence only to the Chancellor. This means that the day-to-day running and leadership of the university is the responsibility of the Principal.

Principal and Vice-Chancellors

*David A. Kennedy (1992–1997)
*William Stevely CBE (1997–2005)
*R. Michael Pittilo MBE (2005–2010)
*John Harper (acting) (2010–2011)
*Ferdinand von Prondzynski (2011–2018)
*John Harper (2018–2020)
*Steve Olivier (2020–present)

==Academic profile==

===Reputation and rankings===
In the subject league tables from &quot;The Guardian&quot;, it was first in Scotland for four subjects in 2017 (Health Professions; Journalism; Architecture; and Pharmacy), while securing three subjects in the UK top 10.

&quot;The Sunday Times&quot; awarded RGU the title of Best Modern University in the UK for 2012 in its &quot;University Guide 2012&quot;. The title had previously been won by Oxford Brookes University for each of the preceding ten years. RGU received the 2012 award partly due to ratings of the quality of teaching and research, but also due to its employment record which was judged the best of any UK university. RGU was also named as Best Modern University in the UK in &quot;The Times Good University Guide 2013&quot;.

==Symbols and identity==
The university&#x27;s logo and corporate identity make frequent use of the colour purple and the &quot;Gordon&quot; font, all of which appear extensively on campus signage, printed material and online. The current logo was unveiled in February 2013. From 2009 to 2013, the logo consisted of a roundel derived from the university&#x27;s coat of arms.

Most universities in the UK are designated by order of the Privy Council; unusually for a university named after an individual, according to &quot;Robert Gordon University (Scotland) Order of Council 1993&quot; the official name of the university includes the prefix &quot;The&quot; (as with George Washington University, Ohio State University and the College of William &amp; Mary). However, current university branding typically leaves it out although it is still used for graduation.

===Coat of Arms===

The coat of arms derives from the one issued by the Lord Lyon King of Arms (the state official responsible for heraldry in Scotland) to Robert Gordon&#x27;s Institute of Technology in 1982, which in turn derives from that first used in 1881 by the governors of Robert Gordon&#x27;s Hospital when it became Robert Gordon&#x27;s College. The arms consist of a shield only and are used infrequently, usually at formal occasions such as graduation, and can also be seen over the main entrance to the university&#x27;s Administration Building at Schoolhill and various academic buildings at the main campus at Garthdee. The shield also formed the previous logo which still features on some older signage.

On the left side of the arms, the three boars on a blue background edged in gold are taken from the arms of the Gordon family, while on the right the castle on a red background is taken from the arms of the City of Aberdeen. This symbol of the city is shared with the arms of the University of Aberdeen. A black wavy band divides the two sides, and features heraldic symbols in gold representing technology (a mechanical cog), learning (a flaming torch) and commerce (a gold coin).

===Motto===
The university&#x27;s motto is &quot;Omni Nunc Arte Magistra&quot;, which translates literally from Latin as &quot;&quot;Now by all your mastered arts...&quot;, as if to suggest making use in everyday life of knowledge and skills gained. It is sometimes translated as &quot;Make the best of all your abilities&quot;&quot;, although this is a somewhat more liberal rendering of the Latin. It comes from Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Book VIII, line 441, as the god Vulcan encourages his workers at the forge. It shares this motto with Robert Gordon&#x27;s College, who use it more frequently. Unlike some universities, the motto is not seen frequently, although it has appeared in graduation materials and is engraved on the shaft of the university&#x27;s ceremonial mace.

===Tartan===

Like most Scottish universities, RGU has its own tartan; it mirrors the university&#x27;s official colours of Royal Blue, Red and Gold which appear on the coat of arms (although the purple brand is now the recognised face of the university). The tartan was designed by Michael King in 1997. Some students on their graduation day choose to wear a tartan kilt.

==Student life==

In 2023/2024 there were 18,000 students studying on campus and online.

As well as full-time and part-time on-campus study, the university provides a range of distance learning facilities over the internet via its virtual learning environment, CampusMoodle.

===Student Association===
The first Student Representative Council was organised at Robert Gordon&#x27;s Technical College in 1931, with activities such as sports clubs and societies following in the 1940s. A Student Union building opening in 1952 at Rubislaw Terrace in the city&#x27;s West End. In 1969, the shop and bakery next to Gray&#x27;s School of Art (now the ONE Tech Hub) on Schoolhill came on the market and were purchased by Robert Gordon&#x27;s Institute of Technology. The Student Union building opened there in 1974 and remained until its closure in July 2014 as the campus relocated to Garthdee. RGU:Union moved to Union Way by RGU Sport, and as of 2021 is now located within the Riverside Building.

===Student media===

RGU:Union operates a student media program with RGU:Radio, RGU:TV and &quot;Radar Magazine&quot;. The student radio station, called RGU:Radio broadcasts live from a studio on campus, running a number of shows from music to current affairs. Broadcasts are streamed and regular podcasts are posted online.

RGU:TV produces regular videos about campus events, topical issues and student life and distributed them online through a YouTube channel.

&quot;Radar Magazine&quot; is a full-colour printed publication which is published three or four times each year. It features articles written by students covering campus events, student life, music, news, reviews, entertainment, fashion, sport and more. The magazine also has an online website where articles are posted regularly by students.

===Accommodation===
The university&#x27;s Accommodation Services department arranges for students to be placed in one of nine halls of residence across the city.

By far the largest of the halls of residence are the Woolmanhill Flats at St. Andrew Street. The Woolmanhill flats have over 700 one-person bedrooms, arranged in self-catering flats of up to eight. The Woolmanhill Flats development was constructed in stages in the late 1980s and early 1990s by the university working in collaboration with a private developer. The newest hall of residence is the Crathie Student Village on Holburn Street, and houses approximately 100 students.

Other halls of residence include two buildings on the Garthdee Campus; the Square Tower and the Round Tower. These distinctive pink buildings were constructed in the early 1990s and inspired by traditional Scottish tower houses. They have received architectural acclaim by critics and are included in &quot;Prospect&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the 100 best Scottish modern buildings. When the list was published in 2005, the Round and Square Towers were the only buildings in Aberdeen to be included. A number of other halls of residence across the city are used, some operated in-house by RGU and others by private companies. These include Rosemount Halls, St. Peter&#x27;s Halls and Linksfield Halls which were constructed by the University of Aberdeen and then privatised in the early 2000s. Students also have access to the private halls of residence in Aberdeen which are operated on a commercial basis by specialist companies, such as those owned and operated by the Unite Group.

===Sports===
RGU SPORT at the Garthdee campus provides a wide range of sport and fitness facilities to the university community as well as to the general public. Facilities include a 25m pool, various gyms with extensive facilities for cardiovascular training and resistance training (including free weights), a large sports hall (also used for exams), climbing wall, numerous fitness classes, physiotherapy, podiatry and sports massage. Students can obtain a gym membership free of charge and staff and graduates of the university receive a discount on use of these facilities.

There are over 32 campus sports clubs run by RGU:Union, and the university competes in Scottish Student Sport (SSS) and British Universities and Colleges Sport (BUCS) competitions.

Swimmer Hannah Miley studied at RGU until 2013 and appeared in publicity for the university. A sport scholar program provides support for the athletic and academic careers of developing and elite athletes, including coaching, access to training facilities and financial assistance, as well as flexibility in fitting training around the academic timetable.

The Robert Gordon University Boat Club contests the annual Aberdeen Universities Boat Race each Spring against the University of Aberdeen. RGU were victorious in 2012 2013, 2014, 2015. and 2016.

The two universities also compete annually in the Granite City Challenge which sees teams across a range of sports compete to be the best in the city.

===Notable alumni===

* Gordon Duthie (born 1987), musician, singer/songwriter
* Ola Gorie, jewellery designer
* Maxwell Hutchinson, architect and broadcaster, guitarist with Lene Lovich
* Eilidh Middleton, equestrian competitor
* Hannah Miley, swimmer and Olympian
* Callum Innes, Turner Prize-nominated artist
* Titi Horsfall, author
* Alan J. Jamieson, marine biologist

== See also ==
* Armorial of UK universities
* List of universities in the United Kingdom
* Universities in Scotland

==References==
==External links==

*Robert Gordon University website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1788342" start="0" end="24" title="Robert Gordon University" label="Robert Gordon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788342" start="42" end="45" title="Robert Gordon University" label="RGU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="55" end="72" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="88" end="96" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="98" end="106" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344866" start="218" end="231" title="Robert Gordon (philanthropist)" label="Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="426" end="448" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028741" start="459" end="476" title="campus university" label="campus university"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524403" start="480" end="488" title="Garthdee" label="Garthdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="588" end="594" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="BA/BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="598" end="601" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344866" start="1726" end="1739" title="Robert Gordon (philanthropist)" label="Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="1813" end="1830" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1873" end="1879" title="Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507569" start="2049" end="2062" title="George Heriot" label="George Heriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2894" end="2915" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804572" start="3008" end="3034" title="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institutes" label="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536992" start="3092" end="3107" title="George Birkbeck" label="George Birkbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q375606" start="3141" end="3157" title="Birkbeck College" label="Birkbeck College"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="3163" end="3183" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344852" start="3882" end="3910" title="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College" label="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="3994" end="4007" title="coeducational" label="coeducational"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598125" start="4161" end="4186" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062105" start="4500" end="4519" title="Central Institution" label="Central Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="5136" end="5152" title="domestic science" label="domestic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344852" start="5191" end="5219" title="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College" label="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="5614" end="5624" title="Navigation" label="Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474817" start="5687" end="5702" title="external degree" label="external degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310138" start="5830" end="5860" title="Student Representative Council" label="Student Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474817" start="5966" end="5981" title="external degree" label="external degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="6299" end="6322" title="Business Administration" label="Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21546954" start="6464" end="6484" title="Thomas Scott Sutherland" label="Tom Scott Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437338" start="6801" end="6840" title="Scott Sutherland School of Architecture and Built Environment" label="Scott Sutherland School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425849" start="7121" end="7142" title="Aberdeen City Council" label="Aberdeen City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118956" start="7167" end="7181" title="Robbins Report" label="Robbins Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="7404" end="7421" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902446" start="7438" end="7474" title="Plate glass university" label="&amp;quot;plate-glass&amp;quot; universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227020" start="7517" end="7529" title="Polytechnic (United Kingdom)" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176305" start="7590" end="7626" title="Council for National Academic Awards" label="Council for National Academic Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062105" start="7707" end="7726" title="central institution" label="central institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="8097" end="8107" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475782" start="8224" end="8240" title="Academic council" label="Academic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="8393" end="8410" title="Faculty (division)" label="faculty structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="8509" end="8514" title="Dean (education)" label="deans"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="8631" end="8640" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="8957" end="8970" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091069" start="9123" end="9160" title="Further and Higher Education Act 1992" label="Further and Higher Education Act 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="10031" end="10053" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11166" end="11178" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056695" start="11233" end="11257" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Been Trumped" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Been Trumped"/>
<link wikidata="Q209465" start="13895" end="13901" title="campus" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524403" start="13905" end="13913" title="Garthdee" label="Garthdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018455" start="13958" end="13973" title="Greenfield land" label="greenfield site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666883" start="14705" end="14725" title="Aberdeen Art Gallery" label="Aberdeen Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344852" start="14730" end="14758" title="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College" label="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="14898" end="14913" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787101" start="14950" end="14971" title="Architecture of Aberdeen" label="buildings in Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416419" start="15323" end="15337" title="Sandman Hotels" label="Sandman Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="15616" end="15624" title="Escorial" label="Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="15649" end="15666" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598125" start="15782" end="15807" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719556" start="15851" end="15879" title="Alexander Marshall Mackenzie" label="Alexander Marshall Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598125" start="16973" end="16998" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437338" start="17139" end="17206" title="Scott Sutherland School of Architecture and Built Environment" label="The Scott Sutherland School of Architecture &amp;amp; Built Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091069" start="17249" end="17297" title="Further and Higher Education Act 1992" label="Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="17579" end="17589" title="Chancellor (education)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245047" start="17838" end="17847" title="Principal (academia)" label="Principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15047487" start="18183" end="18191" title="Ian Wood (businessman)" label="Ian Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="18192" end="18194" title="Order of the Thistle" label="KT"/>
<link wikidata="Q239275" start="18213" end="18227" title="Evelyn Glennie" label="Evelyn Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="18228" end="18230" title="Order of the Companions of Honour" label="CH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848401" start="18643" end="18658" title="Michael Pittilo" label="Michael Pittilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443935" start="18710" end="18735" title="Ferdinand von Prondzynski" label="Ferdinand von Prondzynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="19084" end="19100" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q132478" start="19253" end="19278" title="Oxford Brookes University" label="Oxford Brookes University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19557" end="19593" title="Rankings of universities in the United Kingdom#The Times/The Sunday Times" label="The Times Good University Guide 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="20037" end="20050" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="20270" end="20298" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="20300" end="20321" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="20330" end="20359" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="20538" end="20560" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="20597" end="20605" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="21394" end="21410" title="Aberdeen" label="City of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644438" start="21686" end="21709" title="List of university mottos" label="university&amp;#x27;s motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="21782" end="21787" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="22084" end="22090" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="22104" end="22110" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640" start="22150" end="22156" title="Vulcan (mythology)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432431" start="22441" end="22456" title="ceremonial mace" label="ceremonial mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="22522" end="22528" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="23010" end="23027" title="distance learning" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q694007" start="23065" end="23093" title="virtual learning environment" label="virtual learning environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190434" start="23095" end="23107" title="Moodle" label="CampusMoodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="24765" end="24783" title="hall of residence" label="halls of residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535658" start="25497" end="25509" title="Tower houses in Britain and Ireland" label="tower houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899993" start="25583" end="25619" title="Prospect (architecture magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Prospect&amp;quot; magazine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250725" start="25632" end="25666" title="Prospect 100 best modern Scottish buildings" label="100 best Scottish modern buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250855" start="26257" end="26268" title="Unite Group" label="Unite Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152037" start="26507" end="26530" title="Aerobic exercise" label="cardiovascular training"/>
<link wikidata="Q12834857" start="26535" end="26554" title="Strength training" label="resistance training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437993" start="26938" end="26960" title="Scottish Student Sport" label="Scottish Student Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971186" start="26971" end="27010" title="British Universities and Colleges Sport" label="British Universities and Colleges Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q443809" start="27041" end="27053" title="Hannah Miley" label="Hannah Miley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344874" start="27394" end="27428" title="Robert Gordon University Boat Club" label="Robert Gordon University Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585088" start="27762" end="27775" title="Gordon Duthie" label="Gordon Duthie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082848" start="27819" end="27828" title="Ola Gorie" label="Ola Gorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796113" start="27851" end="27869" title="Maxwell Hutchinson" label="Maxwell Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q450618" start="27913" end="27924" title="Lene Lovich" label="Lene Lovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349513" start="27927" end="27943" title="Eilidh Middleton" label="Eilidh Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q443809" start="27969" end="27981" title="Hannah Miley" label="Hannah Miley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022963" start="28006" end="28018" title="Callum Innes" label="Callum Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66685172" start="28052" end="28065" title="Titi Horsfall" label="Titi Horsfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q44462701" start="28076" end="28092" title="Alan Jamieson" label="Alan J. Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="28129" end="28156" title="Armorial of UK universities" label="Armorial of UK universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="28159" end="28201" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom" label="List of universities in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104421" start="28204" end="28228" title="Universities in Scotland" label="Universities in Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381865" wikidata="Q185332" url="?curid=381865" title="Satu Mare">
<text>Satu Mare (; ; ; or ) is a city with a population of 102,400 (2011). It is the capital of Satu Mare County, Romania, as well as the centre of the Satu Mare metropolitan area. It lies in the region of Maramureș, broadly part of Transylvania. Mentioned in the &quot;Gesta Hungarorum&quot; as (&quot;Zotmar&#x27;s fort&quot;), the city has a history going back to the Middle Ages. Today, it is an academic, cultural, industrial, and business centre in the Nord-Vest development region.

==Geography==
Satu Mare is situated in Satu Mare County, in northwest Romania, on the river Someș, from the border with Hungary and from the border with Ukraine. The city is located at an altitude of on the Lower Someș alluvial plain, spreading out from the Administrative Palace at 25 October Square. The boundaries of the municipality contain an area of .

From a geomorphologic point of view, the city is located on the Someș Meadow on both sides of the river, which narrows in the vicinity of the city and widens upstream and downstream from it; flooded during heavy rainfall, the field has various geographical configurations at the edge of the city (sand banks, valleys, micro-depressions).

The formation of the current terrain of the city, dating from the late Pliocene in the Tertiary period, is linked to the clogging of the Pannonian Sea. Layers of soil were created from deposits of sand, loess and gravel, and generally have a thickness of –. Over this base, decaying vegetation gave rise to podsolic soils, which led to favorable conditions for crops (cereals, vegetables, fruit trees).

The water network around Satu Mare is composed of the Someș River, Pârâul Sar in the north and the Homorod River in the south. The formation and evolution of the city was closely related to the Someș River, which, in addition to allowing for the settlement of a human community around it, has offered, since the early Middle Ages, the possibility of international trade with coastal regions, a practice that favored milling, fishing and other economic activities.

Because the land slopes gently around the city, the Someș River has created numerous branches and meanders (before 1777, in the perimeter of the city there were 25 meanders downstream and 14 upstream). After systematisation works in 1777, the number of meanders in the city dropped to 9 and 5 upstream, the total length of the river now being at within the city. Systematisation performed up to the mid-19th century configured the existing Someș riverbed; embankments were built long on the right bank and on the left. In 1970, the embankments were raised by –, protecting 52,000 hectares within the city limits and restoring nearly 800 ha of agricultural land that had previously been flooded.

===Flora and fauna===
The flora associated with the town of Satu Mare is characteristic for the meadow area with trees of soft essence like wicker, indigenous poplar, maple and hazelnut. Grassland vegetation is represented by &quot;Agrostis stolonifera&quot;, &quot;Poa trivialis&quot;, &quot;Alopecurus pratensis&quot; and other types of vegetation.

The city&#x27;s largest park, the Garden of Rome, features some rare trees that are uncommon to the area, including the pagoda tree, native to East Asia (especially China); &quot;Pterocarya&quot;, also native to Asia; and &quot;Paulownia tomentosa&quot;, native to central and western China.

Fauna is represented by species of rodents (hamster and european ground squirrel), reptiles, including &quot;Vipera berus&quot; in the Noroieni forest, and as avifauna species of ducks, geese, egrets, during passages and systematic occasional wanderings.

===Climate===
Satu Mare has a continental climate, characterised by hot dry summers and cold winters. As the city is in the far north of the country, winter is much colder than the national average, with minimum temperatures reaching , lower than values recorded in other cities in western Romania like Oradea () or Timișoara (). The average annual temperature is , or broken down by seasons: Spring , summer , autumn and winter . Atmospheric humidity is quite high. Prevailing wind currents blow in from the northwest, bringing spring and summer rainfall. Climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is &quot;Cfb&quot; (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).
==Name==
The Hungarian name of the town &quot;Szatmár&quot; is believed to come from the personal name &quot;Zotmar&quot;, as the 13th-century &quot;Gesta Hungarorum&quot; gives the name of the 10th-century fortified settlement at the site of today&#x27;s Satu Mare as (&quot;Zotmar&#x27;s fort&quot;). The name &quot;Satu Mare&quot;, which means &quot;great village&quot; in Romanian, was used for the first time by the priest Moise Sora Novac in the 19th century. An older Romanian name, &quot;Sătmar&quot;, was formally replaced by the current one in 1925.

==History==
Archaeological evidence from Țara Oașului, Ardud, Medieșu Aurit, Homoroade, etc. clearly shows settlements in the area dating to the Stone Age and the Bronze Age. There is also evidence that the local Dacian population remained there after the Roman conquest in 101/106 AD. Later, these lands may have formed part of Menumorut&#x27;s holdings; one of the important defensive fortresses – , dating to the 10th century – was at Satu Mare, as mentioned in the &quot;Gesta Hungarorum&quot;. After Stephen I of Hungary created the Kingdom of Hungary in the year 1000, German colonists were settled at the periphery of the city (&quot;Villa Zotmar&quot;), brought in by Stephen&#x27;s wife, the Bavarian princess Gisela of Hungary. Later, they were joined by more German colonists from beyond the Someș River, in Mintiu.

A royal free city since the 13th century, Satu Mare changed hands several times in the 15th century until the Báthory family took possession of the citadel in 1526, proceeding to divert the Someș&#x27;s waters in order to defend the southern part of the citadel; thus, the fortress remained on an island linked to the main roads by three bridges over the Someș. In 1562 the citadel was besieged by Ottoman armies led by Pargalı İbrahim Pasha of Buda and Maleoci Pasha of Timișoara. Then the Habsburgs besieged it, leading the fleeing Transylvanian armies to set it on fire. The Austrian general Lazar Schwendi ordered the citadel to be rebuilt after the plans of Italian architect Ottavio Baldigara; using an Italian system of fortifications, the new structure would be pentagonal with five towers. After a period when it changed hands, the town came under Ottoman control in 1661. Called &quot;Sokmar&quot; by the new authorities, it was a kaza center within the Şenköy sanjak of Varat Eyalet. This status held until 1691, when the army of the Habsburgs expelled the Ottomans during the Great Turkish War. In the Middle Ages, Satu Mare and Mintiu were two distinct entities. The two settlements, then called &quot;Szatmár&quot; and &quot;Németi&quot;, were united in 1715, and the resulting city was named &quot;Szatmár-Németi&quot;. On 2 January 1721, Emperor Charles VI recognised the union, at the same time granting Satu Mare the status of royal free city. A decade earlier, the Treaty of Szatmár was signed in the city, ending Rákóczi&#x27;s War for Independence.

The city&#x27;s importance was linked to the transportation and commerce of salt from nearby Ocna Dejului (, ), possibly already at a very early date. Due to the economic and commercial benefits it began to receive in the 13th century, Satu Mare became an important centre for craft guilds. In the 18th century, intense urbanisation began; several buildings survive from that period, including the old city hall, the inn, a barracks, the Greek Catholic church and the Reformed church. A Roman Catholic diocese was established there in 1804. In 1823, the city&#x27;s systematization commission was established in order to direct its local government. In 1844, paving operations begun in 1805 were stepped up. The first industrial concerns also opened, including the steam mill, the brick factory, the Neuschloss Factory for wood products, the lumber factory, the Princz Factory and the Unio Factory. Due to its location at the intersection of commercial roads, Szatmárnémeti became an important rail hub. The line to Nagykároly (Carei) was built in 1871, followed in 1872 by a line to Máramarossziget (Sighetu Marmației) line, an 1894 link to Nagybánya (Baia Mare), 1900 to Erdőd (Ardud) and 1906 to Bikszád (Bixad).

Since the second half of the 19th century, it underwent important economic and socio-cultural changes. The city&#x27;s large companies (the Unio wagon factory, the Princz Factory, the Ardeleana textile enterprise, the Freund petroleum refinery, the brick factory and the furniture factory) prospered in this period, and the city invested heavily in communication lines, schools, hospitals, public works and public parks. The banking and commerce system also developed: in 1929 the chamber of commerce and industry, as well as the commodities stock market were established, with 25 commercial enterprises and 75 industrial and production firms as members. In 1930 there were 33 banks.

After the collapse of Austria-Hungary, Romanian troops captured the town during their offensive launched on 15 April 1919. By the Treaty of Trianon, Satu Mare officially ceased to be part of Hungary becoming part of Romania. In 1940, the Second Vienna Award gave back Northern Transylvania, including Satu Mare, to Hungary. In October 1944, the city was captured by the Soviet Red Army. After 1945, the city became again part of Romania. Soon afterwards, a Communist regime came to power, lasting until the 1989 revolution.

===Jewish community===

The presence of Jews in Transylvania is first mentioned in the late 16th century. In the 17th century, prince Gabriel Bethlen permitted Sephardi Jews from Turkey to settle in the Transylvanian capital Gyulafehérvár (Alba Iulia), in 1623. In the early 18th century, Jews were allowed to settle in Sathmar. Some of them became involved in large-scale agriculture, becoming landlords or lessees, or were active in trade and industry, or distilled brandy and leased taverns on crown estates. In 1715, when Sathmar became a royal town, they were expelled, beginning to resettle in the 1820s. In 1841, several Jews obtained the permission to settle permanently in Sathmar; the first Jewish community was formally established in 1849, and in 1857, a synagogue was built. After a great number of traditional Ashkenazic Jews had settled in the town, the Jewish community split in 1898, when a supporter of the Hasidic movement was elected chief rabbi, into an Orthodox and a Status Quo community, led by a Zionist rabbi, which erected a synagogue in 1904.

In the 1920s, there were several Zionist organizations in Satu Mare, and the yeshiva, one of the largest in the region, was attended by 400 students. In 1930, the city had five large synagogues and about 20 shtiebels. In 1928, a conflict within the Orthodox community broke out over the election of a new chief rabbi, lasting six years and ending in 1934 with the appointment of the Hasidic rabbi Joel Teitelbaum, a traditionalist and anti-Zionist, who later re-founded the Satmar Hasidic dynasty in Williamsburg, New York. Another Hasidic rabbi, Aharon Roth, the founder of the Shomrei Emunim and Toldot Aharon communities in Jerusalem, was also active in Satu Mare.

After Satu Mare became part of Hungary again in 1940, the civil rights and economic activities of the Jews were restricted, and in summer 1941, &quot;foreign&quot; Jews were deported to Kamenets-Podolski, where they were murdered by Hungarian and German troops. In 1944, the Jewish population was forced into the Satu Mare ghetto; the majority of men were sent to forced labor battalions, and the others were deported to the extermination camps in Poland, where the majority of them were murdered by the Nazis. Six trains left Satu Mare for Auschwitz-Birkenau, starting on 19 May 1944, each carrying approximately 3300 persons. The trains passed through Kassa (Košice) on 19, 22, 26, 29, 30 May and 1 June. In total, 18,863 Jews were deported from Satu Mare, Carei and the surrounding localities. Of these, 14,440 were killed. Only a small number of the survivors returned to Satu Mare after the war, but a number of Jews belonging to linguistically and culturally different groups from all parts of Romania settled in the city. The majority of them later emigrated to Israel. By 1970, the town&#x27;s Jewish population numbered 500, and in 2011, only 34 Jews remained.

In 2004, a Holocaust memorial was dedicated in the Decebal Street Synagogue&#x27;s courtyard. Aside from the synagogues, two Jewish cemeteries also remain.

Among the notable members of the local Jewish community have been historian Ignác Acsády, parliamentary deputies Ferenc Chorin and Kelemen Samu, politician Oszkár Jászi, writers Gyula Csehi, Rodion Markovits, Sándor Dénes, and Ernő Szép, painter Pál Erdös, Jacob Reinitz and director György Harag.

== Demographics ==

According to the 2021 census, Satu Mare had a population of 91,520, making it the 20th largest city in Romania.













==Politics==
===Administration===
The city government is headed by a mayor. Since 2016, the office is held by Gábor Kereskényi. Decisions are approved and discussed by the local council made up of 23 elected councillors. The city is divided into 12 districts laid out radially. One of these, Sătmărel (&quot;Szatmárzsadány&quot;), is a separate village administered by the city.
Additionally, as Satu Mare is the capital of Satu Mare County, the city hosts the palace of the prefecture, the headquarters of the county council and the prefect, who is appointed by Romania&#x27;s central government. Like all other local councils in Romania, the Satu Mare local council, the county council and the city&#x27;s mayor are elected every four years by the population. The city is at the center of the Satu Mare metropolitan area, a metropolitan area established in 2013, with a population of 243,600, and which includes 26 cities, towns and communes.

The Satu Mare City Council, elected at the 2020 local elections, is composed of the following parties:

The city day is 14 May, which commemorates the devastating floods that affected the city in 1970, although it is also a day of rebirth.

=== Justice system ===
Satu Mare has a complex judicial organisation, as a consequence of its status of county capital. The Satu Mare Court of Justice is the local judicial institution and is under the purview of the Satu Mare County Tribunal, which also exerts its jurisdiction over the courts of Carei, Ardud, Negrești-Oaș, Tășnad and Livada. Appeals from these tribunals&#x27; verdicts, and more serious cases, are directed to the Oradea Court of Appeals. Satu Mare also hosts the county&#x27;s commercial and military tribunals.

Satu Mare has its own municipal police force, &quot;Poliția Municipiului Satu Mare&quot;, which is responsible for policing of crime within the whole city, and operates a number of special divisions. The Satu Mare Police are headquartered on Mihai Viteazul Street in the city centre (with a number of precincts throughout the city) and is subordinated to the county&#x27;s police inspectorate on Alexandru Iioan Cuza Street. City Hall has its own community police force, &quot;Poliția Comunitară&quot; located on Universului Alley, dealing with local community issues. Satu Mare also houses the county&#x27;s gendarmerie inspectorate.

==Transport==

===Road===
Satu Mare has a complex system of transportation, providing road, air and rail connections to major cities in Romania and Europe. The city is an important road and rail hub located near the borders with Hungary and Ukraine. The city is connected to other major Romanian cities by road ( European route E81, European route E671 and European route E58) and by rail (CFR Main Line 400). The total number of automobiles registered in Satu Mare was 82,000 in 2008. The city has around 400 streets with a total length of and cover an area of .

===Railway===
Satu Mare Rail Station, located about north of the city centre, is situated on the Căile Ferate Române Line 400 (Brașov – Siculeni – Deda – Dej – Baia Mare), on Line 402 (Oradea – Săcueni – Carei – Satu Mare – Halmeu) and on Line 417 (Satu Mare – Bixad). CFR provides direct rail connections to all the major Romanian cities and to Budapest. The city is also served by another secondary rail station, the &quot;Saw Station&quot; (&quot;Gara Ferăstrău&quot;).

===Public transport===
The main public transportation system in Satu Mare consists of bus lines. There are twenty-three urban and suburban lines with a total length of , the main operator being Transurban S.A. In addition, there are various taxi companies serving the city. It is worth mentioning that Satu Mare had a trolleybus system in the past, created on 15 November 1994 but has been closed in 2005.

===Airport===
The city is served by the Satu Mare International Airport , located south of the city, with a concrete runway, one of the longest in Romania, with TAROM and Wizz Air operating regular flights to Bucharest, London and Antalya (seasonal only).

==Sports==
Football (soccer) is the most popular recreational sport in Satu Mare. There are two major football clubs in Satu Mare: Olimpia and Someșul Oar. There are two football stadiums in Satu Mare: Stadionul Olimpia with 18,000 seats and Someșul Stadium with 3,000 seats.

Other popular recreational activities include fencing, handball, bowling, women&#x27;s basketball, karate and chess.

The local women&#x27;s basketball team CSM Satu Mare is one of the best in the Romanian league; it finished third in the 2008/2009 season playoffs. The team plays its home matches in the largest indoor arena in the city, the LPS Arena, which has a capacity of 400 seats.

The Cypriot professional tennis player Marcos Baghdatis was brought to Satu Mare in 1998 for a month and a half by his former coach Jean Dobrescu to train and to participate in local tennis competitions alongside his fellow Davis Cup team member, Rareș Cuzdriorean, who is also a Satu Mare native with Cypriot citizenship.

===Fencing===
Satu Mare has a tradition in fencing dating to 1885, and is the city that has supplied the most world and Olympic champions in Europe. Names like Ecaterina Stahl, Marcela Moldovan, Suzana and Ștefan Ardeleanu, Petru Kuki, Rudolf Luczki, Samuilă Melczhner, Geza Tere and in particular Alexandru Csipler figure prominently in the annals of Romanian fencing. The last four also formed the core of the city&#x27;s fencing school, winning major local and international tournaments. Top results for which there is evidence date to 1935, when the local foil team, Olimpia Satu Mare, lost against CFR Timișoara by a score of 15–10 in the national final, while Rudolf Luczki won the sabre finals held in Cluj-Napoca. In 1973, the first signaling device in Romania was used in Satu Mare; this has been characterised as &quot;a veritable revolution&quot; for Romanian fencing.

==Economy==
Satu Mare benefits from its proximity to the borders with Hungary and Ukraine, which makes it a prime location for logistical and industrial parks.

Companies that have established production facilities in Satu Mare are Voestalpine, Dräxlmaier Group, Gotec Group, Anvis Group, Schlemmer, Casco Schützhelme and Zollner Elektronik in the industrial sector; FrieslandCampina in the food sector; Radici Group in the textile sector; and Saint-Gobain and Boissigny in the wood industry.

Currently the largest private employer in Satu Mare is the German automotive company Dräxlmaier Group which owns since 1998 an electric engine components factory in the city and has around 3,600 employees. The factory supplies automotive wiring especially to the German car manufacturer Daimler AG but it also supplied wiring to another car manufacturer Porsche for its Porsche Panamera model. The Swedish company Electrolux owns a kitchen stove factory in the city acquired in 1997, that has a surface area of and 1,800 employees. The facility has an annual production capacity of around 1.2 million units and the majority of the Zanussi brand kitchen stoves in Europe are manufactured there. The Austrian company Voestalpine owns, since 2004, a steel tubes production facility with an annual capacity of 50 million units per year. The German company Arcandor has its main Romanian office established in Satu Mare. The subsidiary, accounting for the region formed by Romania and Hungary, is the most important among the 16 subsidiaries in Europe in terms of the percentage of sales through online orders having in 2008 total orders of €19.3 million. The company also owns a logistic facility and a call center in the city.

Satu Mare&#x27;s retail sector is fairly well-developed; a number of international companies such as Carrefour, Auchan, Kaufland, Metro Point, Lidl and Penny Market have supermarkets or hypermarkets in the city. There is also a regional mall, Shopping City Satu Mare, with a gross leasable area (GLA) of , DIY stores (Dedeman, Brico Dépôt), and several other shopping centers: Grand Mall of , Plaza Europa of and Someșul Mall, of .

There is also an industrial park called Satu Mare Industrial Park located at the edge of the city on a 70 ha surface.

==Education==

===Universities===

Satu Mare is home to the Commercial Academy of Satu Mare and several other branches of important Romanian universities:
* Babeș-Bolyai University
* Spiru Haret University
* Technical University of Cluj-Napoca
* University of Oradea
* Vasile Goldiș West University of Arad

===High schools===
Satu Mare has 16 high schools, of which four are national colleges:
* Doamna Stanca National College
* Ioan Slavici National College
* Kölcsey Ferenc National College
* Mihai Eminescu National College

===Gymnasiums===
The city has 16 gymnasiums, with the most important being:
* The Grigore Moisil Gymnasium (), founded in 1903 and named after the mathematician Grigore Moisil.
* The Ion Creangă Gymnasium (), founded in 1990 and named after the writer Ion Creangă.
* The Lucian Blaga Gymnasium (), founded in 1996 by Ioan Viman and named after the philosopher and writer Lucian Blaga.

==Culture==
Satu Mare has a county museum, an art museum, and a theatre, the North Theatre, built in 1889 which has both a Hungarian and a Romanian section. Concerts are given by the “Dinu Lipatti Philharmonic”, formerly the state symphonic orchestra of Satu Mare, in a concert hall in a wing of the Dacia Hotel. The county library had 320.000 books in 1997, including a special bibliophile collections of over 70.000 volumes.

==Tourism==

Major tourists attractions are:
* Administrative Palace, at , one of the tallest buildings in Romania
* Capitoline Wolf statue
* Chain Church
* Dacia Hotel
* Decebal Street Synagogue
* Firemen&#x27;s Tower, a tall tower
* Roman Catholic Cathedral

==Media==

===Newspapers===
* &quot;Informația Zilei&quot; – daily local newspaper
* &quot;Gazeta de Nord-Vest&quot; – daily local newspaper
* &quot;Cronica Sătmăreană&quot; – daily local newspaper
* &quot;Friss Újság&quot; – daily local newspaper in Hungarian language
* &quot;Szatmári Magyar Hírlap&quot; – daily local newspaper in Hungarian language

===TV stations===
* TV1 Satu Mare
* Nord Vest TV
* Pro TV Satu Mare
* Informația TV

===Radio stations===
* Radio City Satu Mare
* Radio Unu
* Radio Transilvania
* Radio ZU
* Kiss FM Satu Mare

===Online portal===
* &quot;Satu Mare Online&quot;
* &quot;Sătmăreanul&quot;

==Consulates==
* Honorary Consulate of Ukraine

==Natives==

;Romania
* Ioana Boitor
* Gavril Both
* Ciprian Brata
* Vlad Bujor
* Corina Ciorbă
* Cosmin Costinaș
* Daniel David
* Mircea Florian
* Florin Gardoș
* Gábor Gerstenmájer
* Emanuel Gyenes
* Alexandru Karikaș
* Simona Miculescu
* Dorel Moiș
* Ioan Mircea Pașcu
* Vasile Paulovics
* Ciprian Prodan
* Daniel Prodan
* Zoltan Ritli
* Ovidiu Ioan Silaghi
* Sergiu Suciu
* Josef Szepeschy
* Dan Zaviceanu
* Ervin Zsiga
;Hungary
* Dániel Antal
* Árpád Árvay
* Antal Bánhidi
* László Bánhidi
* László Botka
* Gábor Darvas
* Arányi Dezső
* András Domahidy
* Jenő Dsida
* Mónika Esztán
* Zoltán Horváth
* József Kürthy
* Gyula Lengyel
* Noémi Matsutani
* Vince Nagy
* György Nyisztor
* Richárd Osváth
* Zoltán Pánczél
* Moshe Dovid Winternitz

;Germany
* Zita-Eva Funkenhauser
* Monika Weber-Koszto
* Rita König
* Susanne König

;Canada
* Corneliu Chisu
* Ernest Klein

;USA
* Ernie Grunfeld
* Yoel Levi

;Cyprus
* Rareș Cuzdriorean

;Israel
* Miriam Fried
==International relations==

===Twin towns and sister cities===
Satu Mare is twinned with:
* Zutphen, Netherlands, since 1970
* Wolfenbüttel, Germany, since 1974
* Nyíregyháza, Hungary, since 2000
* Berehove, Ukraine, since 2007
* Rzeszów, Poland, since 2007

==Gallery==
== See also ==
* Satmar (Hasidic dynasty), a Jewish religious group named after this city
* List of companies based in Satu Mare
* List of natives and inhabitants of Satu Mare

==References==
== External links ==

===Official websites===
* Satu Mare administration official site 
* Satu Mare County Prefecture 
* Satu Mare Municipal Council 
* Transurban (Public Transport Company) official site 
* Satu Mare International Airport 

===Unofficial websites===
* Satu Mare Online 
* Satu-Mare.com 
* Szatmar.ro 

===Other===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185332" start="0" end="9" title="Satu Mare" label="Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q165459" start="90" end="106" title="Satu Mare County" label="Satu Mare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="108" end="115" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628700" start="146" end="173" title="Satu Mare metropolitan area" label="Satu Mare metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="200" end="209" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="227" end="239" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q937023" start="264" end="280" title="Gesta Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="365" end="376" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q602335" start="453" end="462" title="Nord-Vest" label="Nord-Vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q165459" start="523" end="539" title="Satu Mare County" label="Satu Mare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="576" end="581" title="Someș" label="Someș"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="691" end="717" title="Someș River" label="Lower Someș alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683475" start="742" end="763" title="Administrative Palace, Satu Mare" label="Administrative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="907" end="919" title="Someș River" label="Someș Meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="1001" end="1009" title="Source (river or stream)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="1014" end="1024" title="Source (river or stream)" label="downstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="1253" end="1261" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="1269" end="1277" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705990" start="1319" end="1332" title="Pannonian Sea" label="Pannonian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1379" end="1383" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="1385" end="1390" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1395" end="1401" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192813" start="1489" end="1495" title="podsol" label="podsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1550" end="1556" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1559" end="1568" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q904653" start="1571" end="1581" title="fruit tree" label="fruit tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1653" end="1663" title="Pârâul Sar" label="Pârâul Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807207" start="1685" end="1698" title="Homorod River (Someș)" label="Homorod River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1904" end="1915" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="2002" end="2009" title="Mill (grinding)" label="milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="2011" end="2018" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="2149" end="2156" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="2224" end="2234" title="Source (river or stream)" label="downstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="2242" end="2250" title="Source (river or stream)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="2344" end="2352" title="Source (river or stream)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="2507" end="2518" title="Levee" label="embankments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081013" start="2887" end="2893" title="wicker" label="wicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="2906" end="2912" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="2914" end="2919" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q124969" start="2924" end="2932" title="Corylus avellana" label="hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q163963" start="2979" end="2999" title="Agrostis stolonifera" label="Agrostis stolonifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q159118" start="3013" end="3026" title="Poa trivialis" label="Poa trivialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157346" start="3040" end="3060" title="Alopecurus pratensis" label="Alopecurus pratensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3133" end="3147" title="Garden of Rome" label="Garden of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q288558" start="3219" end="3230" title="Styphnolobium japonicum" label="pagoda tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420126" start="3278" end="3288" title="Pterocarya" label="Pterocarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q157393" start="3327" end="3346" title="Paulownia tomentosa" label="Paulownia tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573" start="3436" end="3443" title="hamster" label="hamster"/>
<link wikidata="Q623466" start="3448" end="3472" title="european ground squirrel" label="european ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192056" start="3501" end="3513" title="Vipera berus" label="Vipera berus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="3571" end="3575" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="3578" end="3583" title="Goose" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060012" start="3585" end="3590" title="egret" label="egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="3678" end="3697" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="3951" end="3957" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="3964" end="3973" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="4041" end="4047" title="Spring (season)" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="4050" end="4056" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="4059" end="4065" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="4070" end="4076" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4318" end="4347" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4382" end="4385" title="Köppen climate classification#Group C: Temperate/mesothermal climates" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4419" end="4434" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q937023" start="4586" end="4602" title="Gesta Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q782781" start="5039" end="5051" title="Oaș Country" label="Țara Oașului"/>
<link wikidata="Q275997" start="5053" end="5058" title="Ardud" label="Ardud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055677" start="5060" end="5073" title="Medieșu Aurit" label="Medieșu Aurit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554783" start="5075" end="5084" title="Homoroade" label="Homoroade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="5143" end="5152" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5161" end="5171" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="5211" end="5217" title="Dacians" label="Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108309" start="5327" end="5336" title="Menumorut" label="Menumorut"/>
<link wikidata="Q937023" start="5473" end="5489" title="Gesta Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q177903" start="5503" end="5523" title="Stephen I of Hungary" label="Stephen I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5536" end="5554" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q232039" start="5717" end="5734" title="Gisela of Hungary" label="Gisela of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="5801" end="5812" title="Someș River" label="Someș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702" start="5828" end="5843" title="royal free city" label="royal free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q388127" start="5936" end="5943" title="Báthory" label="Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025264" start="6224" end="6238" title="Ottoman army in the 15th–19th centuries" label="Ottoman armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q511943" start="6246" end="6267" title="Pargalı İbrahim Pasha" label="Pargalı İbrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="6271" end="6275" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="6297" end="6306" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="6317" end="6326" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="6360" end="6372" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q935921" start="6767" end="6771" title="kaza" label="kaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611575" start="6790" end="6796" title="Sâniob" label="Şenköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="6797" end="6803" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564317" start="6807" end="6819" title="Varat Eyalet" label="Varat Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="6871" end="6880" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="6914" end="6931" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="7188" end="7198" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702" start="7271" end="7286" title="royal free city" label="royal free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q769294" start="7310" end="7327" title="Treaty of Szatmár" label="Treaty of Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="Q595545" start="7359" end="7394" title="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War for Independence" label="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War for Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q273801" start="7490" end="7502" title="Dej" label="Ocna Dejului"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="7835" end="7849" title="Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q252250" start="7865" end="7873" title="Reformed Church in Romania" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q606478" start="7884" end="7906" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Satu Mare" label="Roman Catholic diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="8425" end="8430" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q334874" start="8498" end="8515" title="Sighetu Marmației" label="Sighetu Marmației"/>
<link wikidata="Q185280" start="8550" end="8559" title="Baia Mare" label="Baia Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q275997" start="8577" end="8582" title="Ardud" label="Ardud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054525" start="8605" end="8610" title="Bixad, Satu Mare" label="Bixad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="9095" end="9127" title="chamber of commerce and industry" label="chamber of commerce and industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="9321" end="9336" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="9429" end="9446" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="9515" end="9522" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="9537" end="9556" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="9567" end="9588" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="9669" end="9684" title="Soviet Red Army" label="Soviet Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="9756" end="9772" title="Communist Romania" label="Communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="9806" end="9821" title="Romanian Revolution of 1989" label="1989 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="9872" end="9884" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q313494" start="9958" end="9973" title="Gabriel Bethlen" label="Gabriel Bethlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="9984" end="9997" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="10064" end="10074" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="10591" end="10600" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="10648" end="10663" title="Ashkenazic Jews" label="Ashkenazic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="10749" end="10765" title="Hasidic movement" label="Hasidic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406966" start="10799" end="10834" title="Schism in Hungarian Jewry" label="Orthodox and a Status Quo community"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="10845" end="10852" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891027" start="11103" end="11111" title="shtiebel" label="shtiebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661697" start="11293" end="11308" title="Joel Teitelbaum" label="Joel Teitelbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311326" start="11331" end="11343" title="religious anti-Zionism" label="anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490215" start="11370" end="11376" title="Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Satmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="11377" end="11392" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="11396" end="11408" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="11410" end="11418" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899306" start="11443" end="11454" title="Aharon Roth" label="Aharon Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903967" start="11475" end="11489" title="Shomer Emunim (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Shomrei Emunim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191068" start="11494" end="11507" title="Toldot Aharon" label="Toldot Aharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="11523" end="11532" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193965" start="11751" end="11768" title="Kamenets-Podolski" label="Kamenets-Podolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933356" start="11878" end="11894" title="Satu Mare ghetto" label="Satu Mare ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q452191" start="11929" end="11951" title="forced labor battalion (Hungary)" label="forced labor battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="11990" end="12009" title="extermination camps" label="extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="12069" end="12074" title="Nazis" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="12106" end="12124" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="12226" end="12232" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="12324" end="12329" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="12621" end="12640" title="emigrated to Israel" label="emigrated to Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q752740" start="12787" end="12811" title="Satu Mare Synagogue" label="Decebal Street Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q482018" start="12969" end="12981" title="Ignác Acsády" label="Ignác Acsády"/>
<link wikidata="Q861071" start="13006" end="13019" title="Ferenc Chorin" label="Ferenc Chorin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13024" end="13036" title="Kelemen Samu" label="Kelemen Samu"/>
<link wikidata="Q139980" start="13049" end="13061" title="Oszkár Jászi" label="Oszkár Jászi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13071" end="13082" title="Gyula Csehi" label="Gyula Csehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165539" start="13084" end="13100" title="Rodion Markovits" label="Rodion Markovits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13102" end="13114" title="Sándor Dénes" label="Sándor Dénes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13120" end="13129" title="Ernő Szép" label="Ernő Szép"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13139" end="13148" title="Pál Erdös (painter)" label="Pál Erdös"/>
<link wikidata="Q107303662" start="13150" end="13163" title="Jacob Reinitz" label="Jacob Reinitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q652736" start="13177" end="13189" title="György Harag" label="György Harag"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="13229" end="13240" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="13406" end="13411" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362639" start="13413" end="13423" title="2016 Romanian local elections" label="Since 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="13509" end="13522" title="Local government" label="local council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596426" start="13583" end="13595" title="List of Satu Mare districts" label="12 districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q165459" start="13761" end="13777" title="Satu Mare County" label="Satu Mare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="13848" end="13862" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239800" start="13871" end="13878" title="Prefect (Romania)" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628700" start="14132" end="14159" title="Satu Mare metropolitan area" label="Satu Mare metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301860" start="14161" end="14180" title="Metropolitan areas in Romania" label="a metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251607" start="14326" end="14346" title="2020 Romanian local elections" label="2020 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118466" start="14434" end="14452" title="1970 floods in Romania" label="devastating floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q165459" start="14628" end="14634" title="Satu Mare County" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="14822" end="14827" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q275997" start="14829" end="14834" title="Ardud" label="Ardud"/>
<link wikidata="Q772576" start="14836" end="14848" title="Negrești-Oaș" label="Negrești-Oaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q668701" start="14850" end="14856" title="Tășnad" label="Tășnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q276336" start="14861" end="14867" title="Livada, Satu Mare" label="Livada"/>
<link wikidata="Q636938" start="15431" end="15437" title="Romanian Police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428127" start="15667" end="15678" title="Jandarmeria Română" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q987350" start="16007" end="16025" title="European route E81" label="European route E81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375947" start="16027" end="16046" title="European route E671" label="European route E671"/>
<link wikidata="Q180384" start="16051" end="16069" title="European route E58" label="European route E58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412251" start="16084" end="16101" title="Căile Ferate Române Line 400" label="CFR Main Line 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426557" start="16273" end="16295" title="Satu Mare railway station" label="Satu Mare Rail Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412251" start="16356" end="16384" title="Căile Ferate Române Line 400" label="Căile Ferate Române Line 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="16386" end="16392" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063726" start="16395" end="16403" title="Siculeni" label="Siculeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070458" start="16406" end="16410" title="Deda, Mureș" label="Deda"/>
<link wikidata="Q273801" start="16413" end="16416" title="Dej" label="Dej"/>
<link wikidata="Q185280" start="16419" end="16428" title="Baia Mare" label="Baia Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="16444" end="16450" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q376233" start="16453" end="16460" title="Săcueni" label="Săcueni"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="16463" end="16468" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064556" start="16483" end="16489" title="Halmeu" label="Halmeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054525" start="16520" end="16525" title="Bixad, Satu Mare" label="Bixad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="16605" end="16613" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835384" start="16927" end="16942" title="Transurban S.A." label="Transurban S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2234608" start="17180" end="17211" title="Satu Mare International Airport" label="Satu Mare International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="17301" end="17306" title="TAROM" label="TAROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q335147" start="17311" end="17319" title="Wizz Air" label="Wizz Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="17349" end="17358" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17360" end="17366" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="17371" end="17378" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="17408" end="17416" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q629277" start="17528" end="17535" title="FC Olimpia Satu Mare" label="Olimpia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17540" end="17551" title="Someșul Satu Mare" label="Someșul Oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596437" start="17599" end="17616" title="Stadionul Olimpia" label="Stadionul Olimpia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="17720" end="17727" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="17729" end="17737" title="Team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="17739" end="17746" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887217" start="17748" end="17771" title="women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="17773" end="17779" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="17784" end="17789" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014185" start="17831" end="17844" title="CSM Satu Mare (basketball)" label="CSM Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="17987" end="17999" title="Arena" label="indoor arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459746" start="18017" end="18026" title="LPS Arena" label="LPS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="18068" end="18075" title="Cyprus" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="18089" end="18095" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="18103" end="18119" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245900" start="18288" end="18309" title="Cyprus Davis Cup team" label="Davis Cup team member"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294551" start="18311" end="18328" title="Rareș Cuzdriorean" label="Rareș Cuzdriorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="18431" end="18438" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q222007" start="18548" end="18563" title="Ecaterina Stahl" label="Ecaterina Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978373" start="18583" end="18589" title="Suzana Ardeleanu" label="Suzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025787" start="18594" end="18610" title="Ștefan Ardeleanu" label="Ștefan Ardeleanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901121" start="18612" end="18622" title="Petru Kuki" label="Petru Kuki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18686" end="18703" title="Alexandru Csipler" label="Alexandru Csipler"/>
<link wikidata="Q471447" start="18948" end="18952" title="Foil (fencing)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156606" start="19076" end="19081" title="Sabre (fencing)" label="sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="19097" end="19108" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q689750" start="19501" end="19512" title="Voestalpine" label="Voestalpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q324861" start="19514" end="19530" title="Dräxlmaier Group" label="Dräxlmaier Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587738" start="19532" end="19543" title="Gotec Group" label="Gotec Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777995" start="19545" end="19556" title="Anvis Group" label="Anvis Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19558" end="19567" title="Schlemmer Group" label="Schlemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048266" start="19569" end="19586" title="Casco Schützhelme" label="Casco Schützhelme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19591" end="19609" title="Zollner" label="Zollner Elektronik"/>
<link wikidata="Q248711" start="19636" end="19652" title="FrieslandCampina" label="FrieslandCampina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280508" start="19673" end="19685" title="Radici Group" label="Radici Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q678565" start="19713" end="19725" title="Saint-Gobain" label="Saint-Gobain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19730" end="19739" title="Boissigny" label="Boissigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q324861" start="19848" end="19864" title="Dräxlmaier Group" label="Dräxlmaier Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="20050" end="20060" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="20117" end="20124" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q501349" start="20133" end="20149" title="Porsche Panamera" label="Porsche Panamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="20161" end="20168" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q505922" start="20177" end="20187" title="Electrolux" label="Electrolux"/>
<link wikidata="Q182995" start="20195" end="20208" title="kitchen stove" label="kitchen stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q147065" start="20394" end="20401" title="Zanussi" label="Zanussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q689750" start="20478" end="20489" title="Voestalpine" label="Voestalpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q136132" start="20615" end="20623" title="Arcandor" label="Arcandor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217599" start="21089" end="21098" title="Carrefour" label="Carrefour"/>
<link wikidata="Q758603" start="21100" end="21106" title="Auchan" label="Auchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q685967" start="21108" end="21116" title="Kaufland" label="Kaufland"/>
<link wikidata="Q169167" start="21118" end="21129" title="Metro Cash and Carry" label="Metro Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q151954" start="21131" end="21135" title="Lidl" label="Lidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q284688" start="21140" end="21152" title="Penny Market" label="Penny Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="21158" end="21169" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q750656" start="21174" end="21185" title="hypermarket" label="hypermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460163" start="21263" end="21282" title="gross leasable area" label="gross leasable area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249762" start="21306" end="21313" title="Dedeman" label="Dedeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889702" start="21315" end="21326" title="Brico Dépôt" label="Brico Dépôt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21365" end="21375" title="Grand Mall, Satu Mare" label="Grand Mall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21401" end="21413" title="Someșul Mall" label="Someșul Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="21438" end="21453" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="21527" end="21529" title="Hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152449" start="21600" end="21631" title="Commercial Academy of Satu Mare" label="Commercial Academy of Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q538452" start="21697" end="21720" title="Babeș-Bolyai University" label="Babeș-Bolyai University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132587" start="21723" end="21745" title="Spiru Haret University" label="Spiru Haret University"/>
<link wikidata="Q729296" start="21748" end="21783" title="Technical University of Cluj-Napoca" label="Technical University of Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465437" start="21786" end="21806" title="University of Oradea" label="University of Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031813" start="21809" end="21846" title="Vasile Goldiș West University of Arad" label="Vasile Goldiș West University of Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286477" start="21937" end="21967" title="Doamna Stanca National College (Satu Mare)" label="Doamna Stanca National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061851" start="21970" end="21999" title="Ioan Slavici National College" label="Ioan Slavici National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q742592" start="22002" end="22033" title="Kölcsey Ferenc National College" label="Kölcsey Ferenc National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845070" start="22036" end="22067" title="Mihai Eminescu National College (Satu Mare)" label="Mihai Eminescu National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="22102" end="22112" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546258" start="22230" end="22244" title="Grigore Moisil" label="Grigore Moisil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204810" start="22321" end="22332" title="Ion Creangă (writer)" label="Ion Creangă"/>
<link wikidata="Q381256" start="22440" end="22452" title="Lucian Blaga" label="Lucian Blaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295186" start="22532" end="22545" title="North Theatre (Satu Mare)" label="North Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683475" start="22930" end="22951" title="Administrative Palace, Satu Mare" label="Administrative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q728344" start="22969" end="22997" title="List of tallest buildings in Romania" label="tallest buildings in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q408623" start="23000" end="23015" title="Capitoline Wolf" label="Capitoline Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412269" start="23025" end="23037" title="Satu Mare Chain Church" label="Chain Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207615" start="23040" end="23051" title="Dacia Hotel" label="Dacia Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q752740" start="23054" end="23078" title="Satu Mare Synagogue" label="Decebal Street Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329435" start="23081" end="23101" title="Firemen&amp;#x27;s Tower (Satu Mare)" label="Firemen&amp;#x27;s Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23118" end="23132" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="23133" end="23142" title="Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031294" start="23180" end="23196" title="Informația Zilei" label="Informația Zilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529097" start="23235" end="23254" title="Gazeta de Nord-Vest" label="Gazeta de Nord-Vest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23293" end="23311" title="Cronica Sătmăreană" label="Cronica Sătmăreană"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504724" start="23350" end="23361" title="Friss Újság" label="Friss Újság"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="23395" end="23413" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295139" start="23422" end="23444" title="Szatmári Magyar Hírlap" label="Szatmári Magyar Hírlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="23478" end="23496" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23518" end="23531" title="TV1 Satu Mare" label="TV1 Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23534" end="23546" title="Nord Vest TV" label="Nord Vest TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="23549" end="23565" title="Pro TV" label="Pro TV Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23568" end="23581" title="Informația TV" label="Informația TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23606" end="23626" title="Radio City Satu Mare" label="Radio City Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23629" end="23638" title="Radio Unu" label="Radio Unu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248455" start="23641" end="23659" title="Radio Transilvania" label="Radio Transilvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23662" end="23670" title="Radio ZU" label="Radio ZU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416922" start="23673" end="23690" title="Kiss FM (Romania)" label="Kiss FM Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23720" end="23736" title="Satu Mare Online" label="Satu Mare Online"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23751" end="23762" title="Sătmăreanul" label="Sătmăreanul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23842" end="23854" title="Ioana Boitor" label="Ioana Boitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85036329" start="23857" end="23868" title="Gavril Both" label="Gavril Both"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121293" start="23871" end="23884" title="Ciprian Brata" label="Ciprian Brata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412277" start="23887" end="23897" title="Vlad Bujor" label="Vlad Bujor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693558" start="23900" end="23913" title="Corina (Romanian singer)" label="Corina Ciorbă"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23916" end="23931" title="Cosmin Costinaș" label="Cosmin Costinaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216919" start="23934" end="23946" title="Daniel David" label="Daniel David"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872999" start="23949" end="23963" title="Mircea Florian (musician)" label="Mircea Florian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430147" start="23966" end="23979" title="Florin Gardoș" label="Florin Gardoș"/>
<link wikidata="Q464722" start="23982" end="24000" title="Gábor Gerstenmájer" label="Gábor Gerstenmájer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369070" start="24003" end="24017" title="Emanuel Gyenes" label="Emanuel Gyenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721173" start="24020" end="24037" title="Alexandru Karikaș" label="Alexandru Karikaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520204" start="24040" end="24056" title="Simona Miculescu" label="Simona Miculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297700" start="24059" end="24069" title="Dorel Moiș" label="Dorel Moiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q348800" start="24072" end="24089" title="Ioan Mircea Pașcu" label="Ioan Mircea Pașcu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24092" end="24108" title="Vasile Paulovics" label="Vasile Paulovics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121301" start="24111" end="24125" title="Ciprian Prodan" label="Ciprian Prodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265055" start="24128" end="24141" title="Daniel Prodan" label="Daniel Prodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073614" start="24144" end="24156" title="Zoltan Ritli" label="Zoltan Ritli"/>
<link wikidata="Q347505" start="24159" end="24178" title="Ovidiu Ioan Silaghi" label="Ovidiu Ioan Silaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956355" start="24181" end="24193" title="Sergiu Suciu" label="Sergiu Suciu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24196" end="24211" title="Josef Szepeschy" label="Josef Szepeschy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24214" end="24227" title="Dan Zaviceanu" label="Dan Zaviceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364257" start="24230" end="24241" title="Ervin Zsiga" label="Ervin Zsiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24253" end="24265" title="Dániel Antal" label="Dániel Antal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24268" end="24279" title="Árpád Árvay" label="Árpád Árvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q853048" start="24282" end="24295" title="Antal Bánhidi" label="Antal Bánhidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q339123" start="24298" end="24312" title="László Bánhidi" label="László Bánhidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q848456" start="24315" end="24327" title="László Botka" label="László Botka"/>
<link wikidata="Q897494" start="24330" end="24342" title="Gábor Darvas" label="Gábor Darvas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24345" end="24357" title="Arányi Dezső" label="Arányi Dezső"/>
<link wikidata="Q908036" start="24360" end="24375" title="András Domahidy" label="András Domahidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q724203" start="24378" end="24388" title="Jenő Dsida" label="Jenő Dsida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24391" end="24404" title="Mónika Esztán" label="Mónika Esztán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671579" start="24407" end="24421" title="Zoltán Horváth (basketball)" label="Zoltán Horváth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6321150" start="24424" end="24437" title="József Kürthy" label="József Kürthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128986" start="24440" end="24453" title="Gyula Lengyel" label="Gyula Lengyel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24456" end="24471" title="Noémi Matsutani" label="Noémi Matsutani"/>
<link wikidata="Q542677" start="24474" end="24484" title="Vince Nagy" label="Vince Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706018" start="24487" end="24502" title="György Nyisztor" label="György Nyisztor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935148" start="24505" end="24519" title="Richárd Osváth" label="Richárd Osváth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24522" end="24536" title="Zoltán Pánczél" label="Zoltán Pánczél"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996030" start="24539" end="24561" title="Moshe Dovid Winternitz" label="Moshe Dovid Winternitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q66510" start="24574" end="24595" title="Zita-Eva Funkenhauser" label="Zita-Eva Funkenhauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q25874" start="24598" end="24617" title="Monika Weber-Koszto" label="Monika Weber-Koszto"/>
<link wikidata="Q25878" start="24620" end="24630" title="Rita König" label="Rita König"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978282" start="24633" end="24646" title="Susanne König" label="Susanne König"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997504" start="24658" end="24672" title="Corneliu Chisu" label="Corneliu Chisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393394" start="24675" end="24687" title="Ernest Klein" label="Ernest Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565934" start="24696" end="24710" title="Ernie Grunfeld" label="Ernie Grunfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q964896" start="24713" end="24722" title="Yoel Levi" label="Yoel Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294551" start="24734" end="24751" title="Rareș Cuzdriorean" label="Rareș Cuzdriorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492699" start="24763" end="24775" title="Miriam Fried" label="Miriam Fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="24853" end="24860" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535" start="24869" end="24876" title="Zutphen" label="Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122" start="24904" end="24916" title="Wolfenbüttel" label="Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171223" start="24940" end="24951" title="Nyíregyháza" label="Nyíregyháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q146497" start="24975" end="24983" title="Berehove" label="Berehove"/>
<link wikidata="Q598" start="25007" end="25014" title="Rzeszów" label="Rzeszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490215" start="25065" end="25089" title="Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612221" start="25140" end="25176" title="List of companies based in Satu Mare" label="List of companies based in Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630239" start="25179" end="25223" title="List of natives and inhabitants of Satu Mare" label="List of natives and inhabitants of Satu Mare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381873" wikidata="Q4346384" url="?curid=381873" title="Heligoland trap">
<text>A Heligoland trap (or funnel trap) is a large, building-sized, funnel-shaped, rigid structure of wire mesh or netting used to trap birds, so that they can be banded or otherwise studied by ornithologists.

The name is taken from the site of the first such trap, the Heligoland Bird Observatory on the island of Heligoland, Germany, where it was developed by Hugo Weigold who established the observatory and initiated the banding program there. The trap has a series of linked funnels that guides birds or other animals in but makes it hard for them to leave. Funnel traps of smaller size can also be used to trap squirrels and insects.

==Rybachy trap==
The Rybachy trap is a variation or expansion of the Heligoland trap in that it is a large, passive trap consisting of linked funnels terminating in a small chamber from which the birds are extracted for banding and measuring before release. It differs in being larger – it may have an entrance some 30 m wide by 15 m high – and by having a non-rigid body made of netting rather than wire mesh. It was developed in 1957 by Janis Jakšisat under the leadership of Lev Belopolsky at the Rybachy Biological Station (formerly the Rossitten Bird Observatory) at Rybachy, Kaliningrad Oblast in Russia, on the Curonian Spit.


==See also==
*Duck decoy

==References==
==External links==
* Diagram of a Heligoland trap</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4346384" start="2" end="17" title="Heligoland trap" label="Heligoland trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346384" start="22" end="33" title="Heligoland trap" label="funnel trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="158" end="164" title="bird ringing" label="banded"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="189" end="203" title="ornithology" label="ornithologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q879943" start="266" end="293" title="Heligoland Bird Observatory" label="Heligoland Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038" start="311" end="321" title="Heligoland" label="Heligoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78333" start="358" end="370" title="Hugo Weigold" label="Hugo Weigold"/>
<link wikidata="Q28665598" start="1115" end="1129" title="Lev Belopolsky" label="Lev Belopolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545575" start="1178" end="1204" title="Rossitten Bird Observatory" label="Rossitten Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141723" start="1209" end="1236" title="Rybachy, Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Rybachy, Kaliningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595" start="1255" end="1268" title="Curonian Spit" label="Curonian Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675" start="1286" end="1296" title="Duck decoy (structure)" label="Duck decoy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381875" wikidata="Q2317245" url="?curid=381875" title="Joure">
<text>Joure (; West Frisian: &quot;De Jouwer&quot;) is a town in the north of the Netherlands. It is the administrative center of De Fryske Marren, Friesland. With 13,090 inhabitants, it is also the most populous town in the municipality.

Residents of Joure are called &quot;Jousters&quot;; they are also commonly referred to as &quot;Jouster Keallepoaten&quot;. The Frisian &quot;keallepoat&quot; (calf&#x27;s leg) refers to a baked offering, which early Jousters made to a water spirit, offering gratitude for bestowing so much water on their lands. The product consists of two elongated pastries that are baked next to and against each other and therefore resemble calf legs. They are made from rye flour, honey and various herbs.

==History==
Joure originated partly on top of a &quot;gaast&quot; (sand ridge) and a late Medieval dike that ran from the local toll house to Haskerhorne; the later &quot;Midstraat&quot; was built on the crown of this embankment. In addition to this, Joure also lay on a crossing of waterways next to the former village of Westermeer. In the early fifteenth century, many canals were dug by traders of the Hanseatic League. They were looking for a remote place that could only be reached through canals and by &quot;trekschuit&quot;, because these places were relatively safe from the feared Northerners. Then the &quot;Kolk&quot; was also dug, from where a &quot;De Overspitting&quot; waterway to Heerenveen was dug.

During the Great Depression of the twentieth century there was a lot of activity in Joure. The peat that came from the present day lake of Nannewiid, south of Oudehaske, was transported on prams in Joure and was transferred to &quot;skûtsjes&quot;. This transfer took place at the place where the &quot;Oerdracht&quot; church now stands.

Some street names, such as &quot;Eeltsjebaes&quot;, &quot;Aukebaes&quot; and &quot;Hettebaes&quot;, still recall the shipyards, where new &quot;skûtsjes&quot; and prams were made, but many repairs were also made. Before World War II, Joure was part of an extensive horse-drawn tram network. Joure was connected with Sneek, Lemmer and Heerenveen. The &quot;Stationsstraat&quot; is a street name from that era. Before the construction of these rails, roads had to be built of which the &quot;Tramwei&quot; street is a reminder. Before then, people were used to doing all transport by boat.

Joure is traditionally not a city, but also too big to be called a village. According to Old Frisian tradition, such a place is called a &quot;vlecke&quot;.

There are different theories about the origin of the name Joure or &quot;De Jouwer&quot;. It is often thought that it comes from the Frisian word &quot;Hjouwer&quot;, which refers to oats.

Joure is also inextricably linked to that of Douwe Egberts (DE). In 1753, Douwe Egberts&#x27; father, Egbert Douwes, started a colonial merchandise business on the &quot;Midstraat&quot; in Joure, which has become the well-known coffee roaster. For years, there was another DE store on the &quot;Midstraat&quot;. It was closed on 24 October 2014.

Until the municipal reorganization of 1984, Joure was the administrative center of the former municipality of Haskerland and then until 2014 of the former municipality of Skarsterlân. Joure then became part of the municipality of De Fryske Marren.

The Haulster forests lie east of Joure. De Haskerveenpolder is located north of Joure. The Langweerderwielen is a lake located west of Joure. Joure has a public subtropical swimming pool, marina, a historic town center, and water-rich residential areas.

==Economy==
The town has been renowned since the 18th century for the manufacture of traditional Frisian clocks (&#x27;stoelklokken&#x27; and &#x27;staartklokken&#x27;). This was pure home-industry aided by the presence of a local copper-melting facility. As of today, a handful of skilled tradesmen continue to manufacture these clocks.

In 1753 Egbert Douwes founded a company selling colonial goods in Joure. Starting in a small store, this venture really began to evolve as an industrial giant during the 1930-1950s. Family heirs renamed the company to Douwe Egberts and made it a world imperium, mainly focusing on coffee, tea and tobacco. As of today, many people in this town still have jobs at or related to DE, even though its headquarters moved to the city of Utrecht decades ago. Further typical industries that helped Joure grow are those related to the furniture and graphic sectors.

===Tourism===
Tourism has always been important and Joure offers a wide variety of uniquely typical Frisian attractions of historical, cultural and recreational significance. Its central location as well its sound transportation system make a visit to &quot;De Flecke&quot; easy and memorable.

==Windmills==
There are two restored windmills in Joure, &quot;De Groene Molen&quot; and &quot;Penninga&#x27;s Molen&quot;. The base of a third mill, &quot;Wielinga-stam&quot; also survives.

==Notable people==
* Egbert Douwes (1723–1802), founder of Jacobs Douwe Egberts
* Wynoldus Munniks (1744–1806), professor in medicine
* Frans Julius Johan van Eysinga (1752–1828), grietman of Doniawerstal
* Elias Annes Borger (1784–1820), professor in theology and the arts
* Geart Aeilco Wumkes (1869–1954), theologian and historian
* Nicolas Japikse (1872–1944), historian
* Jacob Jongbloed (1895–1974), physiologist
* Heije Schaper (1906–1996), military officer and politician
* Charles Groenhuijsen (born 1954), journalist and publicist
* Arend Glas (born 1968), bobsledder
* Bert Jan van der Veen (born 1968), speed skater
* Jelle ten Rouwelaar (born 1980), former football player
* Danny Noppert (born 1990), darts player
* Andries Noppert (born 1994), football player for SC Heerenveen and the Netherlands National Football Team

==International relations==
===Twin towns — sister cities===
Joure is twinned with:
* Drolshagen, Germany
* Mediaș, Romania

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2317245" start="0" end="5" title="Joure" label="Joure"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="9" end="21" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114866" start="124" end="140" title="De Fryske Marren" label="De Fryske Marren"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="142" end="151" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935" start="394" end="398" title="Calf (animal)" label="calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="429" end="437" title="Sacrifice" label="offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q477248" start="585" end="593" title="Pastry" label="pastries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="693" end="702" title="rye flour" label="rye flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="704" end="709" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="722" end="726" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="815" end="828" title="Late Middle Ages" label="late Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="829" end="833" title="Levee" label="dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814332" start="858" end="868" title="toll house" label="toll house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549931" start="872" end="883" title="Haskerhorne" label="Haskerhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="1136" end="1152" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q649925" start="1246" end="1256" title="trekschuit" label="trekschuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="1322" end="1333" title="Kalmar Union" label="Northerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q574558" start="1428" end="1438" title="Heerenveen" label="Heerenveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1460" end="1476" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="1544" end="1548" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1588" end="1597" title="Nannewiid" label="Nannewiid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035552" start="1608" end="1617" title="Oudehaske" label="Oudehaske"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483055" start="1638" end="1643" title="Pram (ship)" label="prams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391887" start="1682" end="1689" title="skûtsje" label="skûtsje"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="1905" end="1913" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q706454" start="2008" end="2020" title="Netherlands in World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="2053" end="2069" title="Horsecar" label="horse-drawn tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q23070" start="2104" end="2109" title="Sneek" label="Sneek"/>
<link wikidata="Q144091" start="2111" end="2117" title="Lemmer" label="Lemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626147" start="2406" end="2410" title="City rights in the Low Countries" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="2444" end="2451" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2520" end="2526" title="Vlek" label="vlecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="2668" end="2675" title="West Frisian language" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="2718" end="2721" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252809" start="2770" end="2783" title="Douwe Egberts" label="Douwe Egberts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2827" end="2840" title="Egbert Douwes" label="Egbert Douwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="2852" end="2860" title="Dutch empire" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090758" start="2953" end="2967" title="Coffee roasting" label="coffee roaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3182" end="3192" title="Haskerland" label="Haskerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q225521" start="3243" end="3254" title="Skarsterlân" label="Skarsterlân"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114866" start="3302" end="3318" title="De Fryske Marren" label="De Fryske Marren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3325" end="3341" title="Haulster forests" label="Haulster forests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3361" end="3380" title="De Haskerveenpolder" label="De Haskerveenpolder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3412" end="3429" title="Langweerderwielen" label="Langweerderwielen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="3494" end="3507" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="3509" end="3515" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252809" start="4133" end="4146" title="Douwe Egberts" label="Douwe Egberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="4806" end="4814" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917198" start="4826" end="4853" title="De Groene Molen, Joure" label="&amp;quot;De Groene Molen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098568" start="4858" end="4891" title="Penninga&amp;#x27;s Molen, Joure" label="&amp;quot;Penninga&amp;#x27;s Molen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4982" end="4995" title="Egbert Douwes" label="Egbert Douwes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5043" end="5059" title="Wynoldus Munniks" label="Wynoldus Munniks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5097" end="5127" title="Frans Julius Johan van Eysinga (1752-1828)" label="Frans Julius Johan van Eysinga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5168" end="5186" title="Elias Annes Borger" label="Elias Annes Borger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027397" start="5237" end="5256" title="Geart Aeilco Wumkes" label="Geart Aeilco Wumkes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5297" end="5312" title="Nicolas Japikse" label="Nicolas Japikse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5338" end="5353" title="Jacob Jongbloed" label="Jacob Jongbloed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790450" start="5382" end="5395" title="Heije Schaper" label="Heije Schaper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5443" end="5463" title="Charles Groenhuijsen" label="Charles Groenhuijsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q649956" start="5504" end="5514" title="Arend Glas" label="Arend Glas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5541" end="5562" title="Bert Jan van der Veen" label="Bert Jan van der Veen"/>
<link wikidata="Q954193" start="5591" end="5610" title="Jelle ten Rouwelaar" label="Jelle ten Rouwelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664701" start="5649" end="5662" title="Danny Noppert" label="Danny Noppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905451" start="5691" end="5706" title="Andries Noppert" label="Andries Noppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q200321" start="5740" end="5753" title="SC Heerenveen" label="SC Heerenveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="5762" end="5796" title="Netherlands National Football Team" label="Netherlands National Football Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="5868" end="5875" title="town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q10890" start="5884" end="5894" title="Drolshagen" label="Drolshagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5896" end="5903" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q374465" start="5906" end="5912" title="Mediaș" label="Mediaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="5914" end="5921" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381876" wikidata="Q15914499" url="?curid=381876" title="Marooned">
<text>Marooned may refer to:
* Marooning, the intentional act of abandoning someone in an uninhabited area

== Film and television ==
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (1933 film), a British drama film
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (1969 film), an American science-fiction film
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (1994 film), a short film
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (2004 film), a football documentary
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (2019 film), a short film included on the home media releases of &quot;Abominable&quot;
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (&quot;Legends of Tomorrow&quot;), an episode of &quot;Legends of Tomorrow&quot;
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (&quot;Red Dwarf&quot;), an episode of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (&quot;The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show&quot;), an episode of &quot;The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show&quot;
* &quot;Marooned with Ed Stafford&quot;, a documentary television series

==Other uses==
* File:&quot;Marooned&quot; by Edward J Gregory.jpg, the 1887 oil painting by Edward John Gregory
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (novel), by Martin Caidin, 1964
* Marooned (band), an American &quot;a cappella&quot; band 
* &quot;Marooned&quot; (instrumental), on Pink Floyd&#x27;s 1994 album &quot;The Division Bell&quot;
* &quot;Marooned&quot;, a song from the album &quot;Death or Glory&quot; by Running Wild

== See also ==
* 
* Maroon (disambiguation)
* Maroons (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15914499" start="0" end="8" title="Marooned" label="Marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q282971" start="25" end="34" title="Marooning" label="Marooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q27959318" start="130" end="162" title="Marooned (1933 film)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (1933 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q918485" start="187" end="219" title="Marooned (1969 film)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (1969 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915852" start="256" end="288" title="Marooned (1994 film)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772372" start="305" end="337" title="Marooned (2004 film)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (2004 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55087665" start="456" end="466" title="Abominable (2019 film)" label="Abominable"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204846" start="475" end="529" title="Marooned (Legends of Tomorrow)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Legends of Tomorrow&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863968" start="551" end="570" title="Legends of Tomorrow" label="Legends of Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772369" start="579" end="623" title="Marooned (Red Dwarf)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Red Dwarf&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="645" end="654" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q125457791" start="663" end="723" title="Marooned (The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361124" start="745" end="770" title="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show" label="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814637" start="785" end="810" title="Marooned with Ed Stafford" label="Marooned with Ed Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="" start="868" end="917" title=":File:Marooned by Edward J Gregory.jpg" label="File:&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; by Edward J Gregory.jpg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772373" start="966" end="994" title="Marooned (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772370" start="1021" end="1036" title="Marooned (band)" label="Marooned (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453059" start="1081" end="1116" title="Marooned (instrumental)" label="&amp;quot;Marooned&amp;quot; (instrumental)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181301" start="1232" end="1246" title="Death or Glory (album)" label="Death or Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q397731" start="1290" end="1313" title="Maroon (disambiguation)" label="Maroon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772377" start="1316" end="1340" title="Maroons (disambiguation)" label="Maroons (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381877" wikidata="Q7344866" url="?curid=381877" title="Robert Gordon (philanthropist)">
<text>Robert Gordon (1668–1731) was a Scottish merchant and philanthropist. He is most well known for his founding of a charitable hospital which later evolved into a school and then a university in Aberdeen.

== Biography ==

=== Early life ===
Robert Gordon was born in Aberdeen. He was the only son of Arthur Gordon (1625-1680) who married Isabella Menzies of Balgownie. He was baptised in 1688. When Arthur Gordon, a well-respected advocate in the Edinburgh courts, died in 1680, he left his twelve-year-old son the sum of 20,000 merks (about £1,100, ).

When Gordon reached the age of sixteen he became a Burgess of the City of Aberdeen. Among other benefits, this entitled him to follow a merchant&#x27;s trade in the town. During the next few years he attended Marischal College, graduating in 1689.

=== Career ===
Soon after graduating, he left Aberdeen, travelling far and wide around Northern Europe before finally settling in Gdańsk (also known as Danzig) where he established himself as a merchant trader. Over the next few decades he built a highly successful business in Gdansk and soon became wealthy. By 1692, he was rich enough to donate a large sum of money to his old college and by 1699, it appears that he was providing low interest loans to landowners in Aberdeenshire who needed working capital.

Gordon was a loyalist to the early Jacobite cause in Scotland and at times, gave significant financial support to the Stuart court in exile.

=== Return to Aberdeen, death, and legacy ===
Little more is known about his time on the Baltic Sea but by 1720 at the latest, he returned to Aberdeen a very wealthy man. However he had never married and had no heirs. Consequently, he decided that his fortune would be used to found &#x27;a hospital for maintenance, aliment, entertainment and education of young boys&#x27; and wrote his will to that effect. He started work on the project in 1730. He died shortly thereafter but the project had started and the funding remained, with £10,300 left to the town council of Aberdeen to administer. Owing to his foresightedness, so work continued on the hospital. His death was recorded as being on 28 April 1731.

Construction of the building was completed in 1743. However, before it could be used for its intended purpose, it was taken over by the Duke of Cumberland to use as a barracks for the Hanoverian troops on his visit to Aberdeen in 1746 to put down the Jacobite rising, and so the hospital did not open until 1750. 

During the nineteenth century the hospital developed in two different directions. The first, aimed at secondary education led directly to the modern private school, Robert Gordon&#x27;s College. The second, aimed at tertiary education, developed in combination with external technical institutes such as Gray&#x27;s School of Art, into an institution which achieved university status in 1992 as Robert Gordon University. 

== Bibliography ==


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7344866" start="0" end="13" title="Robert Gordon (philanthropist)" label="Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="193" end="201" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="266" end="274" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="446" end="455" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921781" start="528" end="533" title="merks" label="merks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784578" start="604" end="611" title="Burgess (title)" label="Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="762" end="779" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="932" end="938" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="1297" end="1312" title="working capital" label="working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="1350" end="1358" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1546" end="1556" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="2304" end="2322" title="Prince William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="2352" end="2362" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="2419" end="2427" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="2585" end="2604" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344852" start="2648" end="2676" title="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College" label="Robert Gordon&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="2699" end="2717" title="tertiary education" label="tertiary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598125" start="2787" end="2812" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788342" start="2878" end="2902" title="Robert Gordon University" label="Robert Gordon University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381878" wikidata="Q1057886" url="?curid=381878" title="Draupadi">
<text>Draupadi (), also referred to as Krishnā, Panchali, and Yajnaseni, is the main female protagonist of the ancient Indian epic &quot;Mahabharata,&quot; and the wife of the five Pandava brothers—Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva. She is noted for her beauty, courage and polyandrous marriage.

In the &quot;Mahabharata,&quot; Draupadi and her twin brother, Dhrishtadyumna, were born from a &quot;yajna&quot; (fire sacrifice) organized by King Drupada of Panchala. Arjuna won her hand in marriage, but she had to marry the five brothers because of her mother-in-law&#x27;s misunderstanding. Later, she became the empress of Indraprastha after Yudhishthira performed the Rajasuya ritual and achieved the status of the emperor. She had five sons, one from each Pandava, who were collectively addressed as the Upapandavas. Them being as follows Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Shrutakarma, Shatanika and Shrutasena.

A notable incident in Draupadi&#x27;s life is the game of dice at Hastinapura where Yudhishthira lost all his possessions, and she was humiliated by the Kaurava brothers and Karna. An attempt was made by Dushasana to disrobe her, but she was saved by the intervention of Krishna. Following the subsequent episodes, Draupadi and the Pandavas were exiled for thirteen years, with the last year being a period of hiding when she assumed the identity of the maid Sairandhri. The exile was followed by the Kurukshetra War, where Draupadi lost her father, brothers, and her five children. After the war, she resumed her role as the empress for thirty six years, after which she retired to the Himalayas along with her husbands.

Draupadi&#x27;s story has been an inspiration for various arts, performances and secondary literature. She is extolled as one of the &quot;panchakanya&quot; (five virgins), archetypes of female chastity whose names are believed to dispel sin when recited. In some parts of the sub-continent, a sect of Draupadi exists, where she is worshipped as a goddess.

== Etymology and epithets ==
The word &quot;Draupadī&quot; (lit. &#x27;daughter of Drupada&#x27;) is a patronymic, derived from the word &quot;Drupada&quot;, which means &#x27;pillar&#x27;. Like other epic characters, she is referred to by multiple names in the &quot;Mahabharata&quot;. Some of her other names and epithets are as follows:

* Krishnā (&quot;Kṛṣṇā&quot;) – &#x27;one who has a dark complexion&#x27;. It is the birth name of Draupadi.
* Panchali (&quot;Pāñcālī&quot;) – &#x27;one from Panchala&#x27;.
* Yajnaseni (&quot;Yajñasenī&quot;) – another patronymic derived from Drupada&#x27;s another name Yajnasena (lit. &#x27;he whose army is sacrificial&#x27;); or the name can also mean &#x27;one born from a Yajña (sacrificial fire)&#x27;.
* Drupadakanya (&quot;Drupadakanyā&quot;) – &#x27;the daughter of Drupada&#x27;.
* Sairandhri (&quot;Sairandhrī&quot;) – &#x27;an expert maid&#x27;. This pseudonym was assumed by Draupadi during her incognito life.
* Parshati (&quot;Parṣatī&quot;) – &#x27;granddaughter of Prishata&#x27;, or &#x27;daughter of Prishati&#x27;. Both the names—Parshati and Prishati—are derived from Prishata, Drupada&#x27;s father.
* Nityayuvani (&quot;Nityayuvanī&quot;) – &#x27;one who remains young forever and never becomes old&#x27;.
* Mahabharati – the virtuous wife of great descendants of Bharata (Pandavas)
* Agnisutā – &#x27;Daughter of fire&#x27;
* Kalyani – &#x27;One who brings fortune&#x27;. Yudhishthira addressed her by this name.
* Malini (&quot;Mālinī&quot;) – fragrant, one who makes garlands.
* Panchavallabha (&quot;Pancavallabhā&quot;) – &#x27;Beloved of the five Pandavas&#x27;.
* Pandusharmila (&quot;Pāṇḍuśarmilā&quot;) – &#x27;Daughter-in-law of Pandu&#x27;.

==Literary background==
The story of Draupadi is told in the Indian script &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, one of the Sanskrit epics from the Indian subcontinent. The work is written in Classical Sanskrit and is a composite work of revisions, editing and interpolations over many centuries. The oldest parts in the surviving version of the text probably date to about 400 BCE.

The &quot;Mahabharata&quot; manuscripts exist in numerous versions, wherein the specifics and details of major characters and episodes vary, often significantly. Except for the sections containing the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot; which is remarkably consistent between the numerous manuscripts, the rest of the epic exists in many versions. The differences between the Northern and Southern recensions are particularly significant, with the Southern manuscripts more profuse and longer. Scholars have attempted to construct a critical edition, relying mostly on a study of the &quot;Bombay&quot; edition, the &quot;Poona&quot; edition, the &quot;Calcutta&quot; edition and the &quot;south Indian&quot; editions of the manuscripts. The most accepted version is one prepared by scholars led by Vishnu Sukthankar at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, preserved at Kyoto University, Cambridge University and various Indian universities.

==Life and Legends==

===Birth===
Most Hindu texts state that Draupadi was not born of a woman and thus, she is often described as an &quot;ayonija&quot; (lit. &#x27;one not born from a woman&#x27;s womb&#x27;). Her birth is narrated in the &quot;Adi Parva&quot; of the epic. Drona—the teacher of the Kuru princes—defeats Drupada with the help of his students, and takes half of Panchala. Drupada seeks vengeance but realises that none of his children and allies is capable enough to slay Drona. As a result, he decides to perform a &quot;yajna&quot; (fire-sacrifice) to obtain a powerful son. With the sages Yaja and Upyaja serving as the head priests, the yajna is conducted. After completion, the priests instruct Prishati—the wife of Drupada—to consume the sacrifice offering, but she refuses and asks them to wait till she washed herself. Unable to wait, Yaja pours the offering into the altar of the sacrifice, from which a youthful man and a woman emerge. The latter&#x27;s birth is followed by a divine prophecy, 
The youth and the maiden are named Dhrishtadyumna and Krishnaa, but the latter one is better known by the patronymic &quot;Draupadi&quot;. They accept Drupada and Prishati as their parents and are raised in Drupada&#x27;s palace.

Mahabharata includes an exceedingly flattering description of Draupadi as she arose from the fire, 

===Marriage and children===
Drupada intended to wed Draupadi to Arjuna, who had previously defeated him in a battle. Upon hearing of the Pandavas&#x27; supposed death at Varnavata, he set up a Swayamvara contest for Draupadi to choose her husband from the competitive contest. The test was to lift and string a bow, and fire arrows to pierce the eye of a golden fish only by looking at its reflection in the water. The news of Draupadi&#x27;s svayamvara spread far and wide, and numerous princes, as well as the general public including brahmanas, began proceeding towards Panchala. It so happened that the Pandavas also began their journey toward Panchala at this time along with their mother, Kunti. As they were on their way toward Panchala they were met by a large group of brahmanas on their way to Panchala, who invited Pandavas to join them. At the Swayamvara, almost all the assorted monarchs were unable to complete the challenge. There are some variations regarding Karna&#x27;s participation. Some renditions show Draupadi refusing to marry Karna on account of being a Suta, while some other versions describe him failing to string the bow by the &quot;breadth of a hair&quot;.
In the end, Arjuna succeeds in the task, dressed as a Brahmin. The other attendees, including the Kauravas and Karna protest at a Brahmin winning the competition and attack Draupadi and Arjuna. Arjuna and Bhima together protect Draupadi by defeating all attendees and are able to retreat. Arjuna, along with Draupadi and his brothers, runs home to tell Kunti of his success, shouting &quot;look what we have found&quot;. Kunti thought he was referring to alms found in the forest or to some great prize unknown to her. She tells Arjuna that the find must be shared with his brothers, as they had always shared such things in the past. This misunderstanding, combined with a motherly command, leads to an agreement that all five brothers marry her. This is one of the rare examples of polyandry in Sanskrit literature. The brothers agreed that none should intrude if Draupadi was alone with one of the others, the penalty for doing so being 12 years to be spent in exile. Some versions say that a year was allotted to each Pandava and during that year only that Pandava could enter Draupadi&#x27;s private chambers, while the others have no such mention.

Later Draupadi becomes a mother of five sons, one son each from the Pandava brothers. They were known as Upapandavas. Their names were Prativindhya (from Yudhishthira), Sutasoma (from Bheema), Shrutakarma (from Arjuna), Satanika (from Nakula) and Shrutasena (from Sahadeva). Ashwatthama killed the Upapandavas during his surprise raid on Pandava camp on the eighteenth day of the war to avenge the death of his father Drona.

In Javanese wayang adaption of Mahabharata, Draupadi is only a wife to Yudhishthira and later mothering a son named Pancawala.

===Draupadi as the empress===

With the Pandavas&#x27; survival revealed, a succession crisis was started. Upon the news of Pandavas&#x27; death at Varnavrat, the title of &#x27;the crown prince&#x27; had fallen to Duryodhana. Dhritrashtra invites the Pandavas to Hastinapura and proposes that the kingdom be divided. The Pandavas are assigned the wasteland Khandavaprastha, referred to as &quot;unreclaimed desert&quot;. With the help of Krishna, Pandavas rebuilt Khandavprastha into the glorious Indraprastha. The crown jewel of the kingdom was built at the Khandava forest, where Draupadi resided in the &quot;Palace of Illusions&quot;. Yudhishthira performed the rajasuya yajna with Draupadi by his side; the Pandavas gained lordship over many regions.
Draupadi was trained in economy and was responsible for the treasury of the Empire. Additionally, she also ran a citizen liaison. Her duties as a busy Empress are mentioned in her famous conversation with Satyabhama, Krishna&#x27;s favourite wife, during their exile.

===Duryodhana&#x27;s insult===
There is a popular myth that is believed to be the reason why Duryodhana hated Draupadi.
Duryodhana and his entourage were exploring the keep during their visit to Yudhishthira&#x27;s Rajasuya yajna. While touring the grounds, an unsuspecting Duryodhana fell prey to one of the many illusions that could be seen all around the palace. When he stepped on the apparently solid part of the courtyard, there was a splash and Duryodhana found himself waist-deep in water, drenched from head to foot by the hidden pool. The myth is, Draupadi and her maids saw this from the balcony with amusement, and joked &quot;Andhasya Putra Andhaha&quot; meaning &#x27;a blind man&#x27;s son is blind&#x27;. This famous story does not feature in Veda Vyasa&#x27;s Mahabharata but is the figment of the imagination of a much later playwright. It gained immense popularity gradually through repeated depictions in various screen and written adaptations of the epic across the length and breadth of the country. The most popular depictions were by B.R. Chopra&#x27;s &quot;Mahabharata&quot; series that aired on Doordarshan in 1988 and famous Telugu film &quot;Daana Veera Soora Karna&quot; starring Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao as Duryodhana, where Draupadi&#x27;s laughter was singled out for dramatic effect.

In Vyasa&#x27;s Sanskrit epic, the scene is quite different. It was Bhima, Arjuna, and the twin brothers alongside their retinues who had witnessed Duryodhana&#x27;s fall and laughed along with their servants. In the Sanskrit text, Draupadi is not mentioned in the scene at all, either laughing or insulting Duryodhana. Nonetheless, Duryodhana felt insulted by the behaviour of the four Pandavas, stoking his hatred of them. Later on, he went back to Hastinapura and expressed his immense agony on witnessing the riches of the Pandavas to his blind father, which was the root cause for inviting his cousins for the dice-game. His main wish was to usurp the wealth of his cousins which they had accumulated on account of the Rajasuya Yajna. Known to few, during this conversation, Duryodhan mentions how he had observed Draupadi serving food to everyone, including physically challenged citizens as the Empress. He says to his father, &quot;And, O king, Yajnaseni, without having eaten herself, daily seeth whether everybody, including even the deformed and the dwarfs, hath eaten or not.&quot;

He then went on to express his wrath at having fallen into a pool of water and being laughed at mockingly, mainly by Bhima, followed by Arjun, Nakul, Sahadeva and other menials in the palace. It is here, where he fleetingly mentioned Draupadi&#x27;s name, who accordingly to Duryodhan, had &quot;joined in the laughter with other females.&quot; Whether Duryodhana was speaking an untruth or her name was a later addition into this part of the text is debatable.

Draupadi&#x27;s laughter went on to be singled out and romanticized by writers for centuries as a cause for the dice-game, and the war. In Vyasa&#x27;s Sanskrit epic, however, her role in the scene is trivial compared to the exaggerated treatment it has received in popular adaptations.

===Game of dice and humiliation===
This key incident is often considered to mark a definitive moment in the story of Mahabharata. It is one of the driving reasons that ultimately led to the Kurukshetra War.

Together with his maternal uncle Shakuni, Duryodhana conspired to call on the Pandavas to Hastinapura and win their kingdoms in a game of gambling. There is famous folklore that the plan&#x27;s architect, Shakuni had magic dice that would never disobey his will, as they were made from the bones of Shakuni&#x27;s father. This story, however, is non-existent in the Sanskrit epic. As the game proceeds, Yudhishthira loses everything at first. In the second round, Yudhishthira&#x27;s brother Nakula is at stake, and Yudhishthira loses him. Yudhisthira subsequently gambles away Sahadeva, Arjuna and Bhima. Finally, Yudhishthira puts himself at stake, and loses again. For Duryodhana, the humiliation of the Pandavas was not complete. He prods Yudhishthira that he has not lost everything yet; Yudhishthira still has Draupadi with him and if he wishes he can win everything back by putting Draupadi at stake. Inebriated by the game, Yudhishthira, to the horror of everybody present, puts Draupadi up as a bet for the next round. Playing the next round, Shakuni wins. Draupadi was horrified after hearing that she was staked in the game and now is a slave for Duryodhana. Duryodhana initially sends his charioteer Pratikamin to bring Draupadi to the court. Pratikamin informs Draupadi about the incidents happened during the dice game. Draupadi questions Yudhishthira&#x27;s right on her as he had lost himself first and she was still the queen. Duryodhana, angry with Draupadi&#x27;s questions, commands his younger brother Dushasana to bring her into the court, forcefully if he must.
Dushasana drags Draupadi to the court by the hair. Seeing this, Bhima pledges to cut off Dushasana&#x27;s hands, as they touched Draupadi&#x27;s hair. Now in an emotional appeal to the elders present in the forum, Draupadi repeatedly questions the legality of the right of Yudhishthira to place her at stake.

In order to provoke the Pandavas further, Duryodhana bares and pats his thigh looking into Draupadi&#x27;s eyes, implying that she should sit on his thigh. The enraged Bhima vows in front of the entire assembly that he would break Duryodhana&#x27;s thighs, or else accept being Duryodhana&#x27;s slave for seven lifetimes. At this time Vikarna, a brother of Duryodhana asks the kings assembled in the court to answer the question of Draupadi. He gives his opinion that Draupadi is not won rightfully as Yudhishthira lost himself first before staking her. Besides, no one has the right to put a woman on bet according to shastras; not a husband, father, or even the gods. Hearing these words, Karna gets angry and says that when Yudhishthira lost all his possession he also lost Draupadi, even specifically staking her. Karna calls Draupadi a &quot;whore&quot; for being the wedded wife of five men, adding that her being to the court is not a surprising act whether she is clothed or naked. He then instructs Dushasana to remove the garments of Draupadi. Dushasana attempts to disrobe her, but she is miraculously protected when Dushasana finds that as he continues to unwrap the layers of her sari, the amount of fabric covering her never lessens. Dushasana is eventually reduced to exhaustion, as the awed court observes that Draupadi is still chastely dressed. At this point, a furious Bhima vows to drink blood from Dushasana&#x27;s chest, at the pain of not seeing his ancestors entering heaven. This vow unsettles the entire court.

The only Kauravas who object to the disrobing of Draupadi in the court are Vikarna and Yuyutsu. Vidura openly calls Duryodhana a snake and demon after finding no support even from his own brother, Vidura is helpless. Karna further orders Dushasana to take Draupadi to the servants&#x27; quarters and derisively asks her to choose another husband who unlike Yudhishthira would not gamble her away. Just then, jackals call out as a mark of evil omen. Queen Gandhari enters the scene and counsels Dhritarashtra to undo her sons&#x27; misdeeds. Fearing the ill-omens, Dhritarashtra intervenes and grants Draupadi a boon. Draupadi asks that her husband Yudishthira be freed from bondage so her son Prativindhya would not be called a slave. In order to pacify her further, Dhritarashtra offers a second boon. Calmly, she asks for the freedom of the Pandavas along with their weapons. When Dhritarashtra asks her for her third wish, she reminds him that a Kshatriya woman can seek only two wishes, three would be a sign of greed. Dhritarashtra gives them back their wealth and grants them permission to go home.

Amused by the sudden turn of events, Karna remarks that they &quot;have never heard of such an act, performed by any of the women noted in this world for their beauty.&quot; He taunts the Pandavas by praising their wife, as she had rescued them &quot;like a boat from their ocean of distress&quot;.

Having restored their pride and wealth, the Pandavas and Draupadi leave for Indraprastha, only to receive another invitation for a game of dice, in which the loser would be given an exile of 12 years followed by a year of Agyatavasa, meaning &quot;living in incognito&quot;. Yudhishtira yet again accepts the invitation and loses, and goes on an exile with his brothers and wife Draupadi.

===Living in Exile===
====Durvasa&#x27;s visit====

Though this story is regarded as an interpolation to the Mahabharata, it is very popular. Once, Draupadi and the Pandavas had finished eating their meal cooked from the Akshay Patra. Suddenly, sage Durvasa and his pupils visited them. They were sent by Duryodhana as he wanted the sage to curse the Pandavas. The brothers welcomed the sage along with his pupils and offered them service. Durvasa demanded food to eat as he was hungry. However, Draupadi had nothing left to feed the guests. Frightened that the sage would curse them, Draupadi prayed to god. Krishna then came there and asked her to give him the vessel. Draupadi gave the vessel to Krishna and he ate a single grain of rice left in it. The sage and his pupils suddenly felt that they had eaten a grand feast and left the place with satisfaction. Though a very popular tale, the &quot;Critical Edition&quot; does not include this incident.

====Abduction by Jayadratha====

While the Pandavas was in the Kamyaka forest, they often went hunting, leaving Draupadi alone. At this time Jayadratha, the son of Vriddhakshatra and the husband of Duryodhana&#x27;s sister Dussala, passed through Kamyaka forest on the way to Salva Desa. Jayadratha met Draupadi and then started beseeching her to go away with him and desert her husband. Draupadi pointed out the immorality of deserting one&#x27;s spouses when they were in difficulty and attempted to stall and dissuade Jayadratha by describing how the Pandavas would punish him. Failing with words, Jayadratha forced her onto his chariot. Meanwhile, the Pandavas finished their hunt and found Draupadi missing. Learning of their wife&#x27;s abduction by Jayadratha they rushed to save her. On seeing the Pandavas coming after him, Jayadratha left Draupadi on the road, though ultimately the Pandavas managed to arrest him. Arjuna urged Bheema to spare Jayadratha&#x27;s life for the sake of Dussala and Gandhari, much to the indignation of Draupadi. In some versions of the story, Yudhishthira asks Draupadi to pass the sentence since it was she who was attacked, and she begrudgingly counsels to spare him because of the relations they share. Before freeing him, the Pandavas shaved Jayadratha&#x27;s head at five places in order to publicly humiliate him.

====Agyatvās (Incognito)====

On the thirteenth year of their exile, the Pandavas choose to stay in the Matsya Kingdom. Draupadi becomes the maid of Sudeshna, queen of Matsya, and serves her.
One day Kichaka, Sudeshna&#x27;s brother and the commander of king Virata&#x27;s forces, happens to see Draupadi. He is filled with lust by looking at her and requests her hand in marriage. Draupadi refuses him, saying that she is already married to Gandharvas. Seeing his persistence, she warns Kichaka that her husbands are very strong and that he will not be able to escape death at their hands. Later, he convinces his sister, the queen Sudeshna, to help him win Draupadi. Sudeshna orders Draupadi to fetch wine from Kichaka&#x27;s house, overriding Draupadi&#x27;s protests. When Draupadi goes to get wine, Kichaka tries to molest her. 

Draupadi escapes and runs into the court of Virata. Kichaka kicks her in front of all the courtiers, including Yudhishthira. Fearful of losing his most powerful warrior, even Virat does not take any action. Bheema is present, and only a look from Yudhishthira prevents him from attacking Kichaka. Furious, Draupadi asks about the duties of a king and dharma. She then curses Kichaka with death by her husband&#x27;s hand. Laughing it off, Kichaka only doubts their whereabouts and asks those present where the Gandharvas are. Yudhishthira addresses Draupadi as Sairandhri and orders her to go to the temple, as Kichaka would not do anything to her there (in some versions, he recommends she seeks refuge with the queen). With this, the king asks Kichaka to leave and praises Yudhishthira&#x27;s reply as he himself could not think of anything.
Later that night, Bheema consoles Draupadi, and they hatch a plan to kill Kichaka. Draupadi meets with Kichaka, pretending to actually love him and agreeing to marry him on the condition that none of his friends or brothers will know about their relationship. Kichaka accepts her condition. Draupadi asks Kichaka to come to the dancing hall at night. Bheema (in the guise of Draupadi), fights with Kichaka and kills him. 

Draupadi calls the members of Kichaka&#x27;s family and shows them the mutilated body of Kichaka. The murder is attributed to her Gandharva husbands. This angers Kichaka&#x27;s brothers and they decide to burn her along with Kichaka&#x27;s body to take revenge. After getting permission from Virata, Draupadi is forcefully tied to Kichaka&#x27;s pyre. Upon her pleading, Bheema runs for her help and kills the brothers of Kichaka, thus saving her from being burnt alive.

=== Kurukshetra War ===
During the war, Draupadi stays at Ekachakra with other women. On the 16th day, Bheema kills Dushasana, drinking his blood and fulfilling his oath.

A popular myth, often depicted in well-known adaptations of Mahabharata, depicts Draupadi washing her hair with her brother-in-law Dushasana&#x27;s blood, as a mark of her vengeance against the molestation she had suffered at the dice-game. Though an extremely powerful and symbolic theme, this incident does not appear in Vyasa&#x27;s Sanskrit Mahabharata. 
Alf Hiltebeitel in his acclaimed research work, &quot;The Cult of Draupadi&quot; explores the source of this myth as he travels through the rural areas of India. He discovers that the first literary mention of the blood-washing theme appeared in &quot;Venisamhara&quot; or &quot;Braiding The Hair (of Draupadi)&quot;, a Sanskrit play written in the Pallava period by eminent playwright Bhatta Narayana. Since then, this powerful theme of vengeance had been used in most retellings and adaptations on Mahabharat, thus mistakenly attributing the authorship to Veda Vyasa.

====Ashwatthama&#x27;s attack====
Ashwathama, in order to avenge his father&#x27;s as well as other Kuru warriors&#x27; deceitful killing by the Pandavas, attacks their camp at night with Kripacharya and Kritavarma. Ashwathama killed Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Upapandavas, and the remaining Pandava and Panchala army. In the morning, Yudhishthira hears the news and asks Nakula to bring Draupadi from Matsya Kingdom. Draupadi vows that if the Pandavas do not kill Ashwatthama, she would fast to death. The Pandavas find Ashwatthama at Vyasa&#x27;s hut. Arjuna and Ashwatthama end up firing the Brahmashirsha astra at each other. Vyasa intervenes and asks the two warriors to withdraw the destructive weapon. Not endowed with the knowledge to do so, Ashwatthama instead redirects the weapon to Uttara&#x27;s womb, but Krishna protects the Pandavas&#x27; only heir with his Sudarshana Chakra. Krishna curses him for this act. Ashwatthama is caught by the Pandavas and his jewel is taken away. Draupadi gives the jewel to Yudhishthira and forgives the killer of her children. Due to the power of meditation, her wrath is subdued and she speaks of Ashwathama, son of their preceptor Drona, 

===Later life and death===
Draupadi and Yudhishthira performed the ashvamedha and ruled for 36 years. When her husbands retired from the world and went on their journey towards the Himalayas and heaven, she accompanied them and was the first to fall dead on the journey. When Bheema asked Yudhishthira why Draupadi had fallen, Yudhishthira replied,

== Polyandry ==

Polyandry was not regarded without censure by the society spoken of in the epic. Her marriage to five men was controversial for political reasons as that was an advantage for Prince Duryodhana to get the throne of Bharat Varsha. However, when questioned by Kunti to give an example of polyandry, Yudhishthira cites Gautam-clan Jatila (married to seven Saptarishi) and Hiranyaksha&#x27;s sister Pracheti (married to ten brothers).

There are many women of high born classes or royal class like Princess Mādhavi who had four husbands, the only daughter of King Yayati. Polyandry was in the royal class but under the strict guidance of the Vedic sages exactly like polygamous marriages of ancient Indian kings were under strict supervision and guidance of the Vedic laws and Vedic sages.

==Draupadi as a goddess==

In Sanskrit Mahābhārata, Draupadi is described as the incarnation of different goddesses. In Sambhava section of Adi Parva, she is said to be partial incarnation of Goddess Shachi (or Sachi). However, in Vaivahika section of Adi Parva Vyasa describes her as the celestial Sri. In Svargarohanika Parva, Yudhisthira goes to heaven and sees Draupadi seated as Goddess Sri (Or Sree).

The Draupadi Amman sect (or Draupadi devotional sect) is a tradition that binds together a community of people in worshipping Draupadi Amman as a village goddess with unique rituals and mythology Fire walking or Thimithi is a popular ritual enacted at Draupadi Amman temples. At the ancient religious festival of Bengaluru Pete named Bangalore Karaga, Draupadi is worshipped as an incarnation of Adishakti and Parvati in the nine-day event.There are over 400 temples dedicated to Draupadi in the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and other countries like Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malaysia, Mauritius, Réunion, South Africa. In these regions, Draupadi is worshipped mainly by people of the Palli or Vanniyar Kulakshatriyar.

There are a few processions and festivals which are conducted for about three weeks a year. The most famous festival is in the village Durgasamudram, Tirupati of Chittoor district.

===As a village deity===
The Draupadi Amman cult (or Draupadi sect) is a regional Hindu sect in which the Pallis or Vanniyar Kula Kshatriyas communities worship Draupadi Amman as main god of vanniyar as a village goddess with unique rituals and mythologies.

===Incarnation of Kali===
The Pillais, Vanniyars, Mudaliyars, Konars and the Gounder community of Tamil Nadu, and the Tigala community of Karnataka believe Draupadi Amman was an incarnation of Adi Parashakti and was the household goddess (kuladevi) of their communities. There are many temples in South Indian villages dedicated to Draupadi Amman, observing annual festivals. One of the popular temples of Sri Dharmarayaswamy- Draupadi temple is at Thigarapete, the heart of Bengaluru, Karnataka. .

===Fire Walking ritual===
Fire walking or Thimithi is a popular ritual enacted at the Draupadi Amman temples.

==In other traditions==
In Buddhism, Kṛṣṇā Draupadī is presented in the Mahāvastu and the Lalitavistara as one among eight goddesses who reside in the western cardinal direction.

In Digambara Jain scriptures like &quot;Harivamsa Purana&quot;, polyandry of Draupadi has been rejected and it is suggested that she was married only to Arjuna. Hemachandra, a Śvetāmbara Jain monk, accepts the polyandry in his work &quot;Triṣaṣṭi&quot; and further suggests that Draupadi was Nagasri in one of her previous lives and had poisoned a Jain monk. Therefore, she had to suffer in hell and animal incarnations for several lives before being born a woman who later became a Jain nun. After her death, she was reborn as Draupadi and was married to five Pandavas.

==In popular culture==
=== In folk cultures ===
* According to a folklore, Draupadi introduced the popular Indian snack Pani Puri.

===Arts and dances===
Karaga is a folk festival of Karnataka which originated as a ritual in Southern India dedicated to Draupadi as known in these parts as Droupadamma. The ritual is performed on a full moon day.
The story of Draupadi is one of the central topics of Yakshagana, a traditional dance-play practised in Karnataka and Terukkuttu, a Tamil street theatre form practised in Tamil Nadu state of India and Tamil-speaking regions of Sri Lanka.

=== In literature ===
The fiery heroine of Mahabharata has been the topic of research and debate for centuries. There are various plays and novels based on her.

*Yajnaseni by Pratibha Ray – This novel, originally written in Odia was the recipient of Jnanpith Award. It was also translated in various languages like English, Hindi, Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam, etc.
*The Palace of Illusions: A Novel by Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni – Deviating much from the Sanskrit text, Divakaruni brings up the emotions of Draupadi, re-imagining the whole epic from her perspective.
* Draupadi by Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad, is a Sahitya Akademi Award-winning Telugu novel that narrates Mahabharata from Draupadi&#x27;s perspective.
*The Cult of Draupadi by Alf Hiltebeitel – This trilogy is an exhaustive, scholarly account of the various folk traditions surrounding Draupadi in South India. Hiltebeitel travels through various parts of India, tracing and recording the lesser-known customs and tribes in Gingi Cult and much more, who extensively worship Draupadi as their deity – a status which has been attained by few Mahabharat characters. There are over 31 plays and ballads that are conducted in over 400 temples, that are dedicated to Draupadi Amman. The story of Draupadi creates great respect for women in society. Her sacrifice and her inner power defeats the evil activities performed on women
*Nathabati Anathbat by Shaoli Mitra – This is a stage play depicting the agony of Draupadi as a woman who &quot;has five husbands, and yet none to protect her.&quot;
*Dopdi by Mahasweta Devi in Bengali – A contemporary tale of oppression with Draupadi as the lead character.
*The Great Indian Novel by Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Written as a fictional work that is analogous to the events featured in the Mahabharata in order to describe contemporary Indian Politics, Dr.Tharoor has described the character of &#x27;Draupadi&#x27; as &#x27;Di Mokrasi&#x27;, who is an illegitimate daughter of &#x27;Dhritarashtra&#x27; and &#x27;Lady Drewpad&#x27; in the novel. Tharoor likens Draupadi to the tenets of &#x27;Democracy&#x27;. As mentioned in Veda Vyasa&#x27;s epic, he ascribes her to be the wife to all five &#x27;Pandyas&#x27;, who are themselves an abbreviation of different facets of Indian politics.

==See also==
* Agnivansha
* Draupati Amman
* Yajnaseni, a novel by Pratibha Ray
* Yajnaseni, a play by Suman Pokhrel
*Historicity of the Mahabharata

==Notes==


==References==
* &quot;Eminent women in the Mahabharata&quot; by Vanamala Bhawalkar.
*
*The Critical Edition of Mahabharat(1966) published by Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
* &quot;Mahabharata&quot; (1999) by Krishna Dharma
* Mahabharata of Krishna Dwaipayana Vyasa, English translation by Kisari Mohan Ganguli
* 
* 
*
*
* 

== External links ==

* Sacred-texts.com
* The Kaurava race of Sri Lanka and the worship of Draupadi
* Karaga Worship is all about Goddess Draupadi
* Pattanaik, Devadutt (2009). &quot;7 Secrets from Hindu Calendar Art&quot;. Westland, Mumbai. .
* Draupadi Amman Shrine/ Temple - KONDAL, Mayiladuthurai, TN.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="0" end="8" title="Draupadi" label="Draupadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="33" end="40" title="Draupadi" label="Krishnā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="42" end="50" title="Draupadi" label="Panchali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="56" end="65" title="Draupadi" label="Yajnaseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="86" end="97" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="105" end="124" title="Indian epic poetry" label="ancient Indian epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="131" end="142" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="175" end="182" title="Pandava" label="Pandava"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="192" end="204" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="206" end="211" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="213" end="219" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978476" start="221" end="227" title="Nakula" label="Nakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044641" start="233" end="241" title="Sahadeva" label="Sahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102979" start="284" end="295" title="Polyandry" label="polyandrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357086" start="370" end="384" title="Dhrishtadyumna" label="Dhrishtadyumna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="409" end="414" title="yajna" label="yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389430" start="456" end="463" title="Drupada" label="Drupada"/>
<link wikidata="Q558603" start="467" end="475" title="Panchala" label="Panchala"/>
<link wikidata="Q844424" start="564" end="577" title="Kunti" label="mother-in-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975540" start="636" end="648" title="Indraprastha" label="Indraprastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="655" end="667" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029727" start="682" end="690" title="Rajasuya" label="Rajasuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898172" start="819" end="830" title="Upapandavas" label="Upapandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459714" start="984" end="994" title="Hastinapur" label="Hastinapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648561" start="1071" end="1078" title="Kaurava" label="Kaurava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727397" start="1092" end="1097" title="Karna" label="Karna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044646" start="1122" end="1131" title="Dushasana" label="Dushasana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="1189" end="1196" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="1377" end="1387" title="Draupadi" label="Sairandhri"/>
<link wikidata="Q387123" start="1419" end="1434" title="Kurukshetra War" label="Kurukshetra War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651202" start="1780" end="1791" title="panchakanya" label="panchakanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="1918" end="1931" title="sub-continent" label="sub-continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q558603" start="2499" end="2507" title="Panchala" label="Panchala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="2720" end="2725" title="Yajna" label="Yajña"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728386" start="3062" end="3070" title="Prishati" label="Prishati"/>
<link wikidata="Q857071" start="3705" end="3710" title="Pandu" label="Pandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3830" end="3838" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="3854" end="3873" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="4297" end="4310" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="4613" end="4629" title="critical edition" label="critical edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12453121" start="4879" end="4896" title="Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar" label="Vishnu Sukthankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595113" start="4904" end="4942" title="Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute" label="Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="4957" end="4973" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4975" end="4995" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194040" start="5069" end="5080" title="Hindu texts" label="Hindu texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472946" start="5277" end="5286" title="Adi Parva" label="Adi Parva"/>
<link wikidata="Q890529" start="5306" end="5311" title="Drona" label="Drona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068408" start="5331" end="5343" title="the Kuru Kingdom" label="Kuru princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="5569" end="5574" title="yajna" label="yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728386" start="5747" end="5755" title="Prishati" label="Prishati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389430" start="6412" end="6419" title="Drupada" label="Drupada"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="6448" end="6454" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="6521" end="6529" title="Pandavas" label="Pandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479809" start="6536" end="6563" title="Lakshagraha" label="supposed death at Varnavata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12923736" start="6577" end="6587" title="Swayamvara" label="Swayamvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q844424" start="7079" end="7084" title="Kunti" label="Kunti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="7627" end="7634" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="7778" end="7783" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="8028" end="8032" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102979" start="8357" end="8366" title="polyandry" label="polyandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="8370" end="8389" title="Sanskrit literature" label="Sanskrit literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898172" start="8833" end="8844" title="Upapandavas" label="Upapandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044550" start="9003" end="9014" title="Ashwatthama" label="Ashwatthama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078316" start="9157" end="9172" title="Wayang" label="Javanese wayang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405823" start="9497" end="9507" title="Duryodhana" label="Duryodhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q926150" start="9509" end="9521" title="Dhritrashtra" label="Dhritrashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q459714" start="9546" end="9556" title="Hastinapur" label="Hastinapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975540" start="9640" end="9655" title="Khandavprastha" label="Khandavaprastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="9721" end="9728" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975540" start="9780" end="9792" title="Indraprastha" label="Indraprastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250498" start="9842" end="9850" title="Khandava" label="Khandava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029727" start="9949" end="9963" title="Rajasuya" label="rajasuya yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="10992" end="10997" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="11085" end="11096" title="Mahabharatha" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q804792" start="11366" end="11377" title="B.R. Chopra" label="B.R. Chopra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207375" start="11479" end="11502" title="Daana Veera Soora Karna" label="Daana Veera Soora Karna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646553" start="11518" end="11543" title="Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao" label="Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="11696" end="11701" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="11703" end="11709" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="13591" end="13602" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q387123" start="13664" end="13679" title="Kurukshetra War" label="Kurukshetra War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992668" start="13715" end="13722" title="Shakuni" label="Shakuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405823" start="13724" end="13734" title="Duryodhana" label="Duryodhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="13760" end="13768" title="Pandavas" label="Pandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459714" start="13772" end="13782" title="Hastinapur" label="Hastinapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q796171" start="13812" end="13828" title="Pachisi" label="game of gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978476" start="14174" end="14180" title="Nakula" label="Nakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044641" start="14260" end="14268" title="Sahadeva" label="Sahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="14270" end="14276" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="14281" end="14286" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="14297" end="14309" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044646" start="15205" end="15214" title="Dushasana" label="Dushasana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="15745" end="15750" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929388" start="15913" end="15920" title="Vikarna" label="Vikarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727397" start="16269" end="16274" title="Karna" label="Karna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="16771" end="16775" title="sari" label="sari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648561" start="17125" end="17133" title="Kauravas" label="Kauravas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002511" start="17212" end="17218" title="Vidura" label="Vidura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849082" start="17571" end="17579" title="Gandhari (character)" label="Gandhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975540" start="18598" end="18610" title="Indraprastha" label="Indraprastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701818" start="19133" end="19145" title="Akshaya Patra" label="Akshay Patra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361344" start="19162" end="19169" title="Durvasa" label="Durvasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405823" start="19217" end="19227" title="Duryodhana" label="Duryodhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="19912" end="19920" title="Pandavas" label="Pandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359921" start="19932" end="19939" title="Kamyaka" label="Kamyaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381146" start="20010" end="20020" title="Jayadratha" label="Jayadratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723039" start="20092" end="20099" title="Dussala" label="Dussala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406962" start="20145" end="20150" title="Salwa Kingdom" label="Salva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849082" start="20874" end="20882" title="Gandhari (character)" label="Gandhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q113100727" start="21334" end="21348" title="Matsya Kingdom" label="Matsya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290894" start="21379" end="21387" title="Sudeshna" label="Sudeshna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382488" start="21430" end="21437" title="Kichaka" label="Kichaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="21471" end="21480" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978459" start="21489" end="21495" title="Virata" label="Virata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291498" start="21672" end="21681" title="Gandharva" label="Gandharva"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290894" start="21863" end="21871" title="Sudeshna" label="Sudeshna"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="22176" end="22188" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="22272" end="22278" title="Bheema" label="Bheema"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="22416" end="22422" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291498" start="22575" end="22585" title="Gandharvas" label="Gandharvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="22665" end="22671" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="23907" end="23913" title="Bheema" label="Bheema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044646" start="23920" end="23929" title="Dushasana" label="Dushasana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666720" start="24335" end="24350" title="Alf Hiltebeitel" label="Alf Hiltebeitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443344" start="24721" end="24736" title="Bhatta Narayana" label="Bhatta Narayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044550" start="24940" end="24950" title="Ashwathama" label="Ashwathama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068408" start="25006" end="25010" title="Kuru Kingdom" label="Kuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="25051" end="25059" title="Pandavas" label="Pandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044671" start="25094" end="25105" title="Kripacharya" label="Kripacharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669309" start="25110" end="25120" title="Kritavarma" label="Kritavarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357086" start="25140" end="25154" title="Dhrishtadyumna" label="Dhrishtadyumna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357063" start="25156" end="25165" title="Shikhandi" label="Shikhandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898172" start="25167" end="25178" title="Upapandavas" label="Upapandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="25241" end="25253" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978476" start="25278" end="25284" title="Nakula" label="Nakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q113100727" start="25308" end="25322" title="Matsya Kingdom" label="Matsya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q330521" start="25442" end="25447" title="Vyasa" label="Vyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="25460" end="25466" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378785" start="25501" end="25520" title="Brahmashirsha astra" label="Brahmashirsha astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389445" start="25700" end="25713" title="Uttarā (Mahabharata)" label="Uttara&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="25724" end="25731" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q726486" start="26162" end="26172" title="ashvamedha" label="ashvamedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="26276" end="26285" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="26371" end="26377" title="Bheema" label="Bheema"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="26384" end="26396" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102979" start="26462" end="26471" title="Polyandry" label="Polyandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844424" start="26719" end="26724" title="Kunti" label="Kunti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392436" start="26814" end="26824" title="Saptarishi" label="Saptarishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576197" start="26830" end="26841" title="Hiranyaksha" label="Hiranyaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091602" start="27021" end="27027" title="Yayati" label="Yayati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578801" start="27448" end="27454" title="Shachi" label="Shachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="27547" end="27550" title="Lakshmi" label="Sri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="27660" end="27674" title="Draupadi Amman" label="Draupadi Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930712" start="27802" end="27817" title="Village deities of Tamil Nadu" label="village goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q929202" start="27852" end="27864" title="Fire walking" label="Fire walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806757" start="27868" end="27876" title="Thimithi" label="Thimithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887708" start="27969" end="27983" title="Bengaluru Pete" label="Bengaluru Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855058" start="27990" end="28006" title="Bangalore Karaga" label="Bangalore Karaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682614" start="28052" end="28061" title="Adishakti" label="Adishakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="28066" end="28073" title="Parvati" label="Parvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="28169" end="28183" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="28185" end="28195" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="28197" end="28206" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="28232" end="28241" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="28243" end="28252" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="28254" end="28262" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="28264" end="28273" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="28275" end="28282" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="28284" end="28296" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428781" start="28363" end="28371" title="Konar (caste)" label="Palli or"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915134" start="28372" end="28395" title="Vanniyar" label="Vanniyar Kulakshatriyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198998" start="28560" end="28568" title="Chittoor" label="Chittoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915134" start="28686" end="28692" title="Vanniyar" label="Pallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930712" start="28785" end="28800" title="Village deities of Tamil Nadu" label="village goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682614" start="29032" end="29046" title="Adi Parashakti" label="Adi Parashakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q929202" start="29365" end="29377" title="Fire walking" label="Fire walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806757" start="29381" end="29389" title="Thimithi" label="Thimithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="29477" end="29485" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="29522" end="29531" title="Mahāvastu" label="Mahāvastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="29540" end="29553" title="Lalitavistara" label="Lalitavistara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9436" start="29633" end="29642" title="Digambara" label="Digambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807856" start="29670" end="29686" title="Harivamsa Purana" label="Harivamsa Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723463" start="29791" end="29802" title="Hemachandra" label="Hemachandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q280522" start="29806" end="29816" title="Śvetāmbara" label="Śvetāmbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722122" start="30322" end="30331" title="Pani Puri" label="Pani Puri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="30602" end="30612" title="Yakshagana" label="Yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705309" start="30666" end="30676" title="Terukkuttu" label="Terukkuttu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="30680" end="30685" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140453" start="30686" end="30700" title="street theatre" label="street theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="30719" end="30729" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="30739" end="30744" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="30775" end="30784" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="30830" end="30841" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208440" start="30950" end="30959" title="Yajnaseni (novel)" label="Yajnaseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953018" start="30963" end="30975" title="Pratibha Ray" label="Pratibha Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q916783" start="31038" end="31052" title="Jnanpith Award" label="Jnanpith Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31152" end="31184" title="The Palace of Illusions: A Novel" label="The Palace of Illusions: A Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627089" start="31188" end="31214" title="Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni" label="Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049360" start="31367" end="31392" title="Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad" label="Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="31456" end="31467" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666720" start="31527" end="31542" title="Alf Hiltebeitel" label="Alf Hiltebeitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489164" start="32198" end="32210" title="Shaoli Mitra" label="Shaoli Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q144391" start="32351" end="32365" title="Mahasweta Devi" label="Mahasweta Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="32369" end="32376" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737811" start="32451" end="32473" title="The Great Indian Novel" label="The Great Indian Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q195616" start="32481" end="32495" title="Shashi Tharoor" label="Shashi Tharoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693269" start="33090" end="33100" title="Agnivansha" label="Agnivansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="33103" end="33117" title="Draupati Amman" label="Draupati Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208440" start="33120" end="33129" title="Yajnaseni (novel)" label="Yajnaseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953018" start="33142" end="33154" title="Pratibha Ray" label="Pratibha Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q27104107" start="33157" end="33166" title="Yajnaseni (play)" label="Yajnaseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150957" start="33178" end="33191" title="Suman Pokhrel" label="Suman Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="33193" end="33223" title="Historicity of the Mahabharata" label="Historicity of the Mahabharata"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381880" wikidata="Q331613" url="?curid=381880" title="Lord's">
<text>Lord&#x27;s Cricket Ground, commonly known as Lord&#x27;s, is a cricket venue in St John&#x27;s Wood, Westminster. Named after its founder, Thomas Lord, it is owned by Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) and is the home of Middlesex County Cricket Club, the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB), the ICC Europe and, until August 2005, the International Cricket Council (ICC). Lord&#x27;s is widely referred to as the &quot;Home of Cricket&quot; and has the world&#x27;s oldest sporting museum.

Lord&#x27;s today is not on its original site; it is the third of three grounds that Lord established between 1787 and 1814. His first ground, now referred to as Lord&#x27;s Old Ground, was where Dorset Square now stands. His second ground, Lord&#x27;s Middle Ground, was used from 1811 to 1813 before being abandoned to make way for the construction through its outfield of the Regent&#x27;s Canal. The present Lord&#x27;s ground is about north-west of the site of the Middle Ground. The ground can hold 31,100 spectators, the capacity having increased between 2017 and 2022 as part of MCC&#x27;s ongoing redevelopment plans.

==History==
===Background===

Acting on behalf of members of the White Conduit Club and backed against any losses by George Finch, 9th Earl of Winchilsea and Colonel Charles Lennox, Thomas Lord opened his first ground in May 1787 on the site where Dorset Square now stands, on land leased from the Portman Estate. The White Conduit moved there from Islington, unhappy at the standard of the ground at White Conduit Fields, soon afterwards and reconstituted themselves as Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC). It was thought that the establishment of a new ground would offer more exclusivity to its members, with White Conduit Fields considered too far away from fashionable Oxford Street and the West End. The first match played at the new ground saw Middlesex play Essex. In 1811, feeling obliged to relocate because of a rise in rent, Lord removed his turf and relaid it at his second ground. This was short-lived because it lay on the route decided by Parliament for the Regent&#x27;s Canal, in addition to the ground being unpopular with patrons.

The &quot;Middle Ground&quot; was on the estate of the Eyre family, who offered Lord another plot nearby; and he again relocated his turf. This new ground was originally a duck pond on a hill in St. John&#x27;s Wood, which gives rise to Lord&#x27;s famous slope, which at the time was recorded as sloping down from north-west to south-east, though in actuality the slope is . The new ground was opened in the 1814 season, with the MCC playing Hertfordshire in the first match on the ground on 22 June 1814.

===Early history===

A tavern was built for Lord in 1813–14, followed by a wooden pavilion in 1814. First-class cricket was first played on the present ground in July 1814, with the MCC playing St John&#x27;s Wood Cricket Club. The first century to be scored at the ground in first-class cricket was made by Frederick Woodbridge (107) for Epsom against Middlesex, with Epsom&#x27;s Felix Ladbroke (116) recording the second century in the same match. The annual Eton v Harrow match, which was first played on the Old Ground in 1805, returned to the present ground on 29 July 1818. From 1822, the fixture has been almost an annual event at Lord&#x27;s.

Lord&#x27;s witnessed the first double-century to be made in first-class cricket when William Ward scored 278 for the MCC against Norfolk in 1820. The original pavilion, which had recently been renovated at great expense, was destroyed by fire following the first Winchester v Harrow match on 23 July 1823, which destroyed nearly all of the original records of the MCC and the wider game. The pavilion was promptly rebuilt by Lord. In 1825, the future of the ground was placed in jeopardy when Lord proposed developing the ground with housing at a time when St John&#x27;s Wood was seeing rapid development. This was prevented by William Ward, who purchased the ground from Lord for £5,000. His purchase was celebrated in the following anonymous poem:
:And of all who frequent the ground named after Lord,
:On the list first and foremost should stand Mr Ward.
:No man will deny, I am sure, when I say
:That he&#x27;s without rival first bat of the day,
:And although he has grown a little too stout,
:Even Matthews is bothered at bowling him out.
:He&#x27;s our life blood and soul in this noblest of games,
:And yet on our praises he&#x27;s many more claims;
:No pride, although rich, condescending and free,
:And a well informed man and a city M.P.
The first University Match between Oxford and Cambridge was held at Lord&#x27;s in 1827, at the instigation of Charles Wordsworth, establishing what would be the oldest first-class fixture in the world until 2020. The ground remained under the ownership of Ward until 1835, after which it was handed over to James Dark. The pavilion was refurbished in 1838, with the addition of gas lighting. Around this time Lord&#x27;s could still be considered a country ground, with open countryside to the north and west. Lord&#x27;s was described by Lord Cottesloe in 1845 as being a primitive venue, with low benches put in a circle around the ground at a good distance providing seating for spectators. Improvements to the ground were gradually made, with the introduction of a telegraph scoreboard in 1846. A small room was built on the north side of the pavilion in 1848 for professionals, providing them with a separate entrance to the field. In the same year scorecards were introduced for the first time, from a portable press, and drainage was installed in 1849–50.

The Australian Aboriginal cricket team toured England in 1868, with Lord&#x27;s hosting one of their matches to a mixed response, with &quot;The Times&quot; describing the tourists as &quot;a travestie upon cricketing at Lord&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;the conquered natives of a convict colony&quot;. Dark proposed to part with his interest in the ground in 1863, for the fee of £15,000 for the remaining years of his lease. An agreement was reached in 1864, with Dark, who was seriously ill, selling his interests at Lord&#x27;s for £11,000. The landlord of the ground, Isaac Moses, offered to sell it outright for £21,000 in 1865, which was reduced to £18,150. William Nicholson, who was a member of the MCC committee at the time advanced the money on a mortgage, with his proposal for the MCC to buy the ground being unanimously passed at a special general meeting on 2 May 1866. Following the purchase, a number of developments took place. These included the addition of cricket nets for players to practise and the construction of a grandstand designed by the architect Arthur Allom, which was built in the winter of 1867–68 and also provided accommodation for the press. This was funded by a private syndicate of MCC members, from whom the MCC purchased the stand in 1869. The wicket at Lord&#x27;s was heavily criticised in the 1860s due to its poor condition, with Frederick Gale suggesting that nine cricket grounds out of ten within 20 miles of London would have a better wicket; the condition was deemed so poor as to be dangerous that Sussex refused to play there in 1864.

===Continued developments===
By the 1860s and 1870s, the great social occasions of the season were the public schools match between Eton and Harrow, the University Match between Oxford and Cambridge, and the Gentlemen v Players, with all three matches attracting great crowds. Crowds became so large that they encroached on the playing area, which necessitated the introduction of the boundary system in 1866. Further crowd control measures were initiated in 1871, with the introduction of turnstiles. The pavilion was expanded in the mid-1860s and shortly thereafter it was decided to replace the original tavern with a new construction commencing in December 1867. At this time a nascent county game was beginning to take shape. With Lord&#x27;s hosting more county matches, the pitches subsequently improved with the umpires being responsible for their preparation.

Middlesex County Cricket Club, which had been founded in 1864, began playing their home games at Lord&#x27;s in 1877 after vacating their ground in Chelsea, which had been considered a serious rival to Lord&#x27;s given its noblemen backers. In 1873–74, an embankment was constructed which could accommodate 4,000 spectators in four rows of seats. Four years later a new lodge and was constructed to replace an older lodge, along with a new workshop, stables and a store room at a cost of £1,000. To meet the ever increasing demand to accommodate more spectators, a temporary stand was constructed on the eastern side of the ground. After many years of complaints regarding the poor condition of the Lord&#x27;s pitch, the MCC took action by installing Percy Pearce as Ground Superintendent in 1874. Pearce had previously held the same position at the County Ground, Hove. His appointment vastly improved the condition of the wicket, with &quot;The Standard&quot; describing them as &quot;faultless&quot;.

The Australian cricket team captained by Dave Gregory first visited Lord&#x27;s on 27 May 1878, defeating their MCC hosts by 9 wickets. This was considered a shock result and established not only the fame of the Australian team, but also the rivalry between England and Australia. Lord&#x27;s hosted its first Test match during the 1884 Ashes, becoming the third venue in England to host Test cricket after The Oval and Old Trafford. The match was won by England by an innings and 5 runs, with England&#x27;s A. G. Steel and Edmund Peate recording the first Test century and five wicket haul at Lord&#x27;s respectively.

As part of the Golden Jubilee Celebrations for Queen Victoria in 1887, the Kings of Belgium, Denmark, Saxony, and Portugal attended Lord&#x27;s. It was noted that none of them had any grasp of cricket. In the same year Lord&#x27;s hosted the MCC&#x27;s hundredth anniversary celebrations, with the MCC playing a celebratory match against England. With only a two-tiered covered grandstand and both increasing membership and spectator numbers, it was decided to build a new pavilion at a cost of £21,000. Construction on this pavilion, which was designed by Thomas Verity, took place in 1889–90. The pavilion it replaced was relocated and painstakingly rebuilt on an estate in Sussex, where it lived out its days as a glorified garden shed. Soon after this, the MCC purchased the land to the east, known today as the Nursery Ground; this had previously been a market garden known as Henderson&#x27;s Nursery which had grown pineapples and tulips. The ground was subsequently threatened by the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway&#x27;s attempts to purchase the area for their line into Marylebone station. After considering the company&#x27;s offer, the MCC relinquished a strip of land bordering Wellington Road and was given in exchange the Clergy Orphan School to the south. In order to build the railway into Marylebone station, the Nursery Ground had to be dug up to allow tunnels to be constructed between 1894 and 1898 using the cut-and-cover method. Once completed the railway company laid a new pitch.

It was rumoured that subsequent tunnelling under Wellington Road provided the banking for the Mound Stand, which was constructed in 1898/99 on an area previously occupied by tennis and rackets courts. The rapid development of Lord&#x27;s was not well met by some, with critics suggesting Thomas Lord would &#x27;turn in his grave&#x27; at Lord&#x27;s expansion. 1899 saw Albert Trott hit a six over the pavilion while playing for the MCC against the touring Australians, remaining as of the only batsman to do so. The Imperial Cricket Conference was founded by England, Australia and South Africa in 1909, with Lord&#x27;s serving as its headquarters.

Lord&#x27;s hosted three of the nine Test matches in the ill-fated 1912 Triangular Tournament which was organised by the South African millionaire Sir Abe Bailey. The ground&#x27;s centenary was commemorated in June 1914 with a match between MCC, whose team was selected from the touring party from the recent tour of South Africa, and a Rest of England team. The Rest of England won the three-day match by an innings and 189 runs. Lord&#x27;s was requisitioned by the army during the First World War, accommodating the Territorial Army, Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) and Royal Army Service Corps. Both cooking and wireless instruction classes were held at the ground for military personnel. Once the RAMC departed, the War Office used the Nursery Ground and other buildings as a training centre for Royal Artillery cadets. The pavilion and its long room were used throughout the war for the manufacture of hay nets for horses on the Western Front. Though requisitioned, Lord&#x27;s held several charity cricket matches during the war, featuring military teams from the various territories of the British Empire. These matches were well attended and one such match in 1918 between England and the Dominions was attended by George V and the Duke of Connaught.

===Inter–war years and WWII===

First-class cricket returned to Lord&#x27;s in 1919, with a series of two-day matches in the County Championship. 1923 saw the installation of the Grace Gates, a tribute to W. G. Grace who had died in 1915. They were inaugurated by Sir Stanley Jackson, who had suggested the inclusion of the words in the dedication. These gates replaced an earlier, less decorative, entrance to the ground. With attendances growing in number, it was suggested that Lord&#x27;s aim to accommodate crowds of up to 40,000 for Test matches; however, the stands at the ground were considered inadequate with the grandstand described as &quot;hopelessly out of date&quot;. To accommodate these crowds, the old grandstand was demolished and a new one was built in its place in 1926, designed by the architect Sir Herbert Baker. Completion of the stand was delayed due to the 1926 General Strike. Upon its completion, Baker presented Lord&#x27;s with a weather vane &quot;Father Time&quot; removing the bails from a wicket, which was placed on top of the grandstand. The full weathervane is tall, with the figure of &quot;Father Time&quot; standing at . Baker further contributed to the landscape of Lord&#x27;s by designing the Q Stand next to the pavilion in 1934, while at the Nursery End stands were also erected. Careful consideration was taken to preserve the treeline dividing the main ground from the Nursery Ground. The West Indies under the captaincy of Karl Nunes played their first Test match at Lord&#x27;s in 1928. The ground later hosted the first televised Test match during the Second Test of the 1938 Ashes series.

The 1935 season saw the Lord&#x27;s pitches badly affected by crane fly larvae, known as leatherjackets. The larvae caused bald patches to appear on the playing surface and had to be removed by the ground staff, although spin bowlers did gain some benefit from the bare patches.

In contrast to the First World War, Lord&#x27;s was not requisitioned by the military during the Second World War. Lord&#x27;s hosted matches throughout the war for the London Counties cricket team, amongst others, which attracted large crowds. The ground was spared major damage from The Blitz. An oil bomb landed in the Nursery Ground in 1940, with a high-explosive bomb also narrowly missing the Nursery End stands in December of the same year. The grandstand and the pavilion were hit by incendiary bombs, damaging their roofs. The in-house Lord&#x27;s firefighters reacted quickly and limited the damage. As the war progressed, the threat came not from the Luftwaffe but the newly developed V-1 flying bomb. Lord&#x27;s had several near misses from these weapons in 1944, with one bomb landing short of the ground near to Regents Park. The Nursery Ground had been requisitioned by the Royal Air Force and converted into a barrage balloon site. The most high-profile damage during the war was that to &quot;Father Time&quot;, which was damaged by a one such balloon which had broken loose and drifted toward the grandstand, catching &quot;Father Time&quot; and depositing it into the seating at the front of the stand. International cricket resumed at the end of the war, with Lord&#x27;s hosting one of the Victory Tests (though the matches did not actually have Test status) between the Australian Services cricket team and England.

===Post–war years===

Following the end of the war attendances at cricket matches grew. The gross attendance of 132,000 and the gate receipts of £43,000 for the Second Test of the 1948 Ashes series was a record for a Test match in England at that time. This demand necessitated further expansion of the ground, with the construction of the Warner Stand in 1958, which included snack bars and a press box. This stand was the work of the architect Kenneth Peacock and replaced an area of raised ground lined with trees from where it was traditionally possible to watch a match from the comfort of ones own carriage. Prior to the construction of the Warner Stand, all stands at the ground were identified by letters of the alphabet.

The record numbers of spectators who attended Test and County Championship matches began to decline by the end of the 1950s and cricket in England found itself from a position of 2.2 million paid County Championship spectators in 1947, dropping to 719,661 in 1963. To arrest this decline, List A one-day cricket was introduced in 1963, with Lord&#x27;s hosting its first List A match in the 1963 Gillette Cup between Middlesex and Northamptonshire and later hosted the final of the competition between Sussex and Worcestershire in front of a sell-out 24,000 crowd. It was the first such final held anywhere in the world. The tavern and its adjoining buildings were demolished in 1968 to make way for the construction of the Tavern Stand, again designed by Peacock. The tavern was subsequently re-sited next to the Grace Gates and was complemented with a banqueting hall. Lord&#x27;s hosted its first One Day International (ODI) in 1972, with Australia defeating England by 5 wickets. Three years later Lord&#x27;s hosted the final of the inaugural men&#x27;s World Cup, with the West Indies triumphing over Australia. Four years later, Lord&#x27;s held the final of the 1979 World Cup, with the West Indies once against triumphing, this time against England.

The first women&#x27;s cricket match at Lord&#x27;s took place in August 1976 when England and Australia played a 60-over ODI which England won by eight wickets. The opportunity to play a women&#x27;s match at Lord&#x27;s resulted from a campaign by Rachael Heyhoe Flint, and was given extra impetus by England&#x27;s victory in the 1973 Women&#x27;s Cricket World Cup. England had to wait another 11 years to play their second match at Lord&#x27;s. The ground hosted the final of the ICC Women&#x27;s Cricket World Cup in 1993 with England beating New Zealand to win the World Cup. The ground was not fully opened for the game and only 5,000 spectators were able to attend.
A new indoor cricket school was completed in 1973 at the Nursery End, funded by £75,000 from Sir Jack Hayward and additional funds raised by the Lord&#x27;s Taverners and The Sports Council. The West Indies appeared in their third successive World Cup final in 1983, but were defeated by 43 runs by India. The Mound Stand&#x27;s roof was removed in 1985 to make way for a new upper tier designed by Michael Hopkins and Partners, which opened in time for the MCC&#x27;s bicentenary in 1987. That bicentenary was celebrated with a five-day match between MCC and a Rest of the World team in August 1987, which ended in a draw after the final day was rained off.

Graham Gooch made the first Test match triple-century at Lord&#x27;s, scoring 333 against India in 1990. The final decade of the 20th–century saw rapid redevelopment of Lord&#x27;s. The Compton and Edrich stands were completed in 1991, having run over time and budget. The indoor school closed in 1994, owing to the construction of a new state-of-the-art indoor cricket centre which opened in 1995. The old Grandstand was demolished in 1996, with a replacement designed by Nicholas Grimshaw &amp; Partners being completed in 1998. Since 1997, Lord&#x27;s was home to the European Cricket Council (ECC) till 2010 and currently is home to ICC Europe, which administers cricket outside of the European full-member nations. With Lord&#x27;s hosting three matches in the 1999 World Cup, including the final, the MCC set about improving press facilities by constructing the Media Centre at the Nursery End between the Compton and Edrich stands, offering commanding views towards the pavilion from over the bowlers arm. The Media Centre was opened in April 1999 by then MCC President Tony Lewis.

===21st–century developments===
Lord&#x27;s hosted its one-hundredth Test match in June 2000, with England defeating the West Indies by two wickets; the match was also notable for the 21 wickets which fell on the second day, the most to fall in a day in a Test at Lord&#x27;s since 1888. The ground also hosted The University Match over three days for the last time in 2000, after which the match alternated between Fenner&#x27;s at Cambridge and University Parks at Oxford. The fixture has continued at Lord&#x27;s since 2001 as a one-day limited overs match. At the start of the 21st–century, the Lord&#x27;s slope which provides a benefit to both seam bowlers and swing bowlers from the Pavilion and Nursery Ends respectively, was under threat of being levelled due to the advent of drop-in pitches. However, the MCC resisted these calls as levelling the pitch would require the rebuilding of Lord&#x27;s and would mean Test cricket would not be able to be played there for five years. The outfield was notorious for becoming waterlogged due to the clay soil, which resulted in considerable lost match time. The entire outfield was relaid in the winter of 2002 with the clay soil being replaced with sand, which has improved drainage. Lord&#x27;s hosted its first Twenty20 match in the second edition of the Twenty20 Cup in 2004. In 2005 the International Cricket Council (formerly the Imperial Cricket Conference) headquarters, which had been located at Lord&#x27;s since its foundation in 1909, were closed and moved to the Dubai Sports City in the United Arab Emirates.

Temporary floodlights were installed at the ground in 2007, but were removed in 2008 after complaints of light pollution from local residents. In January 2009, Westminster City Council approved the use of new 48 metre high retractable floodlights designed to minimise light spillage into nearby homes. Conditions of the approval included a five-year trial period during which up to 12 matches and 4 practice matches could be played under the lights from April to September. The lights must be dimmed to half-strength at 9.50 pm and be switched off by 11 pm. The floodlights were first used successfully on 27 May 2009 during the Twenty20 Cup match between Middlesex and Kent. Two weeks after the first use of the floodlights, Lord&#x27;s hosted its first Twenty20 International in the World Twenty20 between England and the Netherlands, which resulted in a shock last-ball win for the associate nation. Lord&#x27;s held the final of the competition between Pakistan and Sri Lanka, which Pakistan won by 8 wickets.

In 2008 plans were drawn up by the MCC committee to fund the future £250 million development of the ground by constructing residential apartments and a luxury hotel along the Wellington Road and Grove End Road.

The Lord&#x27;s Masterplan was unveiled in 2013, which is a twenty-year plan to redevelop the ground and improve its facilities. The first phase of the masterplan involved the demolition and replacement of the Warner Stand with a new stand, which was built between 2015 and 2017. The new stand has improved facilities for match officials and reduced the number of restricted view spectator seats from 600 to 100. Phase two of the masterplan involved the demolition of the Compton and Edrich Stands in 2019, with their replacements being completed in 2021; these provided an extra 2,000 seats and for the first time were linked by a walkway bridge.

Lord&#x27;s celebrated the two hundredth anniversary of its current ground in 2014. To mark the occasion, an MCC XI captained by Sachin Tendulkar played a Rest of the World XI led by Shane Warne in a 50-over match.

Two matches of note were played at the ground in July 2019. The first of these was 2019 World Cup Final between England and New Zealand, which ended as a tie with both sides making 241 runs from their 50 overs. The final was then decided by a Super Over, which also ended in a tie. Therefore, the winner was decided on the number of boundaries scored in the game and Super Over; this was England&#x27;s first World Cup triumph. A second match of note followed four days later when Ireland played their first Test match at Lord&#x27;s, where they bowled England out for 85 on the first morning of the match with Tim Murtagh taking 5 for 13. Despite this, in their second innings Ireland were dismissed for 38, the lowest Test total at Lord&#x27;s and lost the match by 143 runs.

In August 2022 the ground&#x27;s East Gate was renamed the Heyhoe Flint Gate in honour of Rachael Heyhoe Flint.

==Ground features and facilities==
===Stands===
As of , the stands at Lord&#x27;s are (clockwise from the Pavilion):
Many of the stands were rebuilt in the late 20th century. In 1987 the new Mound Stand, designed by Michael Hopkins and Partners, was opened, followed by the Grand Stand, designed by Nicholas Grimshaw, in 1996. The Media Centre, opposite the Pavilion between the Compton and Edrich Stands, was added in 1999. Designed by Future Systems, it won the Royal Institute of British Architects&#x27; Stirling Prize for 1999. The redevelopment of the Compton Stand and Edrich Stands was completed in 2021, adding 2,600 seats and bringing the ground capacity to 31,100 spectators. The two ends of the pitch are the Pavilion End (south-west), where the main members&#x27; pavilion is located, and the Nursery End (north-east), dominated by the Media Centre.

The current Grand Stand replaced the one built in 1926 by Sir Herbert Baker. Although the stand was described as &quot;truly a thing of beauty, loved by all who gazed upon it&quot;, it did have limitations for spectators. 43% of the seats had an obstructed views of the playing area and the structure itself was becoming rotten.

===Pavilion===

The current pavilion at Lord&#x27;s is the third pavilion to stand at the ground and is the main survivor from the Victorian era, having been built in 1889–90. It has been a Grade II* listed building since September 1982. The pavilion was constructed using brick with ornate terracotta facing, which includes terracotta gargoyles, such as &#x27;The Patriarch&#x27; which is thought to represent Lord Harris. The building consists of a long, two storey centre section with covered seating between two end towers which are capped with pyramidal roofs which have ornate wrought and cast iron lanterns. Running the full length of the rear of the second floor is the pavilion roof terrace, which provides views of the entire ground. It underwent an £8 million refurbishment programme in 2004–05. The pavilion is primarily for members of the MCC, who may use its amenities, which include seats for viewing the cricket, the Long Room and its Bar, the Bowlers Bar, and a members&#x27; shop. At Middlesex matches the pavilion is open to members of the Middlesex County Cricket Club. The Pavilion also contains the dressing rooms where players change, each of which has a small balcony for players to watch the play.

The Long Room is found on the ground floor of the pavilion and has been described by Lawrence Booth as &quot;the most evocative four walls in world cricket&quot;. Players walk through the Long Room on their way from the dressing rooms to the cricket field; this walk is notoriously long and complex at Lord&#x27;s. On his Test debut in 1975, David Steele got lost on his way out to bat &quot;and ended up in the pavilion&#x27;s basement toilets&quot;. Once a player reaches the Long Room is approximately 30 paces from the swing door at the rear of the room to the steps which lead onto the playing field. The Long Room is decorated with paintings of famous cricketers and administrators from the 18th to the 21st century, predominantly English players. For an overseas player to have their portrait placed in the Long Room is a considerable honour. Amongst overseas players to have a portrait in the Long Room are four Australians: Don Bradman, Keith Miller, Victor Trumper and Shane Warne.

Found in the players dressing rooms are the honours boards for commemorating centuries, five wicket hauls and ten wicket hauls in a match. Two honours boards for batting and bowling commemorate England players in the home dressing room, while the batting and bowling boards commemorating players from other nationalities are found in the away dressing room. Originally only these achievements in Test matches were commemorated, but since 2019 an honours board for ODIs has been introduced. As of 167 players have made 240 Test centuries at Lord&#x27;s and 130 players have taken 186 five wicket hauls. In ODI&#x27;s 29 players have made 32 centuries at Lord&#x27;s and 14 players have taken a five wicket haul. A separate &quot;neutral&quot; honours board was created in 2010 to coincide with Lord&#x27;s hosting a Test match between Australia and Pakistan. The Australians Warren Bardsley and Charlie Kelleway were the first two names added to this board, commemorating their centuries against South Africa in 1912. They were joined by the Australians Shane Watson and Marcus North, who both took five wicket hauls against Pakistan.

The dress code in the pavilion is notoriously strict. Men are required to wear &quot;ties and tailored coats and acceptable trousers with appropriate shoes&quot; and women are required to wear &quot;dresses; or skirts or trousers worn with blouses, and appropriate shoes&quot;. Until 1999 women – except Queen Elizabeth II – were not permitted to enter the pavilion as members during play, due to the gender-based membership policy of the MCC. The 1998 decision to allow female MCC members represented a historic modernisation of the pavilion and its clubs.

===Media Centre===

The decision to build the Media Centre was made during a meeting of the MCC committee in 1995. These plans sought to remove the inadequate media facilities mostly concentrated in the Warner Stand which could accommodate 90 journalists, along with wooden shacks dotted around the ground for commentators, and replace them with a new purpose built facility. It was then approved by members of the MCC at a special general meeting in December 1996. A gap between the Compton and Edrich Stands was selected, with space limitations requiring the centre to stand above the ground on reinforced supports from the structure around its two lift shafts. This design allowed for uninterrupted access between the main ground and the Nursery Ground, while also allowing the movement of ground staff and their equipment.

It was designed by the Future Systems architectural practice led by Czech architect Jan Kaplický and was the first all-aluminium, semi-monocoque building in the world, costing about £5 million. Construction began in January 1997 and was completed in time for the 1999 World Cup. It was built in 32 sections and fitted out by Pendennis Shipyard in Falmouth in combination with Centraalstaal from the Netherlands. These pieces were then delivered to Lord&#x27;s where they were lowered into place during the 1998 season. The glazing on the front of the centre is inclined 25° so as to eliminate reflections and glare on the pitch to minimise the visual barrier between members of the media and the players. The lower tier of the centre provides accommodation for 118 journalists, with two hospitality boxes either side which accommodate 18 people each. The top tier has radio and television commentary boxes, consisting of two television studios, two large commentary and radio commentary boxes, each holding up to six people. The centre&#x27;s only opening window is in the broadcasting box used by BBC Test Match Special. The building won eight architectural awards, including the RIBA Stirling Prize for architecture in 1999. The Media Centre was originally sponsored by NatWest, with sponsorship being taken over by Investec in 2007. Since 31 May 2011, the media centre has been sponsored by J. P. Morgan.

===Nursery Ground===

Purchased in two parts by the MCC in 1838 and 1887, the ground is primarily used as a practice ground and is considered to have some of the best grass nets in the world. In 1895 the Middlesex Volunteers requested the use of the Nursery Ground as a drill ground, but this was declined by the MCC. The Nursery Pavilion, which was constructed in 1999, overlooks the playing area of the Nursery Ground and is one of London&#x27;s largest venues. The ground has hosted one first-class cricket match in 1903, when the MCC played Yorkshire; the match was originally to be played on the main Lord&#x27;s ground, but heavy rain had fallen and in the week leading up to the match this had led to the abandonment of a match between the MCC and Nottinghamshire. The heavy rain persisted during the MCC v Yorkshire match, with the players spending the first two days of the three-day match sat in the pavilion. However, it was deemed that the playing surface on the Nursery Ground was suitable for the third day of the match to be played there, with both sides batting for an innings each and Yorkshire&#x27;s Wilfred Rhodes making an unbeaten 98.

The Women&#x27;s University Match has been played on the Nursery Ground since 2001, however following calls for gender equality, the 20-over fixture will be played on the main Lord&#x27;s ground for the first time from 2022 alongside the men&#x27;s fixtures. On big match days crowds are allowed onto the outfield. The Cross Arrows Cricket Club play their home matches at the Nursery Ground toward the end of the cricket season. The construction of the new Compton and Edrich stands, beginning in August 2019, encroached on the Nursery Ground&#x27;s playing area. In order to reclaim the playing area lost to the redevelopment of the stands, the temporary Nursery Pavilion will be demolished in 2025–26 and the playing area will be extended up to the perimeter wall running along the Wellington Road.

===MCC Museum and Library===

Lord&#x27;s is the home of the MCC Museum, which is the oldest sports museum in the world, and contains the world&#x27;s most celebrated collection of cricket memorabilia, including The Ashes urn. MCC has been collecting memorabilia since 1864, the collection being originated by Sir Spencer Ponsonby-Fane, who subsequently became the club Treasurer. These items were originally displayed in the pavilion, limiting access to the collection to MCC members. Following the Second World War the collection had outgrown its home in the pavilion, with a decision made to relocate the collection and open it to the public. The MCC moved the collection to a disused rackets court, which had fallen into disrepair during the war, with this location also acting as a memorial to the fallen members of the MCC from the two world wars. They appointed Diana Rait Kerr, &quot;to whom the game owes a great debt&quot;, to be the first full-time creator of the museum and library, a position she held from 1945 to 1968. The museum was officially opened to the public as the Imperial Memorial Collection by the Duke of Edinburgh in 1953. During her tenure as curator, Rait Kerr secured donations of pictures, equipment and other artefacts from around the world. Rait Kerr was succeeded as curator by Stephen Green in 1968. The museum today welcomes around 50,000 visitors per year.

Amongst the items on display include cricket kit used by Victor Trumper, Jack Hobbs, Don Bradman, Shane Warne, and others; many items related to the career of W. G. Grace; and curiosities such as the stuffed sparrow that was &#x27;bowled out&#x27; by Jahangir Khan of Cambridge University in delivering a ball to T. N. Pearce batting for the MCC on 3 July 1936. It also contains the battered copy of &quot;Wisden&quot; that helped to sustain E. W. Swanton through his captivity in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp during the Second World War. It continues to collect historic artefacts and also commissions new paintings and photography. It contains the Brian Johnston Memorial Theatre, a cinema which screens historical cricket footage for visitors. The museum collaborates with a number of national museums and schools through active loans, in addition to community and tour programmes. It is a member of the Sporting Heritage network.

Lord&#x27;s also has one of the largest and most comprehensive collections of books and publications dedicated to cricket. The library includes over 20,000 volumes and grows by around 400 volumes a year. The library encourages donations from authors and publishers. The library operates as a private library for MCC members on match days, but is open by appointment on non-match days. It was expanded in the 1980s with the opening of a new library in the tennis court block to the rear of the pavilion, having previously been housed in a small office in the pavilion. In 2010, a selection of 100 duplicates from the library&#x27;s collection was offered for auction by Christie&#x27;s with proceeds going to support the library.

===Gardens===

Lord&#x27;s has two gardens, the Harris Garden and the Coronation Garden. The Coronation Garden was created behind the A stand (Warner Stand) in 1952 to celebrate the Coronation of Elizabeth II. It contains weeping Ash trees and other trees, providing a shaded area under which benches are found. Preserved in the Coronation Garden is one of the first models of mass-produced, cast iron, heavy rollers dating from the 1880s, which was in use at Lord&#x27;s until 1945. A large bronze statue of W. G. Grace stands in the Coronation Garden. The garden is popular with picnickers during major matchdays. The Harris Garden, formerly tennis courts, was created as a rose garden in 1934 in memory of Lord Harris. The garden was restored and re-launched in 2018. The restoration included the exposing of the flint wall which runs along the back of the garden, which displays a dedication to Lord Harris. The flower beds in the Harris Garden were replanted in 2018 with a floral design featuring flowers from all the Test playing nations. The Harris Garden is available for private hire and can host up to 300 people.

==Other sports==

Pelham Warner was of the opinion that the only other sport which had any real standing at Lord&#x27;s was real tennis. A real tennis court began construction in October 1838, with the foundation stone of the court being laid by Benjamin Aislabie. The court was built at a cost of £4,000, which at the time was exceptionally high. A real tennis competition was later established in 1867. The tennis court was demolished in 1898 to make way for the Mound Stand, with a replacement court being built behind the pavilion in 1900 in the back garden of number 3 Grove End Road. By 2005 the MCC had a real tennis playing membership of 200. The playing of rackets at Lord&#x27;s dates from 1844 and is currently played in the same building as real tennis. Lord&#x27;s hosted the Public Schools Championship in 1866, with Harrow School triumphing. Since then the Championship has been held at Prince&#x27;s Club, before moving to Queen&#x27;s Club.

With the advent of lawn tennis, a decision was made at the annual general meeting of the MCC in May 1875 to construct a tennis court, although there was strong opposition from some members. A suggestion to standardise the rules of tennis was made at Lord&#x27;s by J. M. Heathcote, who was himself a prominent real tennis player. On 3 March 1875 the MCC, in its capacity as the governing body for rackets and real tennis, convened a meeting at Lord&#x27;s to test the various versions of lawn tennis which existed with the aim to fully standardise the game&#x27;s rules. Amongst the various versions of lawn tennis which were demonstrated were Major Clopton Wingfield&#x27;s &quot;Sphairistikè&quot;, and John H. Hale&#x27;s Germains Lawn Tennis. After the meeting, the MCC Tennis Committee was tasked with framing the rules. On 29 May 1875 the MCC issued the &quot;Laws of Lawn Tennis&quot;, the first unified rules for lawn tennis, which were adopted by the club on 24 June. These rules were amended by the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club for the 1877 Wimbledon Championship, with the dimensions of the tennis courts being based on those at Lord&#x27;s; the courts on which these were based are no longer used for tennis and are now part of the Harris Garden.

The original intention for the purchase of the northern part of the Nursery Ground in 1838 was for it to serve as an archery venue. Archery is recorded as having been played at Lord&#x27;s as far back as August 1844, when visiting Ioway Indians camped at Lord&#x27;s and demonstrated their archery skills. Lord&#x27;s was one of the venues for the 2012 Summer Olympics, hosting the archery competition. The archery competition took place in front of the pavilion, which the archers were positioned in front of, with the targets placed 70 metres away just past the square and in front of the Media Centre. Either side of the square temporary stands holding up to 5,000 spectators were erected.

Lacrosse was first played at Lord&#x27;s in 1833 by the Canadian pioneers of the sport. Lacrosse returned to Lord&#x27;s in 1876, when a team of Canadian Gentlemen Amateurs led by William George Beers played an exhibition match at the ground against a team of Iroquois Indians. A Canadian lacrosse team toured the United Kingdom again in 1883, with one exhibition match being staged at Lord&#x27;s in front of several thousand spectators. It was later played again at Lord&#x27;s in October 1953 when the Kenton and Old Thorntonians lacrosse clubs met there in a lacrosse championship match, with further fixtures following in November of the same year.

Baseball was first played at Lord&#x27;s in 1874 when the MCC hosted a touring party of 22 baseball players from the Boston Red Stockings and the Philadelphia Athletics, who were the two leading American baseball teams of the time. The Red Stockings defeated The Athletics 24–7 in front of a crowd of 5,000 spectators. A baseball game was held at Lord&#x27;s during the First World War to raise funds for the Canadian Widows and Orphans Fund. A Canadian team played a team of American London residents in a match watched by 10,000 people.

Lord&#x27;s hosted the London pre-1968 Olympics field hockey tournament in 1967. One match saw India play Pakistan, which was broadcast live on the BBC, which at the time was unprecedented in field hockey. Pakistan won the match 1–0, while Pakistan also went on to defeat Belgium later in the tournament. The ground hosted further international hockey matches in the 1970s. The University Match between Oxford and Cambridge hockey clubs took place at Lord&#x27;s for twenty-one years beginning in 1969. England beat world-champions India for the time ever in this venue, in 1978.

Other sports to have been played at Lord&#x27;s include lawn bowls and billiards. In 1838, a bowling green was constructed at the western end of the ground, in addition to a billiards room with two billiard tables which was added to the original tavern, with professional billiards players playing matches at Lord&#x27;s on a Monday during the cricket season; In the late 1840s and early 1850s, Lord&#x27;s held Galloway pony races after the cricket season was over, with races starting at the tavern and finishing twenty yards south of the pavilion.

==International records==
===Test===
* Highest team total: 729/6 declared by Australia v England, 1930
*Lowest team total: 38 all out by Ireland v England, 2019
* Highest individual innings: 333 by Graham Gooch for England v India, 1990
* Best bowling in an innings: 8/34 by Ian Botham for England v Pakistan, 1978
* Best bowling in a match: 16/137 by Bob Massie for Australia v England, 1972

===One Day International===
* Highest team total: 334/4 (60 overs) by England v India, 1975
* Lowest team total: 107 all out (32.1 overs) by South Africa v England, 2003
* Highest individual innings: 138* by Viv Richards for West Indies v England, 1979
* Best bowling in an innings: 6/24 by Reece Topley for England v India, 2022

===Twenty20 International===
* Highest team total: 199/4 (20 overs) by West Indies v ICC World XI, 2018
* Lowest team total: 93 all out (17.3 overs) by Netherlands v Pakistan, 2009
* Highest individual innings: 78 by Mahela Jayawardene for Sri Lanka v Ireland, 2009
* Best bowling in an innings: 4/11 by Shahid Afridi for Pakistan v Netherlands, 2009

All records correct as of .

==Domestic records==
=== First-class ===
* Highest team total: 655 by Middlesex v Glamorgan, 2024.
* Lowest team total: 15 by MCC v Surrey, 1839
* Highest individual innings: 335* by Sam Northeast for Glamorgan v Middlesex, 2024.
*Three bowlers have taken a ten-wicket haul in an innings where the exact bowling figures are not recorded, however it is known they conceded less than 20 runs, they are William Lillywhite, Edmund Hinkly and John Wisden. The best bowling figures in an innings where the records are complete is Samuel Butler&#x27;s 10 for 38 for Oxford University v Cambridge University in 1871.
*William Lillywhite has taken the most wickets in a match, with 18 for the Players v Gentlemen in the Gentlemen v Players fixture of 1837, though his exact bowling figures are not recorded.

=== List A ===
* Highest team total: 368/2 (50 overs) by Nottinghamshire v Middlesex, 2014
* Lowest team total: 57 (27.2 overs) by Essex v Lancashire, 1996
* Highest individual innings: 187* by Alex Hales for Nottinghamshire v Surrey, 2017
* Best bowling in an innings: 7/22 by Jeff Thomson for Middlesex v Hampshire, 1981

=== Twenty20 ===
* Highest team total: 223/7 (20 overs) by Surrey v Middlesex, 2021
* Lowest team total: 90 (14.4 overs) by Kent v Middlesex, 2015
* Highest individual innings: 102 not out by Stephen Eskinazi for Middlesex v Essex, 2021
* Best bowling in an innings: 6/24 by Tim Murtagh for Surrey v Middlesex, 2005

All records correct as of .

==See also==
*List of cricket grounds by capacity
*Lists of stadiums

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==Further reading==
* Rice, Jonathan (2001). &quot;One Hundred Lord&#x27;s Tests&quot;. Methuen Publishing Ltd.
* Wright, Graeme (2005). &quot;Wisden at Lord&#x27;s&quot;. John Wisden &amp; Co. Ltd.

==External links==
* Profile – Lord&#x27;s at the CricInfo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="0" end="26" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="46" end="57" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="64" end="71" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852992" start="72" end="77" title="List of Test cricket grounds" label="venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153758" start="81" end="100" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="102" end="113" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525370" start="140" end="151" title="Thomas Lord" label="Thomas Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="168" end="191" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="217" end="246" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q908169" start="252" end="283" title="England and Wales Cricket Board" label="England and Wales Cricket Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q124811189" start="295" end="305" title="ICC Europe" label="ICC Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="334" end="363" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678853" start="652" end="674" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Old Ground" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Old Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159809" start="686" end="699" title="Dorset Square" label="Dorset Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242877" start="731" end="756" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Middle Ground" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Middle Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004584" start="869" end="888" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994600" start="1183" end="1201" title="White Conduit Club" label="White Conduit Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507342" start="1235" end="1271" title="George Finch, 9th Earl of Winchilsea" label="George Finch, 9th Earl of Winchilsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q335394" start="1276" end="1298" title="Charles Lennox, 4th Duke of Richmond" label="Colonel Charles Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525370" start="1300" end="1311" title="Thomas Lord" label="Thomas Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678853" start="1323" end="1335" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Old Ground" label="first ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159809" start="1366" end="1379" title="Dorset Square" label="Dorset Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232115" start="1416" end="1430" title="Portman Estate" label="Portman Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="1467" end="1476" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994601" start="1519" end="1539" title="White Conduit Fields" label="White Conduit Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="1589" end="1612" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="1786" end="1799" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="1808" end="1816" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841954" start="1863" end="1872" title="Middlesex county cricket teams" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399847" start="1878" end="1883" title="Essex county cricket teams" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242877" start="1988" end="2005" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Middle Ground" label="his second ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="2067" end="2077" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004584" start="2086" end="2105" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284516" start="2336" end="2345" title="duck pond" label="duck pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153758" start="2359" end="2379" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="2695" end="2701" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185052" start="2754" end="2762" title="cricket pavilion" label="pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="2772" end="2791" title="First-class cricket" label="First-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970072" start="2866" end="2898" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood Cricket Club" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="2910" end="2917" title="century (cricket)" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499152" start="2980" end="3000" title="Frederick Woodbridge (cricketer)" label="Frederick Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383991" start="3011" end="3016" title="Epsom Cricket Club" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442258" start="3054" end="3068" title="Felix Ladbroke" label="Felix Ladbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404818" start="3134" end="3147" title="Eton v Harrow" label="Eton v Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020006" start="3411" end="3423" title="William Ward (cricketer, born 1787)" label="William Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933883" start="3455" end="3462" title="Norfolk county cricket teams" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185052" start="3485" end="3493" title="cricket pavilion" label="pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="3589" end="3599" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="3602" end="3608" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771607" start="4586" end="4602" title="The University Match (cricket)" label="University Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q821330" start="4611" end="4617" title="Oxford University Cricket Club" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q949035" start="4622" end="4631" title="Cambridge University Cricket Club" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083718" start="4687" end="4705" title="Charles Wordsworth" label="Charles Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132348" start="4884" end="4894" title="James Dark" label="James Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q856548" start="4955" end="4967" title="gas lighting" label="gas lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789823" start="5116" end="5130" title="Thomas Fremantle, 1st Baron Cottesloe" label="Lord Cottesloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823772" start="5645" end="5679" title="Australian Aboriginal cricket team in England in 1868" label="Australian Aboriginal cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="5782" end="5791" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016134" start="6301" end="6318" title="William Nicholson (distiller)" label="William Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185049" start="6613" end="6625" title="cricket nets" label="cricket nets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6713" end="6725" title="Arthur Allom" label="Arthur Allom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954199" start="7011" end="7025" title="Frederick Gale" label="Frederick Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505744" start="7185" end="7191" title="Sussex County Cricket Club" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533752" start="7432" end="7451" title="Gentlemen v Players" label="Gentlemen v Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092634" start="7609" end="7617" title="Boundary (cricket)" label="boundary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7914" end="7925" title="County Championship#Development of county cricket" label="county game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143894" start="8044" end="8051" title="umpire (cricket)" label="umpires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="8094" end="8123" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243733" start="8226" end="8249" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground" label="their ground in Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177658" start="8946" end="8965" title="County Ground, Hove" label="County Ground, Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="9039" end="9051" title="Evening Standard" label="The Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="9105" end="9128" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australian cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228872" start="9142" end="9154" title="Dave Gregory (cricketer)" label="Dave Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="9411" end="9421" title="Test cricket" label="Test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824909" start="9433" end="9443" title="Australian cricket team in England in 1884" label="1884 Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="9508" end="9516" title="The Oval" label="The Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572215" start="9521" end="9533" title="Old Trafford Cricket Ground" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="9556" end="9563" title="England cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526160" start="9610" end="9621" title="A. G. Steel" label="A. G. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526907" start="9626" end="9638" title="Edmund Peate" label="Edmund Peate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="9664" end="9671" title="century (cricket)" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739855" start="9676" end="9692" title="five wicket haul" label="five wicket haul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579597" start="9738" end="9784" title="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="Golden Jubilee Celebrations for Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="9825" end="9831" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678854" start="10243" end="10256" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Pavilion" label="this pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794677" start="10280" end="10293" title="Thomas Verity" label="Thomas Verity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="10399" end="10405" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="10582" end="10595" title="market garden" label="market garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747236" start="10715" end="10761" title="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway" label="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q649419" start="10819" end="10837" title="Marylebone station" label="Marylebone station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11169" end="11182" title="Tunnel#Cut-and-cover" label="cut-and-cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="11430" end="11437" title="Rackets (sport)" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526896" start="11616" end="11628" title="Albert Trott" label="Albert Trott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11635" end="11638" title="Boundary (cricket)#Six runs" label="six"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="11763" end="11790" title="International Cricket Council" label="Imperial Cricket Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="11829" end="11841" title="South African national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998551" start="11965" end="11991" title="1912 Triangular Tournament" label="1912 Triangular Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531665" start="12045" end="12059" title="Sir Abe Bailey" label="Sir Abe Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378515" start="12208" end="12228" title="English cricket team in South Africa in 1913–14" label="tour of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="12363" end="12371" title="British Army" label="the army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12383" end="12398" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="12436" end="12460" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373698" start="12472" end="12496" title="Royal Army Service Corps" label="Royal Army Service Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="12620" end="12630" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="12700" end="12715" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="12834" end="12847" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12997" end="13011" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291092" start="13097" end="13106" title="Dominions cricket team" label="Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="13123" end="13131" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q160558" start="13140" end="13157" title="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn" label="Duke of Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13285" end="13304" title="1919 English cricket season#County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15500157" start="13339" end="13350" title="Grace Gates" label="Grace Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q616068" start="13365" end="13376" title="W. G. Grace" label="W. G. Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q786474" start="13424" end="13443" title="Stanley Jackson (cricketer)" label="Sir Stanley Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q382771" start="13978" end="13995" title="Herbert Baker" label="Sir Herbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="14044" end="14063" title="1926 United Kingdom general strike" label="1926 General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="14121" end="14133" title="weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083963" start="14140" end="14151" title="Father Time (Lord&amp;#x27;s)" label="Father Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809630" start="14171" end="14176" title="Bail (cricket)" label="bails"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14184" end="14190" title="Wicket#Set of stumps" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="14597" end="14608" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372122" start="14632" end="14642" title="Karl Nunes" label="Karl Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824925" start="14763" end="14799" title="Australian cricket team in England in 1938" label="Second Test of the 1938 Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228564" start="14864" end="14873" title="Tipuloidea" label="crane fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15179" end="15195" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670286" start="15251" end="15279" title="London Counties cricket team" label="London Counties cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="15367" end="15376" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="15744" end="15753" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="15778" end="15793" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="15909" end="15921" title="Regents Park" label="Regents Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="15972" end="15987" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q733252" start="16009" end="16024" title="barrage balloon" label="barrage balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557764" start="16394" end="16407" title="Victory Tests" label="Victory Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872180" start="16475" end="16507" title="Australian Services cricket team" label="Australian Services cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153446" start="16683" end="16719" title="Second Test, 1948 Ashes series" label="Second Test of the 1948 Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111258" start="16862" end="16868" title="Pelham Warner" label="Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="17126" end="17134" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="17308" end="17327" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628688" start="17542" end="17564" title="List A cricket" label="List A one-day cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571103" start="17644" end="17661" title="1963 Gillette Cup" label="1963 Gillette Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344193" start="17684" end="17700" title="Northamptonshire County Cricket Club" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818702" start="17722" end="17746" title="1963 Gillette Cup Final" label="final of the competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725667" start="17766" end="17780" title="Worcestershire County Cricket Club" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="18153" end="18174" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139930" start="18291" end="18321" title="1975 Cricket World Cup" label="inaugural men&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="18332" end="18343" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156500" start="18410" end="18437" title="1979 Cricket World Cup Final" label="final of the 1979 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q336274" start="18763" end="18783" title="Rachael Heyhoe Flint" label="Rachael Heyhoe Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674033" start="18846" end="18881" title="1973 Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup" label="1973 Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580299" start="18998" end="19032" title="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup" label="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q96368332" start="19036" end="19040" title="1993 Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup Final" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594388" start="19281" end="19297" title="Jack Hayward" label="Sir Jack Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678864" start="19333" end="19354" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Taverners" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Taverners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19359" end="19377" title="Sport England#The Sports Council Archives" label="The Sports Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566578" start="19413" end="19445" title="1983 Cricket World Cup Final" label="third successive World Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="19487" end="19492" title="India national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682592" start="19587" end="19615" title="Hopkins Architects" label="Michael Hopkins and Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760537" start="19717" end="19772" title="MCC Bicentenary match" label="five-day match between MCC and a Rest of the World team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541932" start="19848" end="19860" title="Graham Gooch" label="Graham Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725351" start="20034" end="20041" title="Denis Compton" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528662" start="20046" end="20052" title="Bill Edrich" label="Edrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348044" start="20321" end="20353" title="Nicholas Grimshaw" label="Nicholas Grimshaw &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q652616" start="20419" end="20443" title="European Cricket Council" label="European Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q487299" start="20547" end="20558" title="List of International Cricket Council members" label="full-member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139952" start="20614" end="20628" title="1999 Cricket World Cup" label="1999 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12984388" start="20644" end="20649" title="1999 Cricket World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350202" start="20925" end="20935" title="Tony Lewis" label="Tony Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443529" start="21354" end="21367" title="Fenner&amp;#x27;s" label="Fenner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21385" end="21401" title="University Parks#Cricket ground" label="University Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440678" start="21588" end="21600" title="Seam bowling" label="seam bowlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506615" start="21605" end="21618" title="Swing bowling" label="swing bowlers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21724" end="21739" title="Cricket pitch#Drop-in pitches" label="drop-in pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="22205" end="22213" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653328" start="22249" end="22261" title="Twenty20 Cup" label="Twenty20 Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="22283" end="22312" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q910493" start="22467" end="22484" title="Dubai Sports City" label="Dubai Sports City"/>
<link wikidata="Q381704" start="22525" end="22536" title="Floodlights (sport)" label="floodlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="22620" end="22635" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989145" start="22675" end="22699" title="Westminster City Council" label="Westminster City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195284" start="23185" end="23189" title="Kent County Cricket Club" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="23270" end="23292" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International"/>
<link wikidata="Q732507" start="23300" end="23314" title="2009 ICC World Twenty20" label="World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988180" start="23339" end="23350" title="Netherlands national cricket team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091820" start="23439" end="23463" title="2009 ICC World Twenty20 Final" label="final of the competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="23472" end="23480" title="Pakistan national cricket team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="23485" end="23494" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455859" start="24418" end="24443" title="Bicentenary Celebration match" label="two hundredth anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="24520" end="24536" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q555240" start="24574" end="24585" title="Shane Warne" label="Shane Warne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740837" start="24690" end="24710" title="2019 Cricket World Cup Final" label="2019 World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521411" start="24850" end="24860" title="Super Over" label="Super Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q137660" start="25088" end="25095" title="Ireland cricket team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55696429" start="25103" end="25140" title="Irish cricket team in England in 2019" label="their first Test match at Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804030" start="25218" end="25229" title="Tim Murtagh" label="Tim Murtagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682592" start="25715" end="25743" title="Hopkins Architects" label="Michael Hopkins and Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348044" start="25798" end="25815" title="Nicholas Grimshaw" label="Nicholas Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="25830" end="25842" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Media Centre" label="Media Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725351" start="25878" end="25885" title="Denis Compton" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528662" start="25890" end="25896" title="Bill Edrich" label="Edrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091301" start="25936" end="25950" title="Future Systems" label="Future Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q920638" start="26007" end="26021" title="Stirling Prize" label="Stirling Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26883" end="26908" title="Listed building#Examples of Grade II* listed buildings" label="Grade II* listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528938" start="27104" end="27115" title="George Harris, 4th Baron Harris" label="Lord Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070054" start="27814" end="27827" title="dressing room" label="dressing room"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503866" start="28002" end="28016" title="Lawrence Booth (cricket writer)" label="Lawrence Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q682943" start="28159" end="28172" title="cricket field" label="cricket field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526339" start="28259" end="28271" title="David Steele (cricketer)" label="David Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q313591" start="28850" end="28861" title="Don Bradman" label="Don Bradman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735268" start="28863" end="28875" title="Keith Miller" label="Keith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q462462" start="28877" end="28891" title="Victor Trumper" label="Victor Trumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q555240" start="28896" end="28907" title="Shane Warne" label="Shane Warne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="28987" end="28996" title="century (cricket)" label="centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739855" start="28998" end="29014" title="five wicket haul" label="five wicket haul"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264241" start="29020" end="29035" title="ten wicket haul" label="ten wicket haul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29406" end="29461" title="List of international cricket centuries at Lord&amp;#x27;s#Test centuries" label="167 players have made 240 Test centuries at Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29466" end="29510" title="List of international cricket five-wicket hauls at Lord&amp;#x27;s#Test match five-wicket hauls" label="130 players have taken 186 five wicket hauls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29526" end="29574" title="List of international cricket centuries at Lord&amp;#x27;s#One Day International centuries" label="29 players have made 32 centuries at Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29579" end="29619" title="List of international cricket five-wicket hauls at Lord&amp;#x27;s#One Day International five-wicket hauls" label="14 players have taken a five wicket haul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824882" start="29725" end="29766" title="Australian cricket team against Pakistan in England in 2010" label="Test match between Australia and Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970048" start="29784" end="29799" title="Warren Bardsley" label="Warren Bardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079725" start="29804" end="29820" title="Charlie Kelleway" label="Charlie Kelleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732224" start="29963" end="29975" title="Shane Watson" label="Shane Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758353" start="29980" end="29992" title="Marcus North" label="Marcus North"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="30349" end="30367" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091301" start="31455" end="31469" title="Future Systems" label="Future Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q555682" start="31516" end="31528" title="Jan Kaplický" label="Jan Kaplický"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="31567" end="31576" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="31779" end="31787" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060182" start="31808" end="31821" title="Centraalstaal" label="Centraalstaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593511" start="31938" end="31949" title="1998 English cricket season" label="1998 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377229" start="32534" end="32552" title="Test Match Special" label="Test Match Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q920638" start="32613" end="32632" title="RIBA Stirling Prize" label="RIBA Stirling Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740021" start="32704" end="32711" title="NatWest" label="NatWest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671741" start="32750" end="32758" title="Investec" label="Investec"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="32826" end="32838" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185049" start="33014" end="33018" title="Cricket nets" label="nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270529" start="33045" end="33065" title="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s Rifles" label="Middlesex Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177444" start="33386" end="33395" title="Yorkshire County Cricket Club" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047212" start="33960" end="33974" title="Wilfred Rhodes" label="Wilfred Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="33985" end="33993" title="not out" label="unbeaten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34003" end="34032" title="The University Match (women&amp;#x27;s cricket)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s University Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579927" start="34990" end="35001" title="Sports memorabilia" label="memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714661" start="35013" end="35026" title="The Ashes urn" label="The Ashes urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576160" start="35115" end="35136" title="Spencer Ponsonby-Fane" label="Spencer Ponsonby-Fane"/>
<link wikidata="Q79424923" start="35670" end="35685" title="Diana Rait Kerr" label="Diana Rait Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="35925" end="35942" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q462462" start="36254" end="36268" title="Victor Trumper" label="Victor Trumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q967556" start="36270" end="36280" title="Jack Hobbs" label="Jack Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q313591" start="36282" end="36293" title="Don Bradman" label="Don Bradman"/>
<link wikidata="Q555240" start="36295" end="36306" title="Shane Warne" label="Shane Warne"/>
<link wikidata="Q616068" start="36356" end="36367" title="W. G. Grace" label="W. G. Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922" start="36405" end="36412" title="Old World sparrow" label="sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123157" start="36448" end="36461" title="Jahangir Khan (cricketer)" label="Jahangir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817195" start="36510" end="36522" title="T. N. Pearce" label="T. N. Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="36597" end="36615" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="&amp;quot;Wisden&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322219" start="36639" end="36652" title="E. W. Swanton" label="E. W. Swanton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36689" end="36709" title="Prisoner-of-war camp#Conditions in Japanese camps" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964233" start="36850" end="36864" title="Brian Johnston" label="Brian Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37107" end="37124" title="Sporting Heritage" label="Sporting Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="37804" end="37819" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="38047" end="38073" title="Coronation of Elizabeth II" label="Coronation of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="38095" end="38104" title="Fraxinus" label="Ash trees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38274" end="38281" title="Roller (agricultural tool)#Cricket pitch use" label="rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q291177" start="38541" end="38552" title="rose garden" label="rose garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528938" start="38574" end="38585" title="George Harris, 4th Baron Harris" label="Lord Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38889" end="38909" title="Test cricket#Test status" label="Test playing nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111258" start="39009" end="39022" title="Pelham Warner" label="Pelham Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="39115" end="39126" title="real tennis" label="real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888188" start="39237" end="39254" title="Benjamin Aislabie" label="Benjamin Aislabie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="39657" end="39664" title="Rackets (sport)" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243731" start="39893" end="39911" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748936" start="39930" end="39947" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="39969" end="39980" title="lawn tennis" label="lawn tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249668" start="40215" end="40230" title="John Moyer Heathcote" label="J. M. Heathcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q725054" start="40594" end="40624" title="Walter Clopton Wingfield" label="Major Clopton Wingfield&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063608" start="40655" end="40674" title="John Hale (cricketer)" label="John H. Hale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q815369" start="40959" end="40999" title="All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club" label="All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934049" start="41008" end="41035" title="1877 Wimbledon Championship" label="1877 Wimbledon Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="41339" end="41346" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517496" start="41453" end="41466" title="Iowa people" label="Ioway Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="41570" end="41590" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q209147" start="41604" end="41623" title="Archery at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="archery competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210687" start="41786" end="41792" title="Cricket pitch" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="41916" end="41924" title="Lacrosse" label="Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568653" start="42096" end="42116" title="William George Beers" label="William George Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="42176" end="42192" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="42571" end="42579" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="42688" end="42708" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Boston Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264750" start="42717" end="42739" title="Philadelphia Athletics (1860–1876)" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="43145" end="43158" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="43159" end="43171" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q931527" start="43206" end="43211" title="India men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471403" start="43217" end="43225" title="Pakistan men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q815514" start="43383" end="43390" title="Belgium men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999999" start="43489" end="43505" title="University Match (hockey)" label="University Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342600" start="43614" end="43621" title="England men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255965" start="43627" end="43642" title="1975 Men&amp;#x27;s Hockey World Cup" label="world-champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="43748" end="43758" title="lawn bowls" label="lawn bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324916" start="43763" end="43772" title="English billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q895453" start="43785" end="43798" title="bowling green" label="bowling green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230023" start="44104" end="44117" title="Galloway pony" label="Galloway pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086633" start="44309" end="44317" title="Declaration and forfeiture" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q982121" start="44519" end="44529" title="Ian Botham" label="Ian Botham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933283" start="44596" end="44606" title="Bob Massie" label="Bob Massie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="44841" end="44842" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q738016" start="44846" end="44858" title="Viv Richards" label="Viv Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306588" start="44929" end="44941" title="Reece Topley" label="Reece Topley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="44956" end="44961" title="Indian national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48697933" start="45054" end="45066" title="List of World XI Twenty20 International cricketers" label="ICC World XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739165" start="45186" end="45204" title="Mahela Jayawardene" label="Mahela Jayawardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q380445" start="45273" end="45286" title="Shahid Afridi" label="Shahid Afridi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="45420" end="45429" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933535" start="45482" end="45488" title="Surrey county cricket teams" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="45528" end="45529" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407965" start="45533" end="45546" title="Sam Northeast" label="Sam Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107254" start="45551" end="45560" title="Glamorgan County Cricket Club" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014567" start="45750" end="45768" title="William Lillywhite" label="William Lillywhite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339561" start="45770" end="45783" title="Edmund Hinkly" label="Edmund Hinkly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182779" start="45788" end="45799" title="John Wisden" label="John Wisden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411026" start="45874" end="45887" title="Samuel Butler (cricketer)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533752" start="46061" end="46080" title="Gentlemen v Players" label="Gentlemen v Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344790" start="46207" end="46222" title="Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058749" start="46281" end="46286" title="Essex County Cricket Club" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="46339" end="46340" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717118" start="46344" end="46354" title="Alex Hales" label="Alex Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429184" start="46428" end="46440" title="Jeff Thomson" label="Jeff Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126578" start="46457" end="46466" title="Hampshire County Cricket Club" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195284" start="46598" end="46602" title="Kent County Cricket Club" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="46655" end="46662" title="not out" label="not out"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981538" start="46666" end="46682" title="Stephen Eskinazi" label="Stephen Eskinazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804030" start="46749" end="46760" title="Tim Murtagh" label="Tim Murtagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614573" start="46834" end="46869" title="List of cricket grounds by capacity" label="List of cricket grounds by capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="46871" end="46888" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118845" start="47177" end="47185" title="CricInfo" label="CricInfo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381886" wikidata="Q709550" url="?curid=381886" title="Liu Yongfu">
<text>Liu Yongfu () (10 October 1837 – 9 January 1917) was a Chinese warlord, second president of the Republic of Formosa and commander of the celebrated Black Flag Army. Liu won fame as a Chinese patriot fighting against the French Empire in northern Vietnam (Tonkin) in the 1870s and early 1880s. During the Sino-French War (August 1884 – April 1885), he established a close friendship with the Chinese statesman and general Tang Jingsong, and in 1895, he helped Tang organise resistance to the Japanese invasion of Taiwan. He succeeded Tang as the second and last president of the short-lived Republic of Formosa (5 June–21 October 1895).

==Early years==
Liu Yongfu was born on 10 October 1837, in the town of Qinzhou (Ch&#x27;in-chou, ) in southern China, close to the Vietnamese border. Qinzhou, now in Guangxi province, was at that time in the extreme southwest of Guangdong province. The ancestral home of Liu&#x27;s family was the village of Popai in Guangxi province, and when he was eight his parents moved to Shangsizhou (Shang-ssu-chou, , modern Shangsi, Guangxi) in Guangxi. Liu&#x27;s family was poor, living by manual work for others, and was only just able to scrape a living. In 1857, Liu joined a local militia force commanded by Wu Yuanqing (Wu Yuan-ch&#x27;ing, ), who claimed to hold a commission from the Taipings.

The fall of Nanking (capital of Taiping Heavenly kingdom) and the collapse of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom in 1864 altered Liu&#x27;s prospects dramatically for the worse. Imperial forces gradually began to reassert their control over southwest China, and it was only a matter of time before they secured Guangxi province. To escape their vengeance, Liu needed to make himself sufficiently powerful to give the Imperial generals pause. His first step was to buy some time by retreating into the mountains of northern Tonkin. In 1868 he abandoned Wu Yuanqing&#x27;s rebels and crossed into Vietnam with a force of 200 soldiers whose loyalty he could trust. He had dreamed as a youth that he would one day become a famous &#x27;General of the Black Tiger&#x27;, and christened his tiny band of adventurers the Black Flag Army, &quot;Hēiqí Jūn&quot; (&quot;hei-ch&#x27;i chun&quot;, ). The Black Flags marched slowly through northern Tonkin, recruiting men to their standard as they went, and eventually set up camp just outside Sơn Tây, on the northern bank of the Red River.

The mountain regions of western Tonkin were inhabited by minority tribesmen who did not acknowledge the writ of the Vietnamese government, and these montagnards resented the arrival of the Black Flag Army on Vietnamese soil. Fearing that Liu might eventually pose a threat to their own ascendancy in the area, they declared their intention of attacking the intruders. Liu struck first, however, and defeated a far stronger army of montagnards in a surprise attack. The short conflict enabled Liu to come to an early arrangement with the Vietnamese authorities, who had observed the performance of the Black Flag Army with great interest. The Vietnamese government, reasoning that it would be difficult to dislodge Liu from its territory and that he might also be a useful ally against the refractory montagnards, co-opted Liu into its service in 1869 and gave him military rank in the Vietnamese army. Provided that he continued to act in accordance with his technical status as a Vietnamese military governor, the Vietnamese authorities promised not to trouble the Black Flag leader.

== Black Flags versus Yellow Flags ==
Having secured his base, Liu began to extend his ambitions. Ultimately, his intention was to carve out a small empire of his own controlling the upper course of the Red River. His first target was the border town of Lào Cai, which had recently been occupied by a force of Cantonese bandits under the command of He Junchang (Ho Chun-ch&#x27;ang, ). His band was allied with the Yellow Flag Army, a force established by Huang Chongying (Huang Ch&#x27;ung-ying, ) on the model of the Black Flag Army and about three times its size. Liu&#x27;s attempt on Lào Cai brought him into conflict with the Yellow Flags. Troops of both armies moved warily into the town while their leaders negotiated insincerely. Finally the Yellow Flags launched a surprise attack on the Black Flags, first setting off a mine in an unsuccessful attempt to kill the Black Flag leader. However, despite their superior numbers, they were defeated and driven from Lào Cai. The town remained in the hands of the Black Flags until 1885, and became Liu&#x27;s main stronghold.

In 1869, having conciliated the Vietnamese, Liu also won favour with the Chinese authorities by committing the Black Flag Army to a Chinese punitive campaign against the Yellow Flags, which gave him the opportunity to cripple this rival bandit army. The Chinese expedition was commanded by the veteran general Feng Zicai, who would later win fame during the Sino-French War (August 1884 – April 1885) by defeating a French column at the Battle of Zhennan Pass (24 March 1885). In one particular military exploit, known as &#x27;the storming of the thirteen passes&#x27;, Liu&#x27;s Black Flags fought their way through the mountains and attacked Huang Chongying&#x27;s headquarters at Hayang, a town on the Clear River near the border with Yunnan, forcing the Yellow Flag leader to take refuge with his montagnard allies. Although the Chinese and Black Flags failed to annihilate the Yellow Flags, they taught them a severe lesson, and Feng rewarded Liu for his help by offering him an honorary commission in the Chinese army.

In the next few years, Liu Yongfu established a profitable protection racket on commerce on the Red River between Sơn Tây and Lào Cai. Traders were taxed at the rate of 10% of the value of their goods. The profits that accrued from this extortion were so great that Liu&#x27;s army swelled in numbers during the 1870s, attracting to its ranks adventurers from all over the world. Although most of the soldiers were Chinese, many of the junior officers were Americans or European soldiers of fortune, some of whom had seen action in the Taiping Rebellion, and Liu used their expertise to transform the Black Flag Army into a formidable fighting force. Liu commanded 7,000 black flag soldiers from Guangdong and Guangxi around Tonkin.

==Liu Yongfu and Francis Garnier==
In 1873, the Vietnamese government enlisted the help of Liu&#x27;s Black Flag Army to defeat the first French attempt to conquer Tonkin, led by the naval lieutenant Francis Garnier. On 21 December 1873 Liu Yongfu and around 600 Black Flags, marching beneath an enormous black banner, approached the west gate of Hanoi. A large Vietnamese army followed in their wake. Garnier began shelling the Black Flags with a field piece mounted above the gate, and when they began to fall back led a party of 18 French marine infantrymen out of the city to chase them away. The attack failed, and Garnier, leading three men uphill in a bayonet attack on a party of Black Flags, was speared to death by several Black Flag soldiers after stumbling in a watercourse. The youthful &quot;enseigne de vaisseau&quot; Adrien-Paul Balny d’Avricourt led an equally small column out of the citadel to support Garnier, but he also died leading his men. Three French soldiers also were killed in these sorties, and the others fled back to the citadel after their officers fell. Garnier&#x27;s death ended the first French adventure in Tonkin.

==Liu Yongfu and Henri Rivière==
In April 1882, the French naval captain Henri Rivière captured the citadel of Hanoi, again disclosing French colonial ambitions in Tonkin and alarming the Vietnamese and Chinese governments. In April 1883, in the wake of Rivière&#x27;s capture of Nam Định (27 March), the Chinese and Vietnamese were again able to enlist the support of Liu Yongfu and the Black Flag Army against the French in Tonkin.

On 10 May 1883 Liu Yongfu challenged the French to battle in a taunting message widely placarded on the walls of Hanoi:
The valiant warrior Liu, general and military governor of the three provinces, has decided to wage war. He makes this proclamation to the French bandits: Everyone knows you are thieves. Other nations despise you. Whenever you come to a country, you claim that you have come to preach the faith, but you really wish to stir up the inhabitants with false rumours. You claim that you have come to trade, but in fact you are plotting to take over the country. 
You act like wild animals. You are as fierce as tigers and wolves. Ever since you came to Vietnam, you have seized cities and killed governors. Your crimes are as numerous as the hairs on the head. You have taken over the customs and seized the revenues. This crime deserves death. The inhabitants have been reduced to misery, and the country is nearly ruined. God and man both loathe you. Heaven and earth both reject you. I have now been ordered to wage war. My three armies are massed like clouds. My rifles and cannon are as many as the trees of the forest. We are eager to attack you in your devil’s den and to suppress all disloyal subjects. But the country’s welfare weighs heavily with me. I cannot bear to turn Hanoi into a battlefield, in case I ruin its merchants and people. So I am first making this proclamation: You French bandits, if you think you are strong enough, send your rabble of soldiers to Phủ Hoài to fight in the open field with my tiger warriors, and then we will see who is the strongest.
If you are afraid to come, cut off the heads of your chief men and present them to me. Then give back the cities you have taken. I am a merciful commander, and I will let you miserable ants live. But if you delay, my army will take your city and kill you all, and not even a blade of grass will mark where you stood. You must choose between happiness and disaster. Life is but a step away from death. Mark my words well.

The French had no option but to respond to so stark a challenge. On 19 May, Rivière marched out of Hanoi to attack the Black Flags. His small force (around 450 men) advanced without proper precautions, and blundered into a well-prepared Black Flag ambush at Paper Bridge (Pont de Papier), a few miles to the west of Hanoi. In the Battle of Paper Bridge, the French were enveloped on both wings, and were only with difficulty able to regroup and fall back to Hanoi. Like Francis Garnier, ten years earlier, Rivière was killed in the battle. Liu had now taken the scalps of two French naval commanders in remarkably similar circumstances.

==Sơn Tây, Bắc Ninh and Hưng Hóa==
Liu began an unconventional campaign against the French, with success. Liu fought two further actions against the French in the autumn of 1883, the Battle of Phủ Hoài (15 August 1883) and the Battle of Palan (1 September 1883). The Black Flag Army was mauled in both these battles, but was not seriously damaged as a fighting force. In December 1883, however, Liu Yongfu suffered a major defeat at the hands of Admiral Amédée Courbet in the Sơn Tây Campaign. Despite fighting with fanatical courage in the engagements at Phù Sa on 14 December and Sơn Tây on 16 December, the Black Flags were unable to prevent the French from storming Sơn Tây. Although there were also Chinese and Vietnamese contingents at Sơn Tây, the Black Flag Army bore the brunt of the fighting, and took very heavy casualties.

Angered that his Chinese and Vietnamese allies had done little to support the Black Flag Army at Sơn Tây, Liu stood on the sidelines during the Bắc Ninh Campaign (March 1884). After the French capture of Bắc Ninh, Liu retreated with the Black Flag Army to Hưng Hóa. In April 1884 the French advanced on Hưng Hóa with both brigades of the Tonkin Expeditionary Corps. The Black Flags had thrown up an impressive series of fortifications around the town, but General Charles-Théodore Millot, the French commander-in-chief, took it without a single French casualty. While General François de Négrier&#x27;s 2nd Brigade pinned the Black Flags frontally and subjected Hưng Hóa to a ferocious artillery bombardment from the Trung Xa heights, General Louis Brière de l&#x27;Isle&#x27;s 1st Brigade made a flank march to the west to cut Liu&#x27;s line of retreat. On the evening of 11 April, seeing Brière de l&#x27;Isle&#x27;s Turcos and marine infantry emerging behind their flank at Xuân Đông, the Black Flags evacuated Hưng Hóa before they were trapped inside it. They set alight the remaining buildings before they left, and on the following morning the French found the town completely abandoned.

Liu now fell back up the Red River to Thanh Quan, only a few days march from the frontier town of Lào Cai. He was now in a position to retreat into China if the French pursued him. Several hundred Black Flag soldiers, demoralised by the ease with which Courbet and Millot had defeated the Black Flag Army, surrendered to the French in the summer of 1884. One of Millot&#x27;s final achievements was to advance up the Lô River and throw the Black Flag Army out of Tuyên Quang in the first week of June, again without a single French casualty. If the French had seriously pursued Liu Yongfu after the capture of Tuyên Quang, the Black Flags would probably have been driven from Tonkin there and then. But French attention was diverted by the sudden crisis with China provoked by the Bắc Lệ ambush (23 June 1884), and during the eventful summer of 1884 the Black Flags were left to lick their wounds.

==Tuyên Quang and Hòa Mộc==
Liu&#x27;s fortunes were transformed by the outbreak of the Sino-French War in August 1884. The Empress Dowager Cixi responded to the news of the destruction of China&#x27;s Fujian Fleet at the Battle of Fuzhou (23 August 1884) by ordering her generals to invade Tonkin to throw the French out of Hanoi. Tang Jingsong, the commander of the Yunnan Army, knew that Liu&#x27;s services would be invaluable in the war with France. Although Liu had bitter memories of his previous service as an ally of China, he respected Tang (the only Chinese commander to have contributed troops to the defence of Sơn Tây), and agreed to take part with the Black Flag Army in the forthcoming campaign. Appointed a divisional general in the Yunnan Army, Liu helped the Chinese forces put pressure on Hưng Hóa and the isolated French posts of Phủ Doãn and Tuyên Quang during the autumn of 1884. In the winter and spring of 1885 he commanded 3,000 soldiers of the Black Flag Army during the Siege of Tuyên Quang. At the Battle of Hòa Mộc (2 March 1885), the Black Flag Army inflicted heavy casualties on a French column marching to the relief of Tuyên Quang.

One of the conditions of the peace treaty between France and China that ended the Sino-French War was that Liu Yongfu and the Black Flag Army should leave Tonkin. By the end of the war, Liu had only around 2,000 troops under his command and was in no position to resist pressure from Tang Jingsong and the other commanders of the Yunnan Army to remove the Black Flag Army. Liu crossed into China with some of his most loyal followers, but the bulk of the Black Flag Army was disbanded on Tonkinese soil in the summer of 1885. Unpaid for months and still in possession of their rifles, most of the unwanted Black Flag soldiers immediately took to banditry. It took months for the French to reduce them, and the route between Hưng Hóa and the border town of Lào Cai was only secured in February 1886. Meanwhile, the Qing government rewarded Liu Yongfu for his services in the Sino-French War with a minor military appointment in Guangdong province.

Liu&#x27;s Black Flag forces continued to harass and fight the French in Tonkin after the end of the Sino-French War.

==Defence of the Democratic Republic of Formosa==
In 1895, under the Treaty of Shimonoseki which ended the First Sino-Japanese War, Taiwan was ceded by China to Japan. The Taiwanese attempted to resist the Japanese occupation, and a short-lived Democratic Republic of Formosa was declared by the Chinese governor Tang Jingsong on 25 May 1895. Tang became president of the new republic, and Liu Yongfu was made a brigadier general and given command of resistance forces in southern Taiwan. Ten days after declaring independence Tang Jingsong fled to Mainland China, and Liu replaced him as head of government (though he did not, as is often claimed, succeed to the presidency). At the end of May 1895 Japanese forces landed near Keelung, on the northern coast of Taiwan, and proceeded to conquer the island. Between June and August the Japanese defeated the Formosan forces in northern and central Taiwan, and in October 1895 three Japanese columns advanced on Tainan, sweeping aside Liu&#x27;s forces. On 20 October 1895 Liu fled to the mainland aboard the British-flagged merchant ship &quot;SS Thales&quot; with the Japanese cruiser in close pursuit. &quot;Yaeyama&quot; caught &quot;Thales&quot; in international waters outside of Amoy, but her boarding party was unable to apprehend Liu, who was disguised as a coolie. The incident provoked a diplomatic protest from the United Kingdom and resulted in an official apology by the Japanese government. On 21 October Tainan capitulated to the Japanese. The collapse of Formosan resistance inaugurated five decades of Japanese rule in Taiwan.

==Final years==

Liu Yongfu outlived the Qing dynasty and survived into the second decade of the twentieth century, his reputation growing with the passing years:
He continued until the closing years of the dynasty in the employment of the Kwangtung provincial administration, and is said to have been a notable suppressor of bandits and a pacifier of clan feuds, those twin curses of the south China countryside. The advent of the Republic in 1912 found him in retirement, listening with interest to the news of public affairs as others related it to him from the papers, for he himself never learned to read. Most of the time, though, his mind dwelt in the past. He would take out Garnier’s watch and show the picture of the young wife inside the cover. He would tell of his challenge to Rivière and describe the battle at Paper Bridge. But he soon wearied of the incomprehensible foreign devils, and turned instead to what for him had been beyond comparison the most serious business of his life. The talk would then be all of the Black and Yellow Flags, and of the long years of feuds and hatreds in the steaming malarial jungle and on the silent reaches of the great river. His published memoirs, for his reminiscences were reverently taken down in writing, have as their main theme the story of this interminable vendetta between expatriate Chinese. But when he died, in January 1917, it was as the scourge of a formidable foreign enemy, the hero whose achievements were nullified by the cowardice of his own government, that he was mourned by his countrymen, and that is the way they still remember him.
==Legacy==
The Yongfu Road and Yongfu Elementary School in West Central District, Tainan City, Taiwan, are named after Liu Yongfu.

==Notes==


==References==

* Davidson, J. W., &quot;The Island of Formosa, Past and Present&quot; (London, 1903)
* Forbes, Andrew ; Henley, David (2011). &quot;Traders of the Golden Triangle&quot;. Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN: B006GMID5
* Lung Chang [], &quot;Yueh-nan yu Chung-fa chan-cheng&quot; [, Vietnam and the Sino-French War] (Taipei, 1993)
* McAleavy, H., &quot;Black Flags in Vietnam: The Story of a Chinese Intervention&quot; (New York, 1968)
* Yosaburo Takekoshi, &quot;Japanese Rule in Formosa&quot; (London, 1907)
* Thomazi, A., &quot;La conquête de l&#x27;Indochine&quot; (Paris, 1934)
* Thomazi, A., &quot;Histoire militaire de l&#x27;Indochine française&quot; (Hanoi, 1931)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q709550" start="0" end="10" title="Liu Yongfu" label="Liu Yongfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="63" end="70" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q319881" start="96" end="115" title="Republic of Formosa" label="Republic of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331363" start="148" end="163" title="Black Flag Army" label="Black Flag Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="220" end="233" title="French colonial empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428694" start="237" end="253" title="northern Vietnam" label="northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q622778" start="255" end="261" title="Tonkin" label="Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="304" end="319" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701499" start="421" end="434" title="Tang Jingsong" label="Tang Jingsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q717373" start="491" end="518" title="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1895)" label="Japanese invasion of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319881" start="590" end="609" title="Republic of Formosa" label="Republic of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q571766" start="708" end="715" title="Qinzhou" label="Qinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="866" end="875" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355305" start="1053" end="1069" title="Shangsi County" label="Shangsi, Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784779" start="1337" end="1352" title="Third Battle of Nanjing" label="fall of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486676" start="1415" end="1439" title="Taiping Heavenly Kingdom" label="Taiping Heavenly Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331363" start="2141" end="2156" title="Black Flag Army" label="Black Flag Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365138" start="2359" end="2366" title="Son Tay" label="Sơn Tây"/>
<link wikidata="Q206850" start="2396" end="2405" title="Red River (Asia)" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="2524" end="2545" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Vietnamese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="2557" end="2568" title="Montagnard (Vietnam)" label="montagnards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3909" end="3925" title="Yellow Flag Army" label="Yellow Flag Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068368" start="4885" end="4895" title="Feng Zicai" label="Feng Zicai"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="4933" end="4948" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870413" start="5012" end="5034" title="Battle of Zhennan Pass" label="Battle of Zhennan Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441510" start="6537" end="6552" title="Francis Garnier" label="Francis Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926906" start="7564" end="7577" title="Henri Rivière (naval officer)" label="Henri Rivière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="7602" end="7607" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870828" start="10273" end="10295" title="Battle of Paper Bridge" label="Battle of Paper Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441510" start="10413" end="10428" title="Francis Garnier" label="Francis Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872034" start="10764" end="10782" title="Battle of Phủ Hoài" label="Battle of Phủ Hoài"/>
<link wikidata="Q519060" start="10808" end="10823" title="Battle of Palan" label="Battle of Palan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482156" start="11035" end="11049" title="Amédée Courbet" label="Amédée Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667673" start="11057" end="11073" title="Sơn Tây Campaign" label="Sơn Tây Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141584" start="11561" end="11578" title="Bắc Ninh Campaign" label="Bắc Ninh Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821532" start="11755" end="11781" title="Tonkin Expeditionary Corps" label="Tonkin Expeditionary Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q320823" start="12160" end="12187" title="Louis Brière de l&amp;#x27;Isle" label="Louis Brière de l&amp;#x27;Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33373" start="12711" end="12718" title="Lào Cai" label="Lào Cai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005745" start="13394" end="13407" title="Bắc Lệ ambush" label="Bắc Lệ ambush"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="13600" end="13615" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="13636" end="13656" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015598" start="13714" end="13726" title="Fujian Fleet" label="Fujian Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562509" start="13734" end="13750" title="Battle of Fuzhou" label="Battle of Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q701499" start="13844" end="13857" title="Tang Jingsong" label="Tang Jingsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331363" start="14483" end="14498" title="Black Flag Army" label="Black Flag Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486048" start="14510" end="14530" title="Siege of Tuyên Quang" label="Siege of Tuyên Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871238" start="14539" end="14556" title="Battle of Hòa Mộc" label="Battle of Hòa Mộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122816" start="15656" end="15706" title="Pacification of Tonkin" label="continued to harass and fight the French in Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="15815" end="15836" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="15853" end="15876" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701499" start="16273" end="16286" title="Tang Jingsong" label="Tang Jingsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="16295" end="16309" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="16474" end="16481" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q717373" start="16533" end="16551" title="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1895)" label="conquer the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q848944" start="16819" end="16832" title="merchant ship" label="merchant ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="16948" end="16968" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="16980" end="16984" title="Amoy" label="Amoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893413" start="17093" end="17111" title="diplomatic protest" label="diplomatic protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="17314" end="17337" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Japanese rule in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706699" start="19010" end="19031" title="West Central District" label="West Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="19033" end="19044" title="Tainan City" label="Tainan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="19046" end="19052" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13542868" start="19113" end="19128" title="James W. Davidson" label="Davidson, J. W."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381889" wikidata="Q1404101" url="?curid=381889" title="Fellow">
<text>A fellow is a title and form of address for distinguished, learned, or skilled individuals in academia, medicine, research, and industry. The exact meaning of the term differs in each field. In learned or professional societies, the term refers to a privileged member who is specially elected in recognition of their work and achievements. Within institutions of higher education, a fellow is a member of a highly ranked group of teachers at a particular college or university or a member of the governing body in some universities. It can also be a specially selected postgraduate student who has been appointed to a post (called a fellowship) granting a stipend, research facilities and other privileges for a fixed period (usually one year or more) in order to undertake some advanced study or research, often in return for teaching services. In the context of medical education in North America, a fellow is a physician who is undergoing a supervised, sub-specialty medical training (fellowship) after having completed a specialty training program (residency). Lastly, In large, R&amp;D-intensive institutions, the term denotes a small number of senior scientists and engineers.

==Education and academia==
In education and academia there are several kinds of fellowships, awarded for different reasons.

===Teaching fellowships===

The title of (senior) teaching fellow is used to denote an academic teaching position at a university or similar institution and is roughly equivalent to the title of (senior) lecturer. The title &quot;(senior) fellow&quot; can also be bestowed to an academic member of staff upon retirement who continues to be affiliated to a university in the United Kingdom.

The term teaching fellow or teaching assistant is used, in the United States and United Kingdom, in secondary school, high school and middle school setting for students or adults that assist a teacher with one or more classes.

===Medical fellowships===

In US medical institutions, a fellow refers to someone who has completed residency training (e.g. in family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, general surgery, etc.) and is currently in a 1 to 3 year subspecialty training program (e.g. cardiology, sleep medicine, pediatric nephrology, transplant surgery, etc.).

===Research fellowships===
====As an academic position====

The title of research fellow may be used to denote an academic position at a university or a similar institution; it is roughly equivalent to the title of lecturer in the Commonwealth teaching career pathway.

====As a financial grant====
Research fellow may also refer to the recipient of academic financial grant or scholarship.
For example, in Germany, institutions such as the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation offer research fellowship for postdoctoral research and refer to the holder as research fellows, while the award holder may formally hold a specific academic title at their home institution (e.g., &quot;Privatdozent&quot;).

These are often shortened to the name of the programme or organization, e.g. Dorothy Hodgkin Fellow rather than Dorothy Hodgkin Research Fellow, except where this might cause confusion with another fellowship, (e.g. Royal Society University Research Fellowship.)

In the context of graduate school in the United States and Canada, a fellow is a recipient of a postgraduate fellowship. Examples include the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the DoD National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship, the DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellowship, the Guggenheim Fellowship, the Rosenthal Fellowship, the Frank Knox Memorial Fellowship, the Woodrow Wilson Teaching Fellowship and the Presidential Management Fellowship. It is granted to prospective or current students, on the basis of their academic or research achievements.

In the UK, research fellowships are awarded to support postdoctoral researchers such as those funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). At ETH Zurich, postdoctoral fellowships support incoming researchers. The MacArthur Fellows Program (aka &quot;genius grant&quot;) as prestigious research fellowship awarded in the United States.

===Fellowships as a training program===
Fellowships may involve a short placement for capacity building, e.g., to get more experience in government, such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science&#x27;s fellowships and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellowship programs. Some institutions offer fellowships as a professional training program as well as a financial grant, such as the Balsillie School of International Affairs, where tuition and other fees are paid by the fellowship.

===Fellowships as a special membership grade===
Fellows are often the highest grade of membership of many professional associations or learned societies, for example, the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, the Chartered Governance Institute or Royal College of Surgeons. Lower grades are referred to as members (who typically share voting rights with the fellows), or associates (who may or may not, depending on whether &quot;associate&quot; status is a form of full membership). 
Additional grades of membership exist in, for example, the IEEE and the ACM.

Fellowships of this type can be awarded as a title of honor in their own right, e.g. the Fellowship of the Royal Society (FRS).
Exclusive learned societies such as the Royal Society have Fellow as the only grade of membership.

Appointment as an honorary fellow in a learned or professional society can be either to honour exceptional achievement or service within the professional domain of the awarding body or to honour contributions related to the domain from someone who is professionally outside it. Membership of the awarding body may or may not be a requirement.

How a fellowship is awarded varies for each society, but may typically involve some or all of these:
* A qualifying period in a lower grade
* Passing a series of examinations
* Nomination by two existing fellows who know the applicant professionally
* Evidence of continued formal training post-qualification
* Evidence of substantial achievement in the subject area
* Submission of a thesis or portfolio of works which will be examined
* Election by a vote of the fellowship

===In ancient universities===

At the ancient universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and Trinity College, Dublin, members of the teaching staff typically have two affiliations: one as a reader, lecturer, or other academic rank within a department of the university, as at other universities, and a second affiliation as a fellow of one of the colleges of the university.
The fellows, sometimes referred to as university dons, form the governing body of the college. They may elect a council to handle day-to-day management. All fellows are entitled to certain privileges within their colleges, which may include dining at High Table (free of charge) and possibly the right to a room in college (free of charge).

At Cambridge, retired academics may remain fellows. At Oxford, however, a Governing Body fellow would normally be elected a &quot;fellow emeritus&quot; and would leave the Governing Body upon his or her retirement. Distinguished old members of the college, or its benefactors and friends, might also be elected &#x27;Honorary Fellow&#x27;, normally for life; but beyond limited dining rights this is merely an honour. Most Oxford colleges have &#x27;Fellows by Special Election&#x27; or &#x27;Supernumerary Fellows&#x27;, who may be members of the teaching staff, but not necessarily members of the Governing Body.

Some senior administrators of a college such as bursars are made fellows, and thereby members of the governing body, because of their importance to the running of a college.

===In the U.S.===
At some universities in the United States, &quot;fellows&quot; are members of the Board of Trustees who hold administrative positions as non-executive trustee rather than academics.

==Industry and corporate fellows==

In industries intensive in science, engineering medicine, and research &amp; development, companies may appoint a very small number of top senior researchers as corporate, technical or industry fellows, either in Science or in Engineering. These are internationally recognized leaders who are among the best in the world in their respective fields.

Corporate, Technical or Industry Fellow in either Science or Engineering is the most senior rank or title one can achieve in a scientific or engineering career, though fellows often also hold business titles such as Vice President or Chief Technology Officer.

Notable examples of fellows in scientific, medical and other research-intensive organizations include:

* Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) Fellows
* Apple Fellows
* Battelle Fellows
* Bell Labs Fellows
* Boeing Fellows
* Deloitte Fellows
* DXC Technology Fellows
* DuPont Fellows
* Google fellows
* Henry Ford Technical Fellows
* HP Fellows
* Intel Fellows
* Microsoft Fellows
* NASA Fellows
* Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Fellows
* RTI International fellows
* Toray Fellows

=== Nonprofit and government fellowships ===
The title fellow can be used for participants in a professional development program run by a nonprofit or governmental organization. This type of fellowship is a short term work opportunity (1–2 years) for professionals who already possess some level of academic or professional expertise that will serve the nonprofit mission. Fellows are given a stipend as well as professional experience and leadership training.

==See also==

*Honorary title (academic)
*List of science awards

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="2" end="8" title="Fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="194" end="201" title="learned society" label="learned"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="205" end="217" title="professional society" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="347" end="379" title="institutions of higher education" label="institutions of higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="633" end="643" title="Fellow" label="fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968259" start="656" end="663" title="stipend" label="stipend"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="1083" end="1100" title="research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D-intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="1513" end="1521" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070313" start="1728" end="1746" title="teaching assistant" label="teaching assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428874" start="2389" end="2406" title="academic position" label="academic position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="2490" end="2498" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="2653" end="2664" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q590267" start="2716" end="2749" title="Alexander von Humboldt Foundation" label="Alexander von Humboldt Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28791821" start="2899" end="2913" title="Academic ranks" label="academic title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="2953" end="2965" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="3052" end="3067" title="Dorothy Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28857542" start="3191" end="3235" title="Royal Society University Research Fellowship" label="Royal Society University Research Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="3257" end="3272" title="graduate school" label="graduate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3280" end="3293" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3298" end="3304" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="3335" end="3347" title="postgraduate" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955293" start="3381" end="3413" title="NSF-GRF" label="NSF Graduate Research Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q106880920" start="3419" end="3483" title="DoD NDSEG Fellowship" label="DoD National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157294" start="3489" end="3534" title="Computational Science Graduate Fellowship" label="DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="3540" end="3561" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825870" start="3567" end="3587" title="Harold Wallace Rosenthal" label="Rosenthal Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487732" start="3593" end="3623" title="Frank Knox Memorial Fellowship" label="Frank Knox Memorial Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909809" start="3629" end="3663" title="Woodrow Wilson Teaching Fellowship" label="Woodrow Wilson Teaching Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241447" start="3672" end="3706" title="Presidential Management Fellowship" label="Presidential Management Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="3871" end="3892" title="postdoctoral research" label="postdoctoral research"/>
<link wikidata="Q326276" start="3924" end="3938" title="Wellcome Trust" label="Wellcome Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904256" start="3947" end="4009" title="Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council" label="Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="4014" end="4024" title="ETH Zurich" label="ETH Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="4085" end="4110" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Fellows Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="4369" end="4420" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4448" end="4505" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences#Fellowship programs" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellowship programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852579" start="4620" end="4661" title="Balsillie School of International Affairs" label="Balsillie School of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="4827" end="4851" title="professional association" label="professional association"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="4856" end="4873" title="learned society" label="learned societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086802" start="4892" end="4926" title="Chartered Institute of Arbitrators" label="Chartered Institute of Arbitrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994951" start="4932" end="4962" title="Chartered Governance Institute" label="Chartered Governance Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373991" start="4966" end="4991" title="Royal College of Surgeons" label="Royal College of Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5263" end="5267" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers#Membership grades" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5276" end="5279" title="Association for Computing Machinery#Membership grades" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320743" start="5327" end="5341" title="title of honor" label="title of honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="5371" end="5408" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellowship of the Royal Society (FRS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="5420" end="5437" title="learned society" label="learned societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="5450" end="5463" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667285" start="6369" end="6389" title="ancient universities" label="ancient universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="6393" end="6399" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="6401" end="6410" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="6416" end="6439" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28791821" start="6540" end="6553" title="academic rank" label="academic rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="6670" end="6678" title="Residential college" label="colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166008" start="6736" end="6750" title="university don" label="university don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="6762" end="6776" title="Governance" label="governing body"/>
<link wikidata="Q289305" start="6949" end="6959" title="High Table" label="High Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000587" start="7704" end="7710" title="bursar" label="bursar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="7931" end="7948" title="Board of Governors" label="Board of Trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="8000" end="8007" title="trustee" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="8095" end="8102" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="8104" end="8115" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="8116" end="8124" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="8130" end="8156" title="research and development" label="research &amp;amp; development"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="8281" end="8288" title="Science" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="8295" end="8306" title="Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="8468" end="8475" title="Science" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="8479" end="8490" title="Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q282049" start="8571" end="8577" title="career" label="career"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="8634" end="8648" title="Vice President" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287861" start="8652" end="8676" title="Chief Technology Officer" label="Chief Technology Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="8785" end="8807" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8824" end="8837" title="Apple Inc.#Corporate culture" label="Apple Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="8859" end="8868" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937157" start="8879" end="8893" title="Boeing Technical Fellowship" label="Boeing Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q28782856" start="8915" end="8929" title="DXC Technology" label="DXC Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="8957" end="8963" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721432" start="8974" end="9001" title="Henry Ford Technical Fellow" label="Henry Ford Technical Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404084" start="9005" end="9007" title="HP_Inc" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9034" end="9051" title=":Category:Microsoft technical fellows" label="Microsoft Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="9054" end="9058" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="9069" end="9098" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="9297" end="9306" title="Nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="9410" end="9422" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968259" start="9552" end="9559" title="stipend" label="stipend"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457366" start="9636" end="9661" title="Honorary title (academic)" label="Honorary title (academic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864760" start="9663" end="9685" title="List of science awards" label="List of science awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381891" wikidata="Q3633226" url="?curid=381891" title="Balbo (aircraft formation)">
<text>Balbo was a common term in the late 1930s and early 1940s to describe any large formation of aircraft. It was named after the Italian fascist flying ace Italo Balbo who led a series of large aircraft formations in record-breaking flights to promote Italian aviation in the 1930s. During the Battle of Britain the term was used for the Big Wings that were based at RAF Duxford. The term is used today in the UK for a mass fly-by at the end of an airshow.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3633226" start="0" end="5" title="Balbo (aircraft formation)" label="Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="93" end="101" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="126" end="133" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="134" end="141" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="153" end="164" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="249" end="265" title="Italian aviation" label="Italian aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="291" end="308" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q858346" start="335" end="343" title="Big Wing" label="Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317425" start="364" end="375" title="Duxford Aerodrome" label="RAF Duxford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381892" wikidata="Q5405633" url="?curid=381892" title="Research assistant">
<text>A research assistant (RA) is a researcher employed, often on a temporary contract, by a university, research institute, or privately held organization to provide assistance in academic or private research endeavors. Research assistants work under the supervision of a principal investigator or supervisor and typically do not bear direct responsibility for the final outcomes of the research. However, in certain countries, research assistants can be the primary contributors to the research outcomes. Research assistants are commonly educated to at least degree level, and they may also be enrolled in postgraduate degree programs. In some cases, such as when pursuing a PhD, they are referred to as Doctoral Research Assistants and may also have teaching responsibilities alongside their research commitments.

==Undergraduate and post-doctoral level==
Although research assistants are typically appointed at the graduate level, there are instances where undergraduate students are also employed to provide research support. In fields such as Economics and Business, there are numerous opportunities for undergraduates who have completed their college education to work as research assistants. These paid positions usually span one to two years and serve as valuable experience, particularly for individuals considering applying to PhD programs in Economics and Business. Applications for these research assistantship positions are typically submitted during the Fall quarter of the student&#x27;s senior year.

Similarly, someone who has recently been awarded a doctoral degree may hold a temporary appointment as a &quot;postdoctoral research assistant&quot;. Postdoctoral research assistants usually contributes to independent research projects or to a larger research team as a part of academic institutions. Their work involves publishing article for academic journals, collecting data and analysing results and assisting in the preparation of grant applications to secure research fundings.

==Clinical research assistant==

A clinical research assistant or clinical research associate is employed by a hospital or medical research centre, who is involved in the administration of clinical trials. They may assist a senior investigator with recruiting and enrolling research subjects, as well as with correspondence and grant applications.

==See also==
* Academic freedom
* Graduate student
* Research associate
* Researcher

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5405633" start="2" end="20" title="Research assistant" label="research assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405633" start="22" end="24" title="Research assistant" label="RA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="88" end="98" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="196" end="204" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="603" end="622" title="Postgraduate education" label="postgraduate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="1625" end="1656" title="Postdoctoral research" label="postdoctoral research assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421307" start="2066" end="2093" title="clinical research associate" label="clinical research associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="2189" end="2204" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q414706" start="2364" end="2380" title="Academic freedom" label="Academic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="2383" end="2399" title="Graduate student" label="Graduate student"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151032" start="2402" end="2420" title="Research associate" label="Research associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="2423" end="2433" title="Researcher" label="Researcher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381903" wikidata="Q3253117" url="?curid=381903" title="List of people associated with the California Gold Rush">
<text>The California gold rush occurred in Northern California, during the period from 1848 to 1855. 
== See also ==

* Chinese Americans in the California gold rush
* Women in the California gold rush
* Five Joaquins Gang, Mexican outlaw gang in California (1850–1853)
* Society of California Pioneers
* List of Californios people

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="4" end="24" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="37" end="56" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819384" start="114" end="159" title="Chinese Americans in the California gold rush" label="Chinese Americans in the California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031543" start="162" end="195" title="Women in the California gold rush" label="Women in the California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455983" start="198" end="216" title="Five Joaquins Gang" label="Five Joaquins Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552409" start="266" end="296" title="Society of California Pioneers" label="Society of California Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130533552" start="299" end="325" title="List of Californios people" label="List of Californios people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381906" wikidata="Q722694" url="?curid=381906" title="International Cricket Council">
<text>The International Cricket Council, often known simply as the ICC, is the global governing body of cricket. It was founded as the Imperial Cricket Conference in 1909 by representatives from Australia, England, and South Africa. In 1965, the body was renamed as the International Cricket Conference and adopted its current name in 1987. ICC has its headquarters in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

The ICC currently has 108 member nations: 12 full members that play Test matches, and 96 associate members. The ICC is responsible for the organisation and governance of cricket&#x27;s major international tournaments, most notably the Cricket World Cup, T20 World Cup, and ICC World Test Championship. It also appoints the umpires and referees that officiate at all sanctioned Test matches, One Day Internationals and Twenty20 Internationals. It promulgates the ICC Code of Conduct, which sets professional standards of discipline for international cricket, and also co-ordinates action against corruption and match-fixing through its Anti-Corruption and Security Unit.

The ICC does not control bilateral fixtures between member countries, which include all Test matches outside of the World Test Championship Final, and neither does it govern domestic cricket within member countries. It does not make or alter the laws of the game, which have remained under the governance of Marylebone Cricket Club since 1788.

The Chairman heads the board of directors, and on 26 June 2014 Narayanaswami Srinivasan, the former president of Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI), was announced as the first chairman of the council. The role of ICC president became a largely honorary position after the establishment of the chairman role and other changes made to the ICC constitution in 2014. It has been claimed that the 2014 changes have handed control to the &#x27;Big Three&#x27; nations of England, India and Australia. The last ICC president was Zaheer Abbas, who was appointed in June 2015 following the resignation of Mustafa Kamal in April 2015. When the post of ICC president was abolished in April 2016, Shashank Manohar, who replaced Srinivasan in October 2015, became the first independent elected chairman of the ICC.

==History==
=== 1909–1963 – Imperial Cricket Conference ===

On 30 November 1907, Abe Bailey, the President of the South African Cricket Association, wrote a letter to the Marylebone Cricket Club&#x27;s (MCC, England) secretary, Francis Lacey. Bailey suggested the formation of an &#x27;Imperial Cricket Board&#x27;. In the letter, he suggested that the board would be responsible for the formulation of rules and regulations that would govern the bilateral international matches of the three members, Australia, England and South Africa. Bailey wanted to host a Triangular Test series among the participant countries in South Africa. However, Australia rejected the offer. Still, Bailey did not lose hope. He saw an opportunity of getting the three members together during Australia&#x27;s tour of England in 1909. After continued lobbying and efforts, Bailey was successful.

On 15 June 1909, representatives from England, Australia and South Africa met at Lord&#x27;s and founded the &quot;Imperial Cricket Conference&quot;. A month later, a second meeting between the three members was held. The rules were agreed upon amongst the nations, and the first-ever Tri-Test series was decided to be held in England in 1912.

In 1926, West Indies, New Zealand and India were elected as Full Members, doubling the number of Test-playing nations to six. After the formation of Pakistan in 1947, it was given Test status five years later in 1952, becoming the seventh Test-playing, nation. In May 1961, South Africa left the Commonwealth and therefore lost membership.

=== 1964–1988 – International Cricket Conference ===

In 1964, the ICC agreed to include non-Test playing countries. The following year, the ICC changed its name to the International Cricket Conference. The US, Ceylon (who later became Sri Lanka} and Fiji were admitted as Associates, a new class of members. In 1968, Denmark, Bermuda, Netherlands, and East Africa were admitted as Associates, while South Africa had still not applied to rejoin the ICC.

In 1969, the basic rules of ICC were amended. At the 1971 meeting, the idea of organizing a World Cup was introduced. At the 1973 meeting, it was decided that a World Cup would be played in 1975 in England. The six Test playing nations and East Africa and Sri Lanka were invited to take part.

New members were added frequently during this period: Israel and Singapore in 1974, West Africa in 1976, Bangladesh in 1977, Papua-New Guinea in 1978, were admitted as Associates. South Africa applied to rejoin, but their application was rejected.

In 1981, Sri Lanka was promoted to a Full Member, and they played their first Test in 1982.

In 1984, a third class of membership (Affiliate) was introduced. Italy was the first such member, followed by Switzerland in 1985. In 1987, Bahamas and France were admitted, followed by Nepal in 1988.

=== 1989–present – International Cricket Council ===
At the July 1989 meeting, the ICC renamed itself as the International Cricket Council, and the tradition of the MCC President automatically becoming the Chairman of ICC was abolished.

In 1990, UAE joined as an Associate.

In 1991, for the first time in ICC history, the meeting was held away from England, in Melbourne, Australia. South Africa was re-elected as a Full Member of the ICC in July, following the end of apartheid.

In 1992, Zimbabwe was admitted as the ninth Full Member. Namibia joined as an Associate member. Austria, Belgium, Brunei and Spain all joined as Affiliates.

In 1993, the position of &quot;Chief Executive of ICC&quot; was created; David Richards of the Australian Cricket Board was the first person appointed to the position. In July, Sir Clyde Walcott, from Barbados, was elected as the first non-British Chairman. The emergence of new technology saw the introduction of a third umpire who was equipped with video playback facilities. By 1995, TV replays were made available for run-outs and stumpings in Test matches, with the third umpire required to signal out or not out with red and green lights respectively. The following year, the cameras were used to determine if the ball had crossed the boundary. In 1997 decisions on the cleanness of catches could be referred to the third umpire. This year also saw the introduction of the Duckworth-Lewis method, a way of adjusting targets in rain-affected ODI matches.

In 2000, Bangladesh was admitted as the tenth Full Member of the International Cricket Council.

In 2005, ICC moved to its new headquarters to Dubai.

In 2017, Afghanistan and Ireland were admitted as the eleventh and twelfth Full Members of the International Cricket Council after a unanimous vote at the ICC Full Council meeting at The Oval. Affiliate Membership was also abolished, with all existing Affiliate Members becoming Associate Members.

In 2018, all Women&#x27;s T20 matches were elevated to Women&#x27;s Twenty20 International status. In 2019, all Men&#x27;s T20 matches were elevated to Twenty20 International status.

In July 2022, Cambodia, Cote D&#x27;Ivoire, and Uzbekistan were granted associate member status by the ICC.

== Members ==

Full Members – The 12 governing bodies of teams that have full voting rights within the International Cricket Council and play official Test matches.
The 96 governing bodies in countries where cricket is firmly established and organized, but have not been granted Full Membership, are called Associate Members.

Currently, eight associate teams have temporary ODI status until 2027. These teams are one tier above the rest of the associate teams.
The details of all 96 associate teams are presented in the table below:

==Location==

Since its creation, the ICC had the Lord&#x27;s Cricket Ground as its home, and in 1993 moved its offices to the &quot;Clock Tower&quot; building at the nursery end of the ground. The independently run ICC was funded initially by commercial exploitation of the rights to the World Cup of One Day International cricket. As not all Member countries had double-tax agreements with the United Kingdom, it was necessary to protect cricket&#x27;s revenues by creating a company, ICC Development (International) Pvt. Ltd, known as IDI outside the UK. This was established in January 1994 and was based in Monaco .

For the remainder of the nineties, the administration of IDI was a modest affair. But with the negotiation of a bundle of rights to all ICC events from 2001 to 2008, revenues available to International cricket and the ICC member countries rose substantially. This led to a growth in the number of commercial staff employed by IDI in Monaco. It also had the disadvantage that the council&#x27;s cricket administrators, who remained at Lord&#x27;s, were separated from their commercial colleagues in Monaco. The Council decided to seek ways of bringing all of their staff together in one office while protecting their commercial income from tax.

The option of staying at Lord&#x27;s was investigated and a request was made, through Sport England, to the British Government to allow the ICC to have all its personnel (including those working on commercial matters) in London – but be given special exemption from paying UK corporation tax on its commercial income. The British Government was unwilling to create a precedent and would not agree to this request. As a consequence, the ICC examined other locations and eventually settled on the city of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. The ICC is also registered in British Virgin Islands. In August 2005, the ICC moved its offices to Dubai, and subsequently closed its offices at Lord&#x27;s and Monaco. The move to Dubai was made after an 11–1 vote by the ICC&#x27;s executive board in favour.

While the principal driver of the ICC&#x27;s move to Dubai was the wish to bring its main employees together in one tax-efficient location, a secondary reason was the wish to move offices closer to the increasingly important new centres of cricketing power in South Asia. Lord&#x27;s had been a logical venue when the ICC had been administered by the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) (a situation that lasted until 1993). But the growing power of India and Pakistan in world cricket had made the continued control of international cricket by a British private members club (the MCC) anachronistic and unsustainable. A direct consequence of the changes and reforms instituted in 1993 was eventually to be the move away from Lord&#x27;s to a more neutral venue.

==Income generation==

The ICC generates income from the tournaments it organises, primarily the Cricket World Cup, and it distributes the majority of that income to its members. Sponsorship and television rights of the World Cup brought in over US$1.6 billion between 2007 and 2015, by far the ICC&#x27;s main source of income. In the nine-month accounting period to 31 December 2007 the ICC had operating income of $12.66 million, mainly from member subscriptions and sponsorship. In contrast, event income was US$285.87 million, including $239 million from the 2007 World Cup. There was also investment income of $6.695 million in the period. In 2022 ICC generated US$208,375,000 as an net income.

The ICC has no income streams from the bilateral international cricket matches (Test matches, One Day International and Twenty20 Internationals), that account for the great majority of the international playing schedule, as they are owned and run by its members. It has sought to create other new events to augment its World Cup revenues. These include the ICC Champions Trophy and the ICC Super Series played in Australia in 2005. However, these events have not been as successful as the ICC hoped. The Super Series was widely seen as a failure and is not expected to be repeated, and India called for the Champions Trophy to be scrapped in 2006. The Champions Trophy 2004 event was referred to in &quot;Wisden 2005&quot; by the editor as a &quot;turkey of a tournament&quot; and a &quot;fiasco&quot;; although the 2006 event was seen as a greater success due to a new format.

The ICC World Twenty20, first played in 2007, was a success. The ICC&#x27;s current plan is to have an international tournament every year, with a Twenty20 World Cup played in even number years, the World Cup continuing to be held the year before the Olympic Games, and the ICC Champions Trophy in the remaining year of the cycle. This arrangement began in 2022.

==Tournaments and winners==

The ICC organizes various international Test, One-Day and T20 cricket competitions for men, women and under-19 national teams.
The ICC, in association with Commonwealth Games Federation and International Olympic Committee, also conducts Cricket at the Commonwealth Games and Cricket at the Summer Olympics.

=== Qualifiers ===
The ICC organizes qualifying tournaments for various international main events.
Starting with the 2024 ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup, the Global Qualifiers will no longer take place and teams will qualify directly based on their performance in the previous T20 World Cup and from regional qualifiers.

=== Leagues ===
ICC conducts world cup qualifying leagues for associate teams. A two-tier league system with promotion &amp; relegation where best performing teams qualify for ICC Cricket World Cup Qualifier.

In addition, there are two playoff events which are part of World cup qualification process and essentially connected to the leagues above mentioned.

* ICC Cricket World Cup Qualifier Playoff
* ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League Playoff

== Rules and regulation ==
The International Cricket Council oversees playing conditions, bowling reviews, and other ICC regulations. The ICC does not have copyright to the &quot;Laws of Cricket&quot;: only the MCC may change the Laws, though this is usually done in consultation with the game&#x27;s global governing body. The ICC maintains a set of playing conditions for international cricket which make slight amendments to the Laws. They also have a &quot;Code of Conduct&quot; to which teams and players in international matches are required to adhere. Where breaches of this code occur the ICC can apply sanctions, usually fines. In 2008, the ICC imposed 19 penalties on players. ICC announces changes to Playing Conditions.

==Umpires and referees==
The ICC appoints international umpires and match referees who officiate at all sanctioned Test matches, One-Day Internationals and Twenty20 Internationals. The ICC operates three panels of umpires: the Elite Panel, the International Panel, and the Associates and Affiliates Panel.

As of March 2012, the Elite Panel included twelve umpires. In theory, two umpires from the Elite Panel officiate at every Test match, while one Elite Panel umpire stands in ODI matches together with an umpire from the International Panel. In practice, members of the International Panel stand in occasional Test matches, as this is viewed an excellent good opportunity to see whether they can cope at the Test level and whether they should be elevated to the Elite Panel. Members of the Elite Panel are full-time employees of the ICC, although they do still, very occasionally, umpire first-class cricket in their country of residence. The average annual officiating schedule for Elite Umpires is 8–10 Test matches and 10–15 ODIs, a potential on-field workload of 75 days per year, plus travel and preparation time.

The International Panel is made up of officials nominated from each of the ten Test-playing cricket boards. The Panel Members officiate in ODI matches in their home country, and assist the Elite Panel at peak times in the cricket calendar when they can be appointed to overseas ODI and Test matches. International Panel members also undertake overseas umpiring assignments such as the ICC Under 19 Cricket World Cup to improve their knowledge and understanding of overseas condition, and help them prepare for possible promotion to the Elite Panel. Some of these umpires also officiate in the Cricket World Cup. Each of the Test cricket boards nominates a &quot;third umpire&quot; who can be called upon to review certain on-field decisions through instant television replays. All third umpires are first-class umpires in their own country, and the role is seen as a step onto the International Panel, and then the Elite Panel.

The inaugural ICC Associate and Affiliate International Umpires Panel was formed in June 2006. It superseded the ICC Associate and Affiliate International Umpires Panel, created in 2005, and serves as the pinnacle for umpires from non-Test playing Members, with selection achieved through each of the five ICC Development Program Regional Umpires Panels.

Members of the Associate and Affiliate International Umpires Panel are eligible for appointments to ODIs involving ICC Associate Members, ICC Intercontinental Cup matches and other Associate and Affiliate tournaments. High-performing umpires may also be considered for other ICC events, including the ICC U/19 Cricket World Cup, and could also be invited to be involved in the ICC Champions Trophy and ICC Cricket World Cup.

There is also an Elite Panel of ICC Referees who act as the independent representative of the ICC at all Test and ODI matches. As of January 2009, it had 6 members, all highly experienced former international cricketers. The Referees do not have the power to report players or officials (which has to be done by the umpires), but they are responsible for conducting hearings under the ICC Code of Conduct and imposing penalties as required at matches, ranging from an official reprimand to a lifetime ban from cricket. Decisions can be appealed, but the original decision is upheld in most cases.

The Council failed to achieve consensus among the cricket-playing nations – as of June 2012 – on the universal application of an Umpire&#x27;s Decision Review System, due to opposition by BCCI. It will continue to be applied subject to mutual agreement of the playing countries. In July 2012, ICC decided to send a delegation to show the ball tracking research done by Ed Rosten, an expert on computer vision and technology, to BCCI to remove the skepticism about the use of DRS technology.

==Regional affiliations==
These regional bodies aim to organise, promote and develop the game of cricket:
* Asian Cricket Council
* Africa Cricket Association
* ICC Europe
* ICC Americas
* ICC East Asia-Pacific

The ICC regional bodies which looks after regions not covered by regional bodies of Asia and Africa:
* ICC Asia
* ICC Africa

The regional body for Europe was disestablished following which ICC took over operations:
* European Cricket Council

Two further regional bodies were disestablished following the creation of the African Cricket Association:
* East and Central Africa Cricket Council
* West Africa Cricket Council

==Rankings and awards==
=== Rankings ===
The ICC publishes team rankings for all three formats of the game and updates the same periodically.

Men&#x27;s
* ICC Men&#x27;s Test Team Rankings
* ICC Men&#x27;s ODI Team Rankings
* ICC Men&#x27;s T20I Team Rankings
Women&#x27;s
* ICC Women&#x27;s ODI and T20I Team Rankings
The ICC Player Rankings are a widely followed system of rankings for international cricketers based on their recent performances.

Men&#x27;s
* ICC Men&#x27;s Player Rankings
Women&#x27;s
* ICC Women&#x27;s Player Rankings

=== Awards ===

The ICC has instituted the ICC Awards to recognize and honor the best international cricket players of the previous 12 months. The inaugural ICC Awards ceremony was held on 7 September 2004, in London. In 2020, ICC announced a special one-off event, the ICC Awards of the Decade to honour the best performers and performances in the previous 10 years.

The ICC Development Awards were established in 2002 to celebrate the world-leading initiatives and innovative programmes delivered by ICC Members to grow the game around the globe.

==Anti-corruption and security==
The ICC has also had to deal with drugs and bribery scandals involving top cricketers. Following the corruption scandals by cricketers connected with the legal and illegal bookmaking markets, the ICC set up an Anti-Corruption and Security Unit (ACSU) in 2000 under the retired Commissioner of London&#x27;s Metropolitan Police, Lord Condon. Among the corruption on which they have reported was that of former South African captain Hansie Cronje who had accepted substantial sums of money from an Indian bookmaker for under-performing or ensuring that certain matches had a pre-determined result. Similarly, the former Indian captain Mohammad Azharuddin and Ajay Jadeja were investigated, found guilty of match-fixing, and banned from playing cricket (for life and for five years, respectively). The ACSU continues to monitor and investigate any reports of corruption in cricket and protocols have been introduced, which for example prohibit the use of mobile telephones in dressing rooms.

Prior to the 2007 Cricket World Cup, ICC chief executive Malcolm Speed warned against any corruption and stated that the ICC would be vigilant and intolerant against it.

Following a scandal that occurred during the 2010 Pakistan tour of England, 3 Pakistani players, Mohammad Amir, Mohammad Asif and Salman Butt were found to be guilty of spot-fixing, and were banned for 5 years, 7 years and 10 years respectively. On 3 November 2011, jail terms were handed down of 30 months for Butt, one year for Asif, six months for Amir and two years and eight months for Majeed, the sports agent that facilitated the bribes.

In 2019, an investigation by Al Jazeera revealed match-fixing in Sri-Lanka, India, England, Australia and other cricket playing nations. The ICC launched an investigation corcerning the report.

==Global Cricket Academy==
The ICC Global Cricket Academy (GCA) is located at Dubai Sports City in the United Arab Emirates. The GCA&#x27;s facilities include two ovals, each with 10 turf pitches, outdoor turf and synthetic practice facilities, indoor practice facilities including hawk eye technology and a cricket-specific gymnasium. Rod Marsh has been appointed as the academy&#x27;s Director of Coaching. The opening, originally planned for 2008, took place in 2010.

==ICC Cricket World Program==

The International Cricket Council telecasts a weekly program on television called ICC Cricket World. It is produced by Sportsbrand.

It is a weekly 30-minute program providing the latest cricket news, recent cricket action including all Test and One-Day International matches, as well as off-field features and interviews.

==Criticism==
In 2015, Sam Collins and Jarrod Kimber made the documentary &quot;Death of a Gentleman&quot; on the internal organisation of the ICC, saying that the richer member countries (specifically India, England and Australia) were &quot;bullying&quot; the ICC and running the organisation to the detriment of the other members.

==See also==

* Association of Cricket Officials
* List of International Cricket Council members
* Federation of International Cricketers&#x27; Associations
* International structure of cricket
* List of International Cricket Council presidents 

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==
*ICC Crictos Launch with Fancraze
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="4" end="33" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="61" end="64" title="International Cricket Council" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="80" end="94" title="Sports governing body" label="governing body"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="98" end="105" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="438" end="450" title="List of International Cricket Council members#Full members" label="full members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="461" end="473" title="Test cricket" label="Test matches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="482" end="499" title="List of International Cricket Council members#Associate members" label="associate members"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="628" end="645" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="647" end="660" title="T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13578103" start="666" end="693" title="ICC World Test Championship" label="ICC World Test Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143894" start="716" end="723" title="umpire (cricket)" label="umpires"/>
<link wikidata="Q202648" start="728" end="735" title="referee" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="784" end="805" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="811" end="833" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969425" start="855" end="874" title="ICC Code of Conduct" label="ICC Code of Conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="1003" end="1015" title="match-fixing" label="match-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="1028" end="1061" title="ICC Anti Corruption and Security Unit" label="Anti-Corruption and Security Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737036" start="1310" end="1326" title="Laws of cricket" label="laws of the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="1372" end="1395" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q20804934" start="1413" end="1421" title="Chairman of the International Cricket Council" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378640" start="1472" end="1496" title="Narayanaswami Srinivasan" label="Narayanaswami Srinivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907539" start="1522" end="1559" title="Board of Control for Cricket in India" label="Board of Control for Cricket in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722507" start="1941" end="1953" title="Zaheer Abbas" label="Zaheer Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943274" start="2015" end="2028" title="Mustafa Kamal (politician)" label="Mustafa Kamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490538" start="2104" end="2120" title="Shashank Manohar" label="Shashank Manohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531665" start="2304" end="2314" title="Abe Bailey" label="Abe Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="2394" end="2417" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481676" start="2451" end="2464" title="Francis Lacey" label="Francis Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="3138" end="3145" title="English cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="3147" end="3156" title="Australian cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="3161" end="3173" title="South African cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="3181" end="3192" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="3454" end="3465" title="West Indian cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143797" start="3467" end="3478" title="New Zealand cricket team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="3483" end="3488" title="Indian cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3594" end="3602" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="3625" end="3636" title="Test status" label="Test status"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3993" end="3995" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3997" end="4003" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4022" end="4031" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="4037" end="4041" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4104" end="4111" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="4113" end="4120" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4122" end="4133" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="4139" end="4150" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="4481" end="4492" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4497" end="4506" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="4589" end="4595" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="4600" end="4609" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="4619" end="4630" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="4640" end="4650" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="4660" end="4676" title="Papua-New Guinea" label="Papua-New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4715" end="4727" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="4793" end="4802" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4942" end="4947" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4987" end="4998" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="5017" end="5024" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5029" end="5035" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="5063" end="5068" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="5326" end="5329" title="UAE" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5430" end="5437" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5442" end="5451" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5464" end="5476" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="5550" end="5559" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071971" start="5571" end="5579" title="Zimbabwe Cricket" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5619" end="5626" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="5658" end="5665" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5667" end="5674" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="5676" end="5682" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5687" end="5692" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239031" start="5793" end="5807" title="David Richards (cricket administrator)" label="David Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q462487" start="5897" end="5914" title="Sir Clyde Walcott" label="Sir Clyde Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351492" start="6036" end="6048" title="third umpire" label="third umpire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263570" start="6499" end="6521" title="Duckworth-Lewis method" label="Duckworth-Lewis method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350108" start="6590" end="6600" title="Bangladesh Cricket Board" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="6724" end="6729" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689143" start="6741" end="6752" title="Afghanistan Cricket Board" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184969" start="6757" end="6764" title="Cricket Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="6915" end="6923" title="The Oval" label="The Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031090" start="7086" end="7121" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Twenty20 International" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Twenty20 International"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="7183" end="7205" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063473" start="7229" end="7237" title="Cricket Association of Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="7239" end="7257" title="Cote D&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Cote D&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871625" start="7263" end="7273" title="Cricket Federation of Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="7909" end="7935" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242836" start="8224" end="8245" title="Double taxation" label="double-tax agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q843265" start="9212" end="9225" title="Sport England" label="Sport England"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="9402" end="9417" title="corporation tax" label="corporation tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="9629" end="9634" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="9642" end="9662" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="9694" end="9716" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="9763" end="9768" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="9978" end="9983" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q126113040" start="10165" end="10195" title="Cricket in South Asia" label="cricketing power in South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="10276" end="10299" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="10780" end="10797" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="11196" end="11199" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="11465" end="11477" title="Test cricket" label="Test matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="11479" end="11500" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="11505" end="11528" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20 Internationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="11742" end="11762" title="ICC Champions Trophy" label="ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604400" start="11771" end="11787" title="ICC Super Series" label="ICC Super Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310318" start="12037" end="12058" title="2004 ICC Champions Trophy" label="Champions Trophy 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="12090" end="12101" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133368" start="12201" end="12211" title="2006 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2006 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="12268" end="12286" title="ICC World Twenty20" label="ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641168" start="12301" end="12308" title="2007 ICC World Twenty20" label="in 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="12515" end="12528" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="12697" end="12701" title="Test cricket" label="Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="12703" end="12710" title="One Day International" label="One-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="12715" end="12718" title="Twenty20 International" label="T20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684877" start="12813" end="12842" title="Commonwealth Games Federation" label="Commonwealth Games Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="12847" end="12878" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12894" end="12927" title="Commonwealth Games#List of Commonwealth sports" label="Cricket at the Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052122" start="12932" end="12962" title="Cricket at the Summer Olympics" label="Cricket at the Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="13082" end="13115" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="13240" end="13253" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="13394" end="13420" title="Promotion and relegation" label="promotion &amp;amp; relegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117786" start="13461" end="13492" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup Qualifier" label="ICC Cricket World Cup Qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749535" start="13648" end="13687" title="2023 Cricket World Cup Qualifier Play-off" label="ICC Cricket World Cup Qualifier Playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q130270771" start="13690" end="13736" title="2024 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League Play-off" label="ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League Playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737036" start="13917" end="13932" title="Laws of Cricket" label="Laws of Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="13949" end="13952" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="MCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969425" start="14199" end="14214" title="ICC Code of Conduct" label="Code of Conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143894" start="14527" end="14534" title="umpire (cricket)" label="umpires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786234" start="14539" end="14552" title="match referee" label="match referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350148" start="14698" end="14709" title="Elite Panel of ICC Umpires" label="Elite Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052316" start="14715" end="14734" title="International Panel of Umpires and Referees" label="International Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969420" start="14744" end="14775" title="ICC Associates and Affiliates umpire panel" label="Associates and Affiliates Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="15363" end="15382" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642130" start="15984" end="16010" title="U/19 Cricket World Cup" label="Under 19 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361938" start="17323" end="17350" title="Elite Panel of ICC Referees" label="Elite Panel of ICC Referees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639692" start="18504" end="18525" title="Asian Cricket Council" label="Asian Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299155" start="18528" end="18554" title="Africa Cricket Association" label="Africa Cricket Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q124811189" start="18557" end="18567" title="ICC Europe" label="ICC Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462401" start="18570" end="18582" title="ICC Americas" label="ICC Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462422" start="18585" end="18606" title="ICC East Asia-Pacific" label="ICC East Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="18711" end="18719" title="ICC Asia" label="ICC Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="18722" end="18732" title="ICC Africa" label="ICC Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q652616" start="18826" end="18850" title="European Cricket Council" label="European Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329737" start="18961" end="19000" title="East and Central Africa Cricket Council" label="East and Central Africa Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984245" start="19003" end="19030" title="West Africa Cricket Council" label="West Africa Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146535" start="19188" end="19221" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Test Team Rankings" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Test Team Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146534" start="19224" end="19256" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s ODI Team Rankings" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s ODI Team Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303625" start="19259" end="19292" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20I Team Rankings" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20I Team Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077530" start="19308" end="19351" title="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s ODI and T20I Team Rankings" label="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s ODI and T20I Team Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491083" start="19496" end="19526" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Player Rankings" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Player Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090314" start="19542" end="19574" title="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s Player Rankings" label="ICC Women&amp;#x27;s Player Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146531" start="19619" end="19629" title="ICC Awards" label="ICC Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882497" start="19846" end="19870" title="ICC Awards of the Decade" label="ICC Awards of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146531" start="19949" end="19971" title="ICC Development Awards" label="ICC Development Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724643" start="20204" end="20220" title="Betting controversies in cricket" label="bribery scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="20332" end="20342" title="bookmaking" label="bookmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993011" start="20437" end="20449" title="Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis" label="Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="20467" end="20486" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q267783" start="20488" end="20499" title="Paul Condon, Baron Condon" label="Lord Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597409" start="20569" end="20590" title="South African national cricket captains" label="South African captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q681723" start="20591" end="20604" title="Hansie Cronje" label="Hansie Cronje"/>
<link wikidata="Q28110598" start="20778" end="20792" title="Indian national cricket captains" label="Indian captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345095" start="20793" end="20812" title="Mohammad Azharuddin" label="Mohammad Azharuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722025" start="20817" end="20828" title="Ajay Jadeja" label="Ajay Jadeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="21112" end="21128" title="mobile telephone" label="mobile telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070054" start="21133" end="21146" title="Changeroom" label="dressing room"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="21168" end="21185" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742644" start="21207" end="21220" title="Malcolm Speed" label="Malcolm Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125779" start="21333" end="21354" title="Pakistan cricket spot-fixing scandal" label="scandal that occurred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202252" start="21418" end="21431" title="Mohammad Amir" label="Mohammad Amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049012" start="21433" end="21446" title="Mohammad Asif (cricketer)" label="Mohammad Asif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273844" start="21451" end="21462" title="Salman Butt" label="Salman Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="21796" end="21806" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969435" start="21993" end="22019" title="ICC Global Cricket Academy" label="ICC Global Cricket Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910493" start="22040" end="22057" title="Dubai Sports City" label="Dubai Sports City"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="22065" end="22085" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742290" start="22298" end="22307" title="Rod Marsh" label="Rod Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161079" start="22828" end="22841" title="Jarrod Kimber" label="Jarrod Kimber"/>
<link wikidata="Q21034401" start="22869" end="22889" title="Death of a Gentleman" label="Death of a Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809757" start="23140" end="23172" title="Association of Cricket Officials" label="Association of Cricket Officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q487299" start="23175" end="23220" title="List of International Cricket Council members" label="List of International Cricket Council members"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440828" start="23223" end="23280" title="Federation of International Cricketers&amp;#x27; Associations" label="Federation of International Cricketers&amp;#x27; Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764250" start="23283" end="23317" title="International structure of cricket" label="International structure of cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574310" start="23320" end="23368" title="List of International Cricket Council presidents" label="List of International Cricket Council presidents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381909" wikidata="Q75478" url="?curid=381909" title="New York University Tandon School of Engineering">
<text>The New York University Tandon School of Engineering (commonly referred to as Tandon) is the engineering and applied sciences school of New York University. Tandon is the second oldest private engineering and technology school in the United States.

The school dates back to 1854 when its predecessor institutions were separately founded: the University of the City of New York School of Civil Engineering and Architecture, which evolved into the NYU College of Engineering; and the Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute, which evolved into Polytechnic Institute. In 1973, Polytechnic Institute acquired the College of Engineering from NYU, but in 2008, Polytechnic was absorbed by NYU to become its new engineering school. In 2015 NYU renamed the engineering school in honor of NYU Trustees Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon following their donation of $100 million to the school.

The school&#x27;s main campus is in Brooklyn&#x27;s MetroTech Center, an urban academic-industrial research park. It is one of several engineering schools that were founded based on a European polytechnic university model in the 1800s, in response to the increasing industrialization of the United States. It has been a key center of research in the development of microwave, wireless, radar, electronics in general, polymers, industrial engineering, operations research and the US space program.
==History==
===Predecessor institutions===
====Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute====
On May 17, 1853, a group of Brooklyn businessmen wrote a charter to establish a school for young men. Founded as the Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute, the school moved into its first home at 99 Livingston Street in Brooklyn. The first class, admitted in 1855, consisted of 265 young men aged nine to 17. The school conferred its first bachelor&#x27;s degrees in 1871. Graduate programs began in 1901, and the school awarded its first doctoral degree in 1921. From 1889 to 1973 the school became known as Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn.

In 1917, the preparatory program separated from the Institute and became the Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School. Polytechnic Institute moved to its present location in 1957, the former site of the American Safety Razor Company factory, where it became a co-educational institution.

====School of Civil Engineering and Architecture====
In 1854, the University of the City of New York, now New York University, founded the School of Civil Engineering and Architecture at a time when specialized schools of engineering were uncommon in America. Classes began in 1855 and the school awarded its first undergraduate degree in 1857. As the industrial revolution took shape, the school formalized its engineering curriculum and the school&#x27;s first dean, Charles H. Snow, changed the name of the school to the School of Applied Science. During this time the engineering school officially separated from the university&#x27;s arts and science school then called University College.

In 1894 the University of the City of New York moved its engineering school to a new campus in the Bronx. The new campus gave the university space to build larger science laboratories that could not be constructed at its Washington Square site. With the addition of the new campus, under the leadership of Chancellor Henry Mitchell MacCracken, the University of the City of New York renamed itself New York University. The neighborhood surrounding the Bronx campus eventually became known as University Heights. By 1920 separate electrical and chemical engineering departments were created and the school changed its name to the College of Engineering.

=== Acquisition of NYU College of Engineering by Polytechnic Institute ===
Enrollment at New York University expanded considerably from the early 1900s into the postwar decades. However, by the early 1970s this growth ceased due to rising crime and financial troubles in New York City. New York University faced financial hardships leading it to sell its University Heights campus that housed its engineering school to City University of New York, which in turn renamed the campus Bronx Community College.
Also during that period from 1969 to 1975, Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn was forced to rely on subsidies provided by New York state to keep the school afloat. The state supported Polytechnic on the basis that closing the school would create economic hardship locally. With both Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn and New York University facing financial difficulties, the state brokered a merger with New York University&#x27;s engineering school. Polytechnic Institute acquired the faculty, programs and students of New York University&#x27;s engineering school to form Polytechnic Institute of New York. Polytechnic Institute of New York gained university status in 1985 and changed its name to Polytechnic University.
By 1986 Polytechnic University in Brooklyn was the largest technological university in the New York metropolitan area and the second-largest in graduate enrollment in the nation after the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Of the 300 engineering schools in the United States, Polytechnic had the second-largest graduate enrollment and was among the most successful institutions in the country as a producer of science and engineering graduates who went on to doctoral studies. An average of 7.2 percent of Polytechnic graduates went on to achieve a Ph.D., compared with two other schools with large engineering programs: Carnegie Mellon, with an average of 6 percent, and Princeton, with 4.5 percent. Polytechnic University became well known for its research centers in electrophysics and polymer blends.

=== Merger between Polytechnic University and NYU ===

Discussions about a merger with Polytechnic University and New York University began in 2004. Four years later Polytechnic University and New York University agreed to take steps toward a merger beginning with a formal affiliation between the two schools. This affiliation resulted in the school changing its name to Polytechnic Institute of New York University. The schools officially merged in 2014 when the New York State Regents approved the change of charter making NYU the sole member of Polytechnic University.

Since the merger, applications to the school and incoming SAT scores have increased substantially. The school has also experienced an influx of students coming from outside of New York state. Fundraising and faculty research awards have increased since the merger. The school also opened a bioengineering facility in partnership with the medical and dental schools.

The school has had several fundraising campaigns over the years. From 2001 to 2005 the school raised more than $275 million. Alumnus Joseph J. Jacobs, who founded Jacobs Engineering Group, one of the largest engineering and construction companies in the world, gave the school more than $30 million over the course of his life.

A gift of $100 million from Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon in 2015 resulted in the school changing its name to the Tandon School of Engineering. New York University has committed to investing over $500 million to its engineering school in the coming years. In 2022, NYU announced it will invest $1 billion in the school to hire 40 tenure-track faculty members, improve lab and student spaces, and bolster the cybersecurity and artificial intelligence programs.

==Name==
The school started from two origins and has carried a number of different names:
*1854: Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute; University of the City of New York School of Civil Engineering and Architecture (founding names, separate institutions)
*1889: Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn (also spun out Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School)
*1896: New York University School of Applied Science (separate from Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn)
*1920: New York University College of Engineering (separate from Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn)
*1973: Polytechnic Institute of New York (acquired the faculty, programs and students of New York University College of Engineering)
*1985: Polytechnic University (acquired university status)
*2008: Polytechnic Institute of New York University (affiliated with New York University)
*2014: New York University Polytechnic School of Engineering (merged with New York University)
*2015: New York University Tandon School of Engineering

==Campuses==
The NYU Tandon School of Engineering main campus is in Downtown Brooklyn and is close to public transportation routes. It is located in the Brooklyn Tech Triangle and about a 20-minute subway ride from NYU&#x27;s main campus in Lower Manhattan. It is also connected to the Washington Square campus by the NYU Shuttle Bus system. In addition to its main address at MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn, the school offers programs in Manhattan. The school is an integral part of NYU Abu Dhabi, NYU Shanghai and the NYU Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) in downtown Brooklyn.

===Brooklyn campus===

The school played a major role in bringing about MetroTech Center, one of the largest urban university-corporate parks in the United States, while closing down the larger campus at its former Long Island Graduate Center. Today, the 16-acre, $1 billion complex in Brooklyn includes the school&#x27;s main campus, along with several technology-dependent companies such as Securities Industry Automation Corporation (SIAC), as well as New York City Police Department&#x27;s 9-1-1 Center, New York City Fire Department Headquarters and the U.S. technology and operations functions of JPMorgan Chase.

The school has seven buildings in Brooklyn, as well as leased spaces in some other nearby buildings. The seven buildings are as follows:

* Jacobs Academic Building
* Jacobs Administration Building
* Rogers Hall
* Wunsch Building
* Dibner Building
* Othmer Residence Hall
* Civil Engineering Building (currently closed)

An eighth 460,000-square-foot space at 370 Jay St, adjacent to Rogers Hall, which houses the Center for Urban Science and Progress and other academic units within NYU, opened in Fall 2017.
===Manhattan sites===

The Bioengineering Institute research facility is located at 433 First Avenue in Manhattan. The School of Engineering and Colleges of Nursing and Dentistry are located in the building where chemical, biomolecular engineers, as well as mechanical engineers do research in biomaterials and biotherapeutics for regenerative medicine.

The engineering school also has a location in downtown Manhattan. The downtown site offers degree programs in Financial Engineering, Management of Technology, Information Management and Accelerated Management of Technology, and the Exec 21 Construction Management certificate.

===Online===
NYU Tandon Digital Learning (formerly known as NYU Tandon Online) is the digital learning department at NYU Tandon School of Engineering which offers 4 master&#x27;s degrees, an advanced graduate certificate, and certificate of completion programs fully online. Focused on peer-to-peer engagement, the unit has been recognized as providing one of the top online learning programs by the Online Learning Consortium among others.

==Academic profile==
===Departments===
*Applied Physics
*Biomedical Engineering
*Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
*Civil and Urban Engineering
*Computer Science and Engineering
*Electrical and Computer Engineering
*Finance and Risk Engineering
*Mathematics (merged into the Courant Department of Mathematics)
*Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
*Technology, Culture and Society
*Technology Management and Innovation (affiliated with Leonard N. Stern School of Business)

===Accreditation===

All undergraduate and graduate programs at the engineering school are accredited by the Middle States Association. Undergraduate chemistry students have the option to pursue a degree approved by the American Chemical Society (ACS). The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET), the Computer Science Accreditation Board (CSAB), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE), Institute of Industrial Engineers (IIE), American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), Construction Management Association of America (CMAA), American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE), American Society for Metals, Society of Manufacturing Engineers (SME), American Academy of Environmental Engineers (AAEE), Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES), American Chemical Society (ACS), American Physical Society (APS) and the Joint Policy Board for Mathematics (JPBM) have recognized the school&#x27;s undergraduate and graduate programs in engineering, computer science and physics, chemistry and mathematics.

=== Admissions ===
Tandon&#x27;s incoming classes typically consist of about 700 students, with a total academic population of over 5,000. For Fall 2019, the average SAT scores for incoming freshmen was 1448. The acceptance rate for the graduate programs in 2016 was 28%. The PhD student-faculty ratio in 2018 was 3.6:1.

For Fall 2018, the international students represented 91 countries and domestic students represented the 47 U.S States. The student body comprises 28.8% females and 71.2% males.

===Rankings===
*Ranked #2 by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; Best Online Graduate Computer Information Technology Program in 2019
*Ranked #20 by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; Best Online Graduate Engineering Programs in 2019
*Ranked #1 by The Princeton Review Top Graduate Schools for Video Game Design in 2019
*Ranked #5 by Risk.net&#x27;s Top 25 quant finance master&#x27;s programmes in the world
*Ranked #25 in 2020 &quot;U.S. News&quot; Best Global Universities for Electrical and Electronic Engineering
*Ranked #21 in &quot;Construction Week Online&quot; – The world&#x27;s top 25 universities for civil engineering in 2019
*Ranked #38 in &quot;U.S. News&quot; Best Engineering Schools Ranked in 2021.
*Ranked #66 in &quot;U.S. News&quot; 2019 undergraduate engineering programs.
*Ranked #65 in 2020 &quot;Times Higher Education&quot; World University Rankings by subject: engineering and technology
*Ranked #81 in 2020 &quot;U.S. News&quot; Best Global Universities for Engineering

==Research== 

In 2023, the school reported $59 million in research expenditures. Some of the school&#x27;s first research institutes included the Polymer Research Institute, established in 1942, and the Microwave Research Institute, established in 1945. The American Chemical Society designated the Polymer Research Institute as a National Historic Chemical Landmark on September 3, 2003. The Microwave Research Institute developed electromagnetic and microwave defense and communication systems and later renamed itself the Weber Research Institute. Other notable research centers of the institute include NSF-sponsored Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT), which ranked #1 among technology research centers in funding and #2 in the number of industry participants according to the United States National Science Foundation, Center for Advanced Technologies in Telecommunications (CATT), a New York State and NSF sponsored research center that is also affiliated with Columbia University, NSF-funded Internet Security and Information Systems Lab, a U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) designated Center of Excellence in Information Assurance, Information Assurance Education and a Center of Excellence in Research, and the New York State Resiliency Institute for Storms &amp; Emergencies (NYS RISE), which is housed jointly at NYU&#x27;s Brooklyn campus, and Stony Brook University.

Over the years the school has been a key center of research in the development of microwave physics, radar, polymers and the space program. During World War II the school&#x27;s Microwave Research Institute worked on problems whose solution led to the development of radar, and later broke ground in electromagnetic theory and electronics in general. In later years the school participated in the space program, solving re-entry problems of crewed space capsules.

The school has been affiliated with some major inventions and innovations including: the Panama Canal locks; lockmaking; the Brooklyn Bridge cables; cable-lift elevators; cordless phones; ATMs; bar codes; laser; radar; penicillin; polymers; elevator brakes; lightweight, ultra durable automotive brake rotor; light beer; cardiac defibrillator; artificial cardiac pacemaker; RFID; contact lenses; zoom lens; first telephone handset; commercial television; non-stick coating as an application of Teflon; suspension system for the largest radio telescope; microwave technology; Apollo Lunar Module, the first, and to date only, crewed spacecraft to operate exclusively in the airless vacuum of space; X-ray crystallography; structure of the DNA molecule; submarine; modern refrigerator; A/C generator; electric motors; transformer; submarine communications facilities; development of the artificial sweetener aspartame; development of nontoxic processes to create food colorings and remove caffeine from coffee; the quasi-complementary (transistor) amplifier circuit; lateral transistor; the wireless microphone; as well as Eugene Kleiner&#x27;s first semiconductor (and much of the Silicon Valley), and Spencer Trask&#x27;s investing and supporting of Thomas Edison&#x27;s invention of the electric light bulb.

===Academic labs===
Academic labs and research centers include:

*Computational Mechanics Laboratory
*Dynamical Systems Laboratory
*Brooklyn Experimental Media Center (formerly Integrated Digital Media Institute)
*Wireless Implementation Testbed Laboratory
*Bio-interfacial Engineering and Diagnostics Lab
*Control and Telecommunications Research Laboratory
*High-Speed Networking Lab 
*Power and Power Electronics Engineering Laboratory
*CITE Game Innovation Lab
*Protein Engineering and Molecular Design Laboratory
*Translational Neuroengineering (associated with the NYU Center for Neural Science and the NYU Langone Medical Center)
*Urban Future Lab (founded in partnership with the New York City Economic Development Corporation)

===Research centers===
Research at the engineering school is conducted either through academic departments or through one of many interdisciplinary research centers including:

*Center for Advanced Technology in Telecommunications (CATT)
*Center for Finance and Technology (CFT)
*Institute for Mathematics and Advanced Supercomputing (IMAS)
*Polymer Research Institute (PRI)
*Urban Intelligent Transportation Systems Center (UITSC)
*Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)
* CRISSP (Cyber-Security. Includes Tandon School of Engineering, Wagner Graduate School, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Stern School of Business, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development)
*Weber Research Institute
*Research Center for Risk Engineering
*Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
*Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center
*The Games for Learning Institute
*Media and Games Network (MAGNET)
*New York State Resiliency Institute for Storms &amp; Emergencies (includes NYU, Stony Brook University, Columbia University, Cornell University, City University of New York and Brookhaven National Laboratory)
*NYU WIRELESS
*Biomatrix Research Center (located in Manhattan)

===CUSP===
The Center for Urban Science and Progress (&quot;CUSP&quot;) is a degree-granting research facility of NYU located at 370 Jay Street in Downtown Brooklyn, New York and is adjacent to NYU School of Engineering&#x27;s Rogers Hall.

==Notable faculty and alumni==

New York University Tandon School of Engineering has just over 33,000 living alumni living in 68 countries as of 2015. The school&#x27;s alumni include inventors, scientists, entrepreneurs, politicians, country presidents, university presidents, academic leaders (including NYU Stern&#x27;s founder Charles Waldo Haskins) and more than 2,000 CEOs and leaders at large corporations. Among its past and present graduates and faculty are at least four Nobel Prize winners, seven National Medals for Science, Technology and Innovation winners, two astronauts, Russ Prize, IEEE Edison Medal, Turing Award, Gordon Prize and Draper Prize winners and over 100 National Academy of Engineering members.

===Nobel laureates===
*Gertrude B. Elion, Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Rudolph Marcus, Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Francis Crick, Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for being a co-discoverer of the structure of the DNA molecule
*Martin Perl, Nobel Prize in Physics in 1995 for his discovery of the tau lepton

===National Medals for Science, Technology and Innovation===
*John G. Trump
*Joel S. Engel
*Richard J. Gambino
*Herman Francis Mark
*Rudolph A. Marcus
*Ernst Weber
*Jerome Swartz, developed early optical strategies for barcode scanning technologies

===Russ Prize, Gordon Prize, Draper Prize===
*Joel S. Engel
*Clive Dym
*Harold S. Goldberg
*Elmer L. Gaden

===IEEE Edison Medal===
*William B. Kouwenhoven, invented the closed-chest cardiac defibrillator
*Bancroft Gherardi, Jr.

===Turing Award===
*Judea Pearl

===Astronauts===
*Paolo A. Nespoli
*Charles Camarda

===DARPA directors===
*Jack Ruina

===Pulitzer Prize winners===
*James Truslow Adams, writer who coined the term &quot;American Dream

===Business leaders===
Alumni leaders at large companies include:
*Ursula Burns, Chairperson and CEO of Xerox
*Arthur C. Martinez, Chairman and CEO of Sears
*Robert J. Stevens, Chairman and CEO of Lockheed Martin
*Alfred Amoroso, Chairman of Yahoo!
*John Dionisio, Chairman and CEO of AECOM
*Herbert L. Henkel, Chairman of Ingersoll Rand
*Spencer Trask, Chairman of The New York Times
*Jason Hsuan, Chairman and CEO of TPV Technology
*John Trani, Chairman and CEO of Stanley Black &amp; Decker
*John Elmer McKeen, Chairman and CEO of Pfizer
*Mark Ronald, Chairman and CEO of BAE Systems
*Vincent A. Calarco, Chairman and CEO of Chemtura
*Sunil Godhwani, Chairman and CEO of Religare
*Robert Prieto, Chairman and CEO of Parsons Brinckerhoff
*Richard Santulli, Chairman and CEO of NetJets
*Stav Prodromou, Chairman and CEO of Peregrine Semiconductor
*Michael H. Kappaz, Chairman and CEO of KM Group
*Israel Borovich, Chairman and CEO of EL AL
*Hugh John Casey, Chairman of New York City Transit Authority
*Stewart G. Nagler, Vice Chairman, Director and CFO of MetLife
*Craig G. Matthews, President, CFO and Chief Operating Officer of KeySpan
*Charles D. Strang, Chairman, CEO and President of Outboard Marine Corporation
*Charles Ranlett Flint, founder of IBM
*Nils Lahr, Chairman, CEO and founder of IBEAM Broadcasting Corporation
*Fadi Chehadé, CEO of ICANN
*Joseph J. Jacobs, Chairman, CEO and founder of Jacobs Engineering Group
*Glenford Myers, Chairman, CEO and founder of Radisys
*Bern Dibner, Chairman, CEO and founder of Burndy
*Eugene Kleiner, Chairman, CEO and founder of Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers
*Ta-lin Hsu, Chairman, CEO and founder of H&amp;Q Asia Pacific
*Paul Ferri, Chairman, CEO and founder of Matrix Partners
*William C. W. Mow, Chairman, CEO and founder of Bugle Boy
*Jerome Swartz, Chairman, CEO and founder of Symbol Technologies
*Alfred P. Sloan (attended, but transferred), Chairman, CEO and founder of General Motors
*Rachelle Friedman, Chairperson, CEO and founder of J&amp;R
*Bill Friend (engineer), President of Bechtel
*Michael Horodniceanu, President of the MTA Capital Construction
*Ami Miron, Vice President, General Instrument Corporation
*Charles Hinkaty, Vice President, Citibank
*Eugene Fasullo, Chief Engineer of Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 
*Jay Greene, NASA chief engineer
*George W. Melville, chief engineer of the United States Navy. Congressional Gold Medal winner.
*Howard A. Chinn, Chief Engineer of CBS. Pioneered techniques of analog audio recording as well as radio and television broadcasting practices. 
*Virginia P. Ruesterholz, President, Verizon
*Alan Schriesheim, Director and CEO of Argonne National Laboratory, Board member of Rohm and Haas

===Inventors===
Partial list of inventors affiliated with the school:
*Barouh Berkovits, contributed to invention of the cardiac defibrillator and artificial cardiac pacemaker
*Gordon Gould, invented the laser
*Mario Cardullo, contributed to the invention of the Radio-frequency identification (RFID)
*Erol Gelenbe invented the Random neural network and the G-network
*Robert G. Brown, invented the first telephone handset
*Jasper H. Kane, invented the practical, deep-tank fermentation method for production of large quantities of pharmaceutical-grade penicillin
*Maurice Karnaugh, inventor of the Karnaugh map (K-map)
*Norman Gaylord, played a prominent role in the development of permeable contact lenses
*Ronald R. Yager, invented Ordered weighted averaging aggregation operator
*Thomas J. Kelly, designed and built the Apollo Lunar Module
*Fredric J. Harris, co-inventor of the Blackman–Harris filter
*David J. Thomson, invented the multitaper
*Erol Gelenbe, invented G-networks and random neural networks
*Joseph Owades, inventor of Lite beer
*John Colagioia, invented Thue (programming language)
*Paul Peter Ewald, inventor of X-ray diffraction method for determination of molecular structure
*Henry C. Goldmark, designed and installed the Panama Canal locks
*Helias Doundoulakis, patented the suspension system for the largest radio telescope in the world
*George Glauberman, discovered the ZJ theorem and the Z* theorem
*Torunn Atteraas Garin, oversaw the development of the artificial sweetener aspartame; developed nontoxic processes to create food colorings and remove caffeine from coffee
*James Wood, fabricated the steel cables for the Brooklyn Bridge, making cable-lift elevators possible. He also contributed to the inventions of lockmaking, submarine, A/C generator, electric motors, transformer and the design of the modern refrigerator. He held 240 patents.
*Joe Landolina, invented Vetigel
*Hung-Chang Lin, invented the quasi-complementary (transistor) amplifier circuit, the lateral transistor, and the wireless microphone. He held 61 patents
*Hans Reissner, designed the first successful all-metal aircraft, the Reissner Canard (or Ente) with both skin and structure made of metal. Also, first solved Einstein&#x27;s equation for the metric of a charged point mass. His closed-form solution, rediscovered by several other physicists within the next few years, is now called the Reissner–Nordström metric.
*Harold Horton Sheldon, invented a precision photoelectric color-scope measurement instrument, more accurate than the human eye
* Fred Waller, invented Cinerama, the Waller Gunnery Trainer, and patented the water ski
* Joginder Lal, Goodyear Polymer Research Manager and expert in the synthesis and mechanism of the formation of high polymers

==See also==
*List of university and college mergers in the United States
*Gee Bee Model R
*NYU Tandon School of Engineering Lynford Lecture Series

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="4" end="52" title="New York University Tandon School of Engineering" label="New York University Tandon School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="78" end="84" title="New York University Tandon School of Engineering" label="Tandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="136" end="155" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602931" start="171" end="247" title="List of United States technological universities" label="second oldest private engineering and technology school in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675330" start="800" end="809" title="Chandrika Tandon" label="Chandrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="921" end="929" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824441" start="937" end="953" title="MetroTech Center" label="MetroTech Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498586" start="984" end="997" title="research park" label="research park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204838" start="1078" end="1106" title="History of European research universities" label="polytechnic university model"/>
<link wikidata="Q426716" start="1151" end="1189" title="Technological and industrial history of the United States" label="industrialization of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1250" end="1259" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1261" end="1269" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="1271" end="1276" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="1278" end="1289" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="1302" end="1309" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="1312" end="1334" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="1336" end="1355" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572617" start="1364" end="1380" title="US space program" label="US space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226112" start="2109" end="2151" title="Poly Prep Country Day School" label="Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073383" start="2237" end="2266" title="American Safety Razor Company" label="American Safety Razor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2429" end="2448" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2792" end="2807" title="Charles H. Snow" label="Charles H. Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="3114" end="3123" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551341" start="3511" end="3529" title="University Heights, Bronx" label="University Heights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4028" end="4053" title="Bronx Community College#Campus" label="University Heights campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="4092" end="4119" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974180" start="4154" end="4177" title="Bronx Community College" label="Bronx Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="4994" end="5020" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873659" start="6178" end="6200" title="New York State Board of Regents" label="New York State Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284234" start="6787" end="6803" title="Joseph J. Jacobs" label="Joseph J. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157622" start="6817" end="6841" title="Jacobs Engineering Group" label="Jacobs Engineering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675330" start="7011" end="7020" title="Chandrika Tandon" label="Chandrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226112" start="7762" end="7804" title="Poly Prep Country Day School" label="Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="8511" end="8528" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321208" start="8545" end="8573" title="Public transportation in New York City" label="public transportation routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="8684" end="8699" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824441" start="8820" end="8836" title="MetroTech Center" label="MetroTech Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="8889" end="8898" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q566189" start="8934" end="8947" title="NYU Abu Dhabi" label="NYU Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652966" start="8949" end="8961" title="NYU Shanghai" label="NYU Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059910" start="8970" end="9018" title="Center for Urban Science and Progress" label="NYU Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824441" start="9114" end="9130" title="MetroTech Center" label="MetroTech Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976594" start="9168" end="9183" title="Science park" label="corporate parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444912" start="9435" end="9477" title="Securities Industry Automation Corporation" label="Securities Industry Automation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="9497" end="9528" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="9550" end="9579" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="9645" end="9659" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039268" start="9876" end="9891" title="Wunsch Building" label="Wunsch Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988196" start="10022" end="10032" title="370 Jay Street" label="370 Jay St"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059910" start="10076" end="10113" title="Center for Urban Science and Progress" label="Center for Urban Science and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q811501" start="10767" end="10790" title="Construction Management" label="Construction Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956112" start="10818" end="10845" title="NYU Tandon Online" label="NYU Tandon Digital Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q946028" start="11526" end="11559" title="Courant_Institute_of_Mathematical_Sciences" label="Courant Department of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q770467" start="11687" end="11722" title="Leonard N. Stern School of Business" label="Leonard N. Stern School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650304" start="11982" end="12039" title="ABET" label="Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="12090" end="12139" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="12148" end="12183" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666355" start="12192" end="12240" title="International Association of Financial Engineers" label="International Association of Financial Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995185" start="12249" end="12282" title="Institute of Industrial Engineers" label="Institute of Industrial Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="12290" end="12330" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164431" start="12339" end="12385" title="Construction Management Association of America" label="Construction Management Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q465184" start="12394" end="12434" title="American Institute of Chemical Engineers" label="American Institute of Chemical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994906" start="12444" end="12471" title="American Society for Metals" label="American Society for Metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995474" start="12473" end="12507" title="Society of Manufacturing Engineers" label="Society of Manufacturing Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742883" start="12515" end="12558" title="American Academy of Environmental Engineers" label="American Academy of Environmental Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915109" start="12567" end="12597" title="Biomedical Engineering Society" label="Biomedical Engineering Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="12606" end="12631" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q466113" start="12639" end="12664" title="American Physical Society" label="American Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269321" start="12679" end="12713" title="Joint Policy Board for Mathematics" label="Joint Policy Board for Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432855" start="14580" end="14608" title="Microwave Research Institute" label="Microwave Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432855" start="14902" end="14926" title="Weber Research Institute" label="Weber Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="14998" end="15054" title="Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)" label="Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="15078" end="15088" title="high technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="15089" end="15104" title="research center" label="research center"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="15194" end="15221" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="15452" end="15476" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432855" start="15960" end="15988" title="Microwave Research Institute" label="Microwave Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="16822" end="16841" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Apollo Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261225" start="17368" end="17382" title="Eugene Kleiner" label="Eugene Kleiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="17427" end="17441" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576212" start="17448" end="17461" title="Spencer Trask" label="Spencer Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="18726" end="18782" title="Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)" label="Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432855" start="19045" end="19069" title="Weber Research Institute" label="Weber Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19482" end="19494" title="NYU WIRELESS" label="NYU WIRELESS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059910" start="19561" end="19598" title="Center for Urban Science and Progress" label="Center for Urban Science and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988196" start="19675" end="19689" title="370 Jay Street" label="370 Jay Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="19693" end="19710" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="19712" end="19720" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q770467" start="20093" end="20102" title="NYU Stern" label="NYU Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083303" start="20118" end="20139" title="Charles Waldo Haskins" label="Charles Waldo Haskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065018" start="20375" end="20385" title="Russ Prize" label="Russ Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q678263" start="20387" end="20404" title="IEEE Edison Medal" label="IEEE Edison Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="20406" end="20418" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354960" start="20420" end="20432" title="Gordon Prize" label="Gordon Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="20437" end="20449" title="Draper Prize" label="Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="20471" end="20502" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q35703" start="20536" end="20553" title="Gertrude B. Elion" label="Gertrude B. Elion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="20555" end="20592" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q239067" start="20594" end="20608" title="Rudolph Marcus" label="Rudolph Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="20610" end="20634" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="20636" end="20649" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="20651" end="20688" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107416" start="20753" end="20764" title="Martin Perl" label="Martin Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="20766" end="20788" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576675" start="20896" end="20909" title="John G. Trump" label="John G. Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547637" start="20911" end="20924" title="Joel S. Engel" label="Joel S. Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326724" start="20926" end="20944" title="Richard J. Gambino" label="Richard J. Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q85914" start="20946" end="20965" title="Herman Francis Mark" label="Herman Francis Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q239067" start="20967" end="20984" title="Rudolph A. Marcus" label="Rudolph A. Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q90248" start="20986" end="20997" title="Ernst Weber (engineer)" label="Ernst Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182916" start="20999" end="21012" title="Jerome Swartz" label="Jerome Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547637" start="21130" end="21143" title="Joel S. Engel" label="Joel S. Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640786" start="21145" end="21154" title="Clive Dym" label="Clive Dym"/>
<link wikidata="Q20631122" start="21156" end="21174" title="Harold S. Goldberg" label="Harold S. Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366604" start="21176" end="21190" title="Elmer L. Gaden" label="Elmer L. Gaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589796" start="21217" end="21239" title="William B. Kouwenhoven" label="William B. Kouwenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="21267" end="21288" title="cardiac defibrillator" label="cardiac defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854156" start="21290" end="21312" title="Bancroft Gherardi, Jr." label="Bancroft Gherardi, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q92824" start="21334" end="21345" title="Judea Pearl" label="Judea Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17177" start="21365" end="21381" title="Paolo A. Nespoli" label="Paolo A. Nespoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q45080" start="21383" end="21398" title="Charles Camarda" label="Charles Camarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114938" start="21423" end="21433" title="Jack Ruina" label="Jack Ruina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681213" start="21465" end="21484" title="James Truslow Adams" label="James Truslow Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q214100" start="21519" end="21533" title="American Dream" label="American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q465663" start="21602" end="21614" title="Ursula Burns" label="Ursula Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="21639" end="21644" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657281" start="21646" end="21664" title="Arthur C. Martinez" label="Arthur C. Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="21686" end="21691" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189946" start="21693" end="21710" title="Robert J. Stevens" label="Robert J. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="21732" end="21747" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722225" start="21749" end="21763" title="Alfred Amoroso" label="Alfred Amoroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="21777" end="21783" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142646" start="21785" end="21798" title="John Dionisio" label="John Dionisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825507" start="21820" end="21825" title="AECOM" label="AECOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656997" start="21827" end="21844" title="Herbert L. Henkel" label="Herbert L. Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453962" start="21858" end="21872" title="Ingersoll Rand" label="Ingersoll Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576212" start="21874" end="21887" title="Spencer Trask" label="Spencer Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21901" end="21919" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129133" start="21921" end="21932" title="Jason Hsuan" label="Jason Hsuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512329" start="21954" end="21968" title="TPV Technology" label="TPV Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657073" start="21970" end="21980" title="John Trani" label="John Trani"/>
<link wikidata="Q706094" start="22002" end="22028" title="Stanley Black &amp;amp; Decker" label="Stanley Black &amp;amp; Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657306" start="22030" end="22047" title="John Elmer McKeen" label="John Elmer McKeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="22069" end="22075" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769496" start="22077" end="22088" title="Mark Ronald" label="Mark Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="22110" end="22121" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656790" start="22123" end="22141" title="Vincent A. Calarco" label="Vincent A. Calarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090664" start="22163" end="22171" title="Chemtura" label="Chemtura"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656957" start="22173" end="22187" title="Sunil Godhwani" label="Sunil Godhwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311108" start="22209" end="22217" title="Religare" label="Religare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22219" end="22232" title="Robert Prieto" label="Robert Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912277" start="22254" end="22274" title="Parsons Brinckerhoff" label="Parsons Brinckerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328889" start="22276" end="22292" title="Richard Santulli" label="Richard Santulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504132" start="22314" end="22321" title="NetJets" label="NetJets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604776" start="22323" end="22337" title="Stav Prodromou" label="Stav Prodromou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167806" start="22359" end="22382" title="Peregrine Semiconductor" label="Peregrine Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657102" start="22384" end="22401" title="Michael H. Kappaz" label="Michael H. Kappaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334107" start="22423" end="22431" title="KM Group" label="KM Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038361" start="22433" end="22448" title="Israel Borovich" label="Israel Borovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q208489" start="22470" end="22475" title="EL AL" label="EL AL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15529659" start="22477" end="22492" title="Hugh John Casey" label="Hugh John Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="22506" end="22537" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="New York City Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22539" end="22556" title="Stewart G. Nagler" label="Stewart G. Nagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="22593" end="22600" title="MetLife" label="MetLife"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656837" start="22602" end="22619" title="Craig G. Matthews" label="Craig G. Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398004" start="22667" end="22674" title="KeySpan" label="KeySpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598012" start="22676" end="22693" title="Charles D. Strang" label="Charles D. Strang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041902" start="22726" end="22753" title="Outboard Marine Corporation" label="Outboard Marine Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960084" start="22755" end="22776" title="Charles Ranlett Flint" label="Charles Ranlett Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="22789" end="22792" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489706" start="22794" end="22803" title="Nils Lahr" label="Nils Lahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489706" start="22834" end="22864" title="IBEAM Broadcasting Corporation" label="IBEAM Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q536854" start="22866" end="22878" title="Fadi Chehadé" label="Fadi Chehadé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="22887" end="22892" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284234" start="22894" end="22910" title="Joseph J. Jacobs" label="Joseph J. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157622" start="22941" end="22965" title="Jacobs Engineering Group" label="Jacobs Engineering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568522" start="22967" end="22981" title="Glenford Myers" label="Glenford Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280252" start="23012" end="23019" title="Radisys" label="Radisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q822095" start="23021" end="23032" title="Bern Dibner" label="Bern Dibner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999626" start="23063" end="23069" title="Burndy" label="Burndy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261225" start="23071" end="23085" title="Eugene Kleiner" label="Eugene Kleiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346838" start="23116" end="23152" title="Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp;amp; Byers" label="Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp;amp; Byers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23154" end="23164" title="Ta-lin Hsu" label="Ta-lin Hsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150615" start="23217" end="23227" title="Paul Ferri" label="Paul Ferri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787860" start="23258" end="23273" title="Matrix Partners" label="Matrix Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657392" start="23275" end="23292" title="William C. W. Mow" label="William C. W. Mow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986210" start="23323" end="23332" title="Bugle Boy" label="Bugle Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182916" start="23334" end="23347" title="Jerome Swartz" label="Jerome Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q603253" start="23378" end="23397" title="Symbol Technologies" label="Symbol Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q344045" start="23399" end="23414" title="Alfred P. Sloan" label="Alfred P. Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="23473" end="23487" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103558" start="23489" end="23506" title="Rachelle Friedman (entrepreneur)" label="Rachelle Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103558" start="23540" end="23547" title="J&amp;amp;R" label="J&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656939" start="23549" end="23571" title="Bill Friend (engineer)" label="Bill Friend (engineer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q813639" start="23586" end="23593" title="Bechtel" label="Bechtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090938" start="23595" end="23615" title="Michael Horodniceanu" label="Michael Horodniceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931455" start="23634" end="23658" title="MTA Capital Construction" label="MTA Capital Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746087" start="23660" end="23669" title="Ami Miron" label="Ami Miron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501636" start="23687" end="23717" title="General Instrument Corporation" label="General Instrument Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090911" start="23719" end="23734" title="Charles Hinkaty" label="Charles Hinkaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="23752" end="23760" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656911" start="23762" end="23776" title="Eugene Fasullo" label="Eugene Fasullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="23796" end="23837" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166664" start="23840" end="23850" title="Jay Greene" label="Jay Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="23852" end="23856" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760668" start="23873" end="23891" title="George W. Melville" label="George W. Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="23935" end="23959" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918936" start="23969" end="23984" title="Howard A. Chinn" label="Howard A. Chinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="24004" end="24007" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657729" start="24114" end="24137" title="Virginia P. Ruesterholz" label="Virginia P. Ruesterholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="24150" end="24157" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707730" start="24159" end="24175" title="Alan Schriesheim" label="Alan Schriesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q649120" start="24197" end="24224" title="Argonne National Laboratory" label="Argonne National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q834077" start="24242" end="24255" title="Rohm and Haas" label="Rohm and Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863071" start="24328" end="24344" title="Barouh Berkovits" label="Barouh Berkovits"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="24378" end="24399" title="cardiac defibrillator" label="cardiac defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="24404" end="24432" title="artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="artificial cardiac pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q546175" start="24434" end="24446" title="Gordon Gould" label="Gordon Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="24461" end="24466" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657270" start="24468" end="24482" title="Mario Cardullo" label="Mario Cardullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="24520" end="24550" title="Radio-frequency identification" label="Radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462580" start="24559" end="24571" title="Erol Gelenbe" label="Erol Gelenbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291980" start="24585" end="24606" title="Random neural network" label="Random neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511950" start="24615" end="24624" title="G-network" label="G-network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344599" start="24626" end="24641" title="Robert G. Brown" label="Robert G. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24662" end="24679" title="handset#telehony" label="telephone handset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657100" start="24681" end="24695" title="Jasper H. Kane" label="Jasper H. Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="24810" end="24820" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92787" start="24822" end="24838" title="Maurice Karnaugh" label="Maurice Karnaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q461528" start="24856" end="24868" title="Karnaugh map" label="Karnaugh map"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052248" start="24878" end="24892" title="Norman Gaylord" label="Norman Gaylord"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="24950" end="24964" title="contact lenses" label="contact lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365183" start="24966" end="24981" title="Ronald R. Yager" label="Ronald R. Yager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100718" start="24992" end="25039" title="Ordered weighted averaging aggregation operator" label="Ordered weighted averaging aggregation operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791090" start="25041" end="25056" title="Thomas J. Kelly (aerospace engineer)" label="Thomas J. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="25081" end="25100" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Apollo Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499394" start="25102" end="25119" title="Fredric J. Harris" label="Fredric J. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25140" end="25162" title="Window function#Blackman–Harris window" label="Blackman–Harris filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235506" start="25164" end="25180" title="David J. Thomson" label="David J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327726" start="25195" end="25205" title="multitaper" label="multitaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462580" start="25207" end="25219" title="Erol Gelenbe" label="Erol Gelenbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511950" start="25230" end="25240" title="G-networks" label="G-networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291980" start="25245" end="25266" title="random neural network" label="random neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707758" start="25269" end="25282" title="Joseph Owades" label="Joseph Owades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814622" start="25296" end="25305" title="Lite beer" label="Lite beer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25307" end="25321" title="John Colagioia" label="John Colagioia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65204" start="25361" end="25377" title="Paul Peter Ewald" label="Paul Peter Ewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="25391" end="25408" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656960" start="25458" end="25475" title="Henry C. Goldmark" label="Henry C. Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388548" start="25504" end="25522" title="Panama Canal locks" label="Panama Canal locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704895" start="25524" end="25543" title="Helias Doundoulakis" label="Helias Doundoulakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="25592" end="25607" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539746" start="25622" end="25639" title="George Glauberman" label="George Glauberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063120" start="25656" end="25666" title="ZJ theorem" label="ZJ theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062800" start="25675" end="25685" title="Z* theorem" label="Z* theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640673" start="25687" end="25708" title="Torunn Atteraas Garin" label="Torunn Atteraas Garin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182040" start="25762" end="25771" title="aspartame" label="aspartame"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979456" start="25860" end="25870" title="James Wood (engineer)" label="James Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="25908" end="25923" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714137" start="26136" end="26149" title="Joe Landolina" label="Joe Landolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712542" start="26160" end="26167" title="Vetigel" label="Vetigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018500" start="26169" end="26183" title="Hung-Chang Lin" label="Hung-Chang Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123407" start="26282" end="26301" title="wireless microphone" label="wireless microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q66709" start="26323" end="26336" title="Hans Reissner" label="Hans Reissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q540664" start="26658" end="26683" title="Reissner–Nordström metric" label="Reissner–Nordström metric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26686" end="26707" title="Harold Horton Sheldon" label="Harold Horton Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101645" start="26815" end="26826" title="Fred Waller" label="Fred Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q224655" start="26837" end="26845" title="Cinerama" label="Cinerama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963045" start="26851" end="26873" title="Waller Gunnery Trainer" label="Waller Gunnery Trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="26892" end="26901" title="water ski" label="water ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q114358424" start="26904" end="26916" title="Joginder Lal" label="Joginder Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="26918" end="26926" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644428" start="27043" end="27102" title="List of university and college mergers in the United States" label="List of university and college mergers in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543289" start="27104" end="27119" title="Gee Bee Model R" label="Gee Bee Model R"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206697" start="27121" end="27176" title="NYU Tandon School of Engineering Lynford Lecture Series" label="NYU Tandon School of Engineering Lynford Lecture Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381913" wikidata="Q257991" url="?curid=381913" title="Ji">
<text>Ji may refer to:
==Names and titles==
* Ji (surname), the pinyin romanization of several distinct Chinese surnames
* Ji (Korean name), a Korean surname and element in given names (including lists of people with the name)
* -ji, an honorific used as a suffix in many languages of India
* J.I the Prince of N.Y, American rapper J.I.
* Ji (or Hou Ji), the legendary founder of the Zhou dynasty

==Places in China==
* Jì (冀), pinyin abbreviation for the province of Hebei
* Jí (吉), pinyin abbreviation for the province of Jilin
* Ji (state in modern Beijing), an ancient Chinese state
* Ji (state in modern Shandong)
* Ji City (disambiguation), several places 
* Ji County (disambiguation), several places
* Ji Prefecture (Shandong), a prefecture in imperial China
* Ji Province, one of the Nine Provinces of ancient China
* Ji River, either of two former rivers

==Organizations==
* Jamaat-e-Islami (disambiguation), several organizations
* Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), a Southeast Asian militant Islamist rebel group
* Jurong Institute (JI), a now-defunct pre-university institution in Singapore
* JI, IATA code for Meraj Airlines since 2010
* JI, IATA code for Midway Airlines (1993–2003)

==Other uses==
* &quot;Ji&quot; (film), a 2005 Indian Tamil film starring Ajith Kumar and Trisha 
* Ji (monk) (632–682), Chinese monk
* &quot;Ji&quot; (polearm) (戟), a kind of Chinese polearm
* Ji Koizumi, a character in the anime &quot;Guru Guru Pon-chan&quot;
* Just intonation, an alternative, and often subordinate to the contemporary Western establishment, tuning concept employed in various musical-compositional procedures and theories
* Joint Implementation (JI), one of the flexibility mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol
* There are two different kana (Japanese script) letters that are romanized as &quot;ji&quot;:
** じ: Shi (し) with dakuten (voicing marks)
** ぢ: Chi (ち) with dakuten
*Another name for the Chinese hairpin
* , Tsurumi Line, a line operated by the East Japan Railway Company
* , Hitahikosan Line, a line operated by the Kyushu Railway Company

== See also ==
* Jicheng (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257991" start="0" end="2" title="Ji" label="Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688839" start="40" end="52" title="Ji (surname)" label="Ji (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515557" start="117" end="133" title="Ji (Korean name)" label="Ji (Korean name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545013" start="223" end="226" title="-ji" label="-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q97628027" start="287" end="308" title="J.I the Prince of N.Y" label="J.I the Prince of N.Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207613" start="333" end="335" title="Hou Ji" label="Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="414" end="416" title="Jì" label="Jì"/>
<link wikidata="Q45208" start="470" end="472" title="Jí" label="Jí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040193" start="526" end="554" title="Ji (state in modern Beijing)" label="Ji (state in modern Beijing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368631" start="583" end="612" title="Ji (state in modern Shandong)" label="Ji (state in modern Shandong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192086" start="615" end="639" title="Ji City (disambiguation)" label="Ji City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191295" start="659" end="685" title="Ji County (disambiguation)" label="Ji County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11561489" start="704" end="728" title="Ji Prefecture (Shandong)" label="Ji Prefecture (Shandong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020006" start="763" end="774" title="Ji Province" label="Ji Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q840262" start="821" end="829" title="Ji River" label="Ji River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19926611" start="880" end="912" title="Jamaat-e-Islami (disambiguation)" label="Jamaat-e-Islami (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506245" start="938" end="954" title="Jemaah Islamiyah" label="Jemaah Islamiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830281" start="1011" end="1027" title="Jurong Institute" label="Jurong Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16045991" start="1108" end="1122" title="Meraj Airlines" label="Meraj Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843264" start="1154" end="1181" title="Midway Airlines (1993–2003)" label="Midway Airlines (1993–2003)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191284" start="1200" end="1221" title="Ji (film)" label="&amp;quot;Ji&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796191" start="1283" end="1292" title="Ji (monk)" label="Ji (monk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368004" start="1319" end="1343" title="Ji (polearm)" label="&amp;quot;Ji&amp;quot; (polearm)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153460" start="1377" end="1387" title="Ji Koizumi" label="Ji Koizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="1447" end="1462" title="Just intonation" label="Just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702541" start="1628" end="1648" title="Joint Implementation" label="Joint Implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091907" start="1723" end="1741" title="Yotsugana" label="two different kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40582" start="1812" end="1815" title="Shi (kana)" label="Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40636" start="1855" end="1858" title="Chi (kana)" label="Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106912817" start="1898" end="1913" title="Chinese hairpin" label="Chinese hairpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195170" start="1918" end="1930" title="Tsurumi Line" label="Tsurumi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360616" start="1986" end="2002" title="Hitahikosan Line" label="Hitahikosan Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192086" start="2068" end="2092" title="Jicheng (disambiguation)" label="Jicheng (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381914" wikidata="Q1165949" url="?curid=381914" title="Flag of Ontario">
<text>The flag of Ontario is a defaced Red Ensign, with the Royal Union Flag in the canton and the Ontario shield of arms in the fly. The flag of Ontario was derived from the Canadian Red Ensign, which was used as a civil ensign and as a &quot;de facto&quot; flag of Canada from the late 19th century to 1965. It was adopted in a period when many Canadian provinces adopted their own flags. May 21 is Ontario Flag Day.

==Description==

The flag of Ontario is a defacement of the Canadian Red Ensign, which had been the &quot;de facto&quot; national flag of Canada from 1867 to 1965. The flag is a red field with the Royal Union Flag in the canton and the Ontario shield of arms in the fly. The coat of arms of Ontario had been previously granted by Royal Warrant of Queen Victoria in 1868. It features a green field with three gold maple leaves and above it, a white band with a red St. George&#x27;s cross.

The specifications of the flag are 1:2. The shade of red in the flag is specified as &quot;British Admiralty Colour Code No. T1144 for nylon worsted bunting and No. T818A for other bunting.&quot; The shield of the coat of arms is &quot;centred in the half farthest from the staff&quot;.

==History==

Before 1965, the Canadian Red Ensign had served as the &quot;de facto&quot; national flag of Canada. It was flown at all military installations in Canada and overseas, embassies and consulates, outside the legislature and government buildings, at Royal Canadian Legion halls, and many private homes.

In 1964, the Canadian Parliament, after a long and acrimonious debate, adopted the Maple Leaf flag as the flag of Canada. The preceding national flag debate was very divisive and the change of flag was unpopular with many Canadians. A Gallup poll of April 1963 indicated that a majority of Canadians outside of Quebec preferred to retain either the Union Jack or the Red Ensign as the national flag. Another poll, in August 1964, indicated that less than 40% of Ontarians approved of the new flag. Many felt, however, that changing the national flag was a worthwhile concession towards bringing Quebec more closely into Confederation. 

The proposal that the Red Ensign, or a variant thereof, would be an appropriate provincial flag was first made in an editorial in the Toronto Star in May 1964, 6 months prior to the adoption of the new Maple Leaf flag. The idea was supported by Leslie Frost, former premier of Ontario, and Richard Rohmer, the advisor of then-Premier John Robarts. It was originally intended to place the full Ontario Coat of Arms on the flag, but this was later reduced to only the shield. 

A tireless proponent of national unity, Robarts sought to use the Red Ensign design to reconcile the majority of Ontarians who opposed the new national flag. The Ensign did not take anything from proponents of the new flag, and it gave something to those who supported the traditional flag. Robarts felt it was an important symbol that reflected Ontario&#x27;s heritage and the sacrifices made under it by Canadian troops. He stated that &quot;without conflict with the flag of Canada, there is an honoured place within our provincial boundaries for a provincial flag for Ontario. Here, in our province, there is a rich heritage of tradition and historic background which we do well to recognize&quot;.

The adoption of the new provincial flag commanded support of the leaders of both the Ontario Liberal Party and the Ontario New Democratic Party. All MPPs except two (Elmer Sopha decried it &#x27;a flag of revenge&#x27; against the new national flag) voted to adopt the flag on the initial reading, and it was subsequently passed by the Legislative Assembly on March 17, 1965. It went in effect on May 21, 1965. The flag of Manitoba was adopted under similar circumstances.

On May 13, 2015, the Liberal MPP from Etobicoke Centre Yvan Baker put forward the Ontario Flag Day Act, 2015. This bill, which passed the house and received royal assent on June 4 in the same year, declares May 21 every year as Ontario Flag Day.

== Reception ==
The Toronto Daily Star supported the adoption of the flag stating &quot;the Red Ensign was quite properly rejected as a flag for Canada because it was not an acceptable symbol of the nation as a whole. But it is much more suitable as a flag for Ontario&quot;. A 2001, a survey conducted by the North American Vexillological Association (NAVA) placed the Ontario provincial flag 43rd in design quality out of the 72 Canadian provincial, U.S. state, and U.S. territory flags ranked. The design of any flag, however, is entirely subjective and not easily compared according to some scholars such as Graham Bartram, chief vexillologist at the Flag Institute, who noted &quot;There&#x27;s often a fundamental misunderstanding of flags by politicians. Saying you like a flag because of its design is like saying you like your family because they are all handsome or beautiful. You love them because of who they are, unconditionally. Flags are a bit like that.&quot; This remark was made after a 2016 New Zealand flag referendum, in which New Zealanders voted to retain their existing flag, inclusive of the Union Jack.

The incorporation of traditional or historical symbols is often an important element in flag design. Bruce Patterson notes the continued significance of the Red Ensign within the context of Canadian flag design, &quot;while not disparaging the current National Flag...the Red Ensign is worth considering as a part of our history, and after fifty years an acknowledgement of this is certainly not a threat to the position of the National Flag.&quot;

===Redesign proposals===
Some Commonwealth countries with the Union Jack in the canton have debated redesigning their national flags, such as in the case of the 2015–2016 New Zealand flag referendums. There has been comparatively less debate around re-designing the Ontario flag, although some commentators have made calls to change the flag. The justification is mainly around perceptions that the current flag centres colonialism and Old Stock Canadians. Most recently, in July 2021, University of Western Ontario Professor Mano Majumdar launched a petition to redesign the flag, stating that &quot;the best flags are distinct and inclusive. Ontario&#x27;s is neither&quot; and calling for &quot;the Ontario legislature to replace the provincial flag with a more distinct and inclusive flag, chosen by democratic means.&quot;

The petition also spurred support for the flag with one editorial encouraging pride in the flag as it was &quot;a symbol of success.&quot; It was emblematic of the origin of Ontario&#x27;s most successful institutions of British inheritance: parliamentary democracy, law and freedom. The editorial argued, using the flags of Fiji or Tuvalu as an example, that the Union Jack is not exclusive to any ethnic group and represents Ontarians of all backgrounds. It further suggested that the Union Jack could also symbolise the attaining of freedom for an estimated 30-40,000 escaped slaves reaching British North America on the Underground Railroad.

==Other flags of Ontario==
==See also==
* List of Canadian flags

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

*Ontario Flag Act
*Government of Ontario, About Ontario: Emblems and Symbols
*Flags of Canada - Ontario book chapter by Alistair B. Fraser
*Rebellion of 1837–1839 in Upper Canada flags of Upper Canada from Flags of the World
*Flag of Ontario in the online Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1165949" start="4" end="19" title="Flag of Ontario" label="flag of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899714" start="25" end="32" title="defacement (flag)" label="defaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105142" start="33" end="43" title="Red Ensign" label="Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54" end="70" title="Union Jack#Canada" label="Royal Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q952860" start="78" end="84" title="flag terminology" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110507" start="93" end="115" title="Coat of arms of Ontario" label="Ontario shield of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q952860" start="123" end="126" title="flag terminology" label="fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q326826" start="169" end="188" title="Canadian Red Ensign" label="Canadian Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881776" start="210" end="222" title="civil ensign" label="civil ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899714" start="456" end="466" title="defacement (flag)" label="defacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q326826" start="474" end="482" title="Canadian Red Ensign" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105142" start="483" end="493" title="Red Ensign" label="Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q614328" start="878" end="901" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s cross" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q326826" start="1222" end="1241" title="Canadian Red Ensign" label="Canadian Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270231" start="1452" end="1473" title="Royal Canadian Legion" label="Royal Canadian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="1519" end="1538" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Canadian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598922" start="1548" end="1575" title="Great Canadian Flag Debate" label="long and acrimonious debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="1612" end="1626" title="flag of Canada" label="flag of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="1855" end="1865" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="2277" end="2289" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820783" start="2388" end="2400" title="Leslie Frost" label="Leslie Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="2409" end="2427" title="premier of Ontario" label="premier of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431170" start="2433" end="2447" title="Richard Rohmer" label="Richard Rohmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q787456" start="2477" end="2489" title="John Robarts" label="John Robarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="3408" end="3429" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q827589" start="3438" end="3466" title="Ontario New Democratic Party" label="Ontario New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366672" start="3489" end="3500" title="Elmer Sopha" label="Elmer Sopha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="3659" end="3679" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q512175" start="3738" end="3754" title="flag of Manitoba" label="flag of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392575" start="3826" end="3829" title="Member of Provincial Parliament (Ontario)" label="MPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404733" start="3835" end="3851" title="Etobicoke Centre (provincial electoral district)" label="Etobicoke Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180515" start="3852" end="3862" title="Yvan Baker" label="Yvan Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="3954" end="3966" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="4064" end="4082" title="Toronto Daily Star" label="Toronto Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081045" start="4354" end="4395" title="North American Vexillological Association" label="North American Vexillological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086900" start="4699" end="4713" title="Flag Institute" label="Flag Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027080" start="5049" end="5081" title="2015–2016 New Zealand flag referendums" label="2016 New Zealand flag referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027080" start="5785" end="5823" title="2015–2016 New Zealand flag referendums" label="2015–2016 New Zealand flag referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162791" start="6060" end="6079" title="Old Stock Canadians" label="Old Stock Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="6110" end="6139" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q871232" start="6509" end="6518" title="editorial" label="editorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q182514" start="6778" end="6782" title="Flag of Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q105643" start="6786" end="6792" title="Flag of Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="7048" end="7069" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="7077" end="7097" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640218" start="7142" end="7164" title="List of Canadian flags" label="List of Canadian flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="7401" end="7413" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381915" wikidata="Q227608" url="?curid=381915" title="CMC">
<text>CMC may refer to:
== Education ==
=== Bangladesh ===
* Chittagong Medical College or Chittagong Medical College Hospital, a public medical college in Chittagong
* Comilla Medical College, a public medical college in Comilla

=== India ===
* Government Medical College, Kozhikode, Kerala, Previously known as Calicut Medical College
* Christian Medical College &amp; Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
* Christian Medical College Ludhiana, Punjab
* Coimbatore Medical College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu

=== Nepal ===
* Chitwan Medical College, Bharatpur, Chitwan

=== Pakistan ===
* Chandka Medical College, Larkana, Sindh
* Continental Medical College, Lahore, Punjab

=== United Kingdom ===
* Cambridge Muslim College, Islamic higher education institution in Cambridge

=== United States ===
* Chicago Musical College, a division of Chicago College of Performing Arts at Roosevelt University
* Claremont McKenna College, a liberal arts college in Claremont, California
* Colorado Mountain College, a network of seven community colleges in western Colorado
* Computer Music Center, the oldest center for electronic and computer music research in the United States
* Copper Mountain College, a community college in Joshua Tree, California
* Clackamas Middle College, a middle school in Oregon

== Television ==
* Cable Music Channel, a defunct music television channel from Turner Broadcasting System, U.S.
* California Music Channel or CMC-TV, an American music video service
* Country Music Channel, a defunct Australian music television channel provided by Foxtel
* Croatian Music Channel, a Croatian television channel broadcasting Croatian music and music of Croatian production
* Cutie Mark Crusaders, a trio of fillies searching for their cutie marks in the animated series &quot;My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic&quot;

== Military ==
* Central Military Commission (China)
* Central Military Commission of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea
* Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of Vietnam
* Chairman of the NATO Military Committee, Chairman of NATO&#x27;s Military Committee
* Command master chief petty officer, the highest-ranking enlisted sailor aboard a warship in some navies
* Commandant of the United States Marine Corps, the highest-ranking officer of the United States Marine Corps
* A US Navy hull classification symbol: Coastal minelayer (CMc)

== Organizations ==
=== International ===
* Cannonball Motorcycle Club, a European outlaw motorcycle club
* Carnegie Moscow Center, a non-profit think tank and regional affiliate of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
* Cluster Munition Coalition, an international civil society movement campaigning against the use of cluster munitions
* CMC Markets, an international financial company
* Compact Model Council, a working group in the EDA industry
* COMSAT mobile communications, a telecommunications company

=== Australia ===
* Cultural Ministers Council, an Australian intergovernmental organisation for ministers of culture and the arts that existed from 1984-2011

=== Canada ===
* Canadian Meat Council, Canada&#x27;s national trade association for the federally inspected red meat packers and processors
* Canadian Meteorological Centre, a provider of forecast guidance to national and regional prediction centres
* Christian Mennonite Conference, a small body of Mennonites in western Canada
* CMC Electronics, a Montréal-based avionics company
* CMC Microsystems, a Kingston-based microelectronics company
* Co-operatives and Mutuals Canada, a co-operative federation

=== Mainland China ===
* China National Machinery Import and Export Corporation
* China Media Capital

=== Taiwan ===
* Central Mint, a subsidiary of the Central Bank of the Republic of China
* Chi Mei Corporation, plastics producer in Taiwan
* China Motor Corporation, a Taiwanese manufacturer of automobiles
* CMC Magnetics, a Taiwanese company, one of world&#x27;s largest optical disc manufacturers

=== United States ===
* Carolinas Medical Center, a hospital in the Charlotte, North Carolina, region
* Catholic Medical Center, a hospital and heart disease institute located in Manchester, New Hampshire
* Central Massachusetts Conference, a high school athletic conference organised by Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association
* Children&#x27;s Museum of Cleveland
* Civic Media Center, an alternative library and reading room in Gainesville, Florida
* Colorado Mountain Club, a nonprofit outdoor recreation and education organization
* Colt&#x27;s Manufacturing Company, an American firearms manufacturer
* Commercial Metals Company, a steel and metal manufacturer based in Irving, Texas
* Conservative Mennonite Conference, the former name of what is now the Rosedale Network of Churches, a mainline Anabaptist body
* Cossacks Motorcycle Club, an American one-percenter style outlaw motorcycle club
* CMC Materials Inc, a chemicals company that was purchased by Entegris in 2022

=== Other countries ===
* Caribbean Media Corporation, a Barbados-based centralised content-provider
* Catholic Medical Center, the eight hospitals attached to the Catholic University of Korea
* CMC (company), an Indian information technology service
* CMC, marketer of coal from the Cerrejón mine in northern Colombia, owned by Anglo American, BHP and Glencore, headquartered in Dublin.
* Colombo Municipal Council, the local council for Colombo, Sri Lanka
* Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix, a Vietnamese Roman Catholic religious order
* Cooper Motor Corporation, a car manufacturer in Kenya
* Cyprus Mines Corporation, an early 20th century American mining company based in Cyprus

== Chemistry ==
* Carboxymethyl cellulose, a cellulose derivative often initialized CMC
* Ceramic matrix composite, a subgroup of composite materials as well as a subgroup of technical ceramics
* Chemistry, manufacturing and control, a drug development process
* Chlormadinone caproate, a progestin that was never marketed
* Critical micelle concentration, the concentration of surfactants above which micelles are spontaneously formed

== Computing ==
* CBC-mask-CBC, a block cipher mode of operation for encrypting hard disks
* Central Management and Control, enterprise data management software for Cruzer Enterprise secure USB drives
* Certificate Management over CMS, an internet standard by the IETF
* Common Messaging Calls, an API client for the Messaging Application Programming Interface
* Community multimedia center or telecentre
* Computer-mediated communication, any form of data exchange across two or more networked computers
* Constraint Monte Carlo algorithm that uses random sampling for computer simulations

== Other uses ==
* CMC (basketball), Cercle Municipal de Casablanca, a basketball club in Casablanca, Morocco
* CMC Cup, international Go tournament
* California Men&#x27;s Colony, a male-only state prison in California, USA
* Canadian Music Centre, a music venue
* Carpometacarpal joint, a joint in the wrist that articulates the carpal bones and the metacarpals
* Certified Management Consultant, an international professional certification for professional management consultants
* Certified Master Chef, the highest level of culinary certification by the American Culinary Federation
* Certified mortgage consultant, a professional certification for mortgage professionals
* Cincinnati Museum Center at Union Terminal, a museum in Cincinnati, Ohio, originally used as a train station
* Christian McCaffrey, American football running back 
* C-M-C&#x27;, a form of commodity trade in the theory of Karl Marx
* CMC International, a record label based near London, United Kingdom
* Commonwealth Code, the territorial law of the Northern Mariana Islands 
* Conditional mean closure, a combustion model for CFD
* Constant mean curvature, a differential-geometric property of some surfaces
* Crime and Misconduct Commission, an independent entity in Queensland Government, Australia, created to combat major crime
* Cuban Missile Crisis, a 13-day confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union
* Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, an immune disorder characterized by chronic infections with &quot;Candida&quot;
* CMC, initials of Welsh singer Charlotte Church (b. 1986) as used on &quot;The Opera Song (Brave New World)&quot;
* Common-mode choke, in electronics special type of choke
* Craig Memorial Cup, a Northern Irish association football tournament
* Global Environmental Multiscale Model, also known as CMC in North America</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227608" start="0" end="3" title="CMC" label="CMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102401" start="55" end="81" title="Chittagong Medical College" label="Chittagong Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151835" start="163" end="186" title="Comilla Medical College" label="Comilla Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019886" start="241" end="278" title="Government Medical College, Kozhikode" label="Government Medical College, Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532259" start="334" end="374" title="Christian Medical College &amp;amp; Hospital" label="Christian Medical College &amp;amp; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109901" start="398" end="432" title="Christian Medical College Ludhiana" label="Christian Medical College Ludhiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141507" start="443" end="469" title="Coimbatore Medical College" label="Coimbatore Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102535" start="511" end="534" title="Chitwan Medical College" label="Chitwan Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071114" start="575" end="598" title="Chandka Medical College" label="Chandka Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201107" start="617" end="644" title="Continental Medical College" label="Continental Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16830779" start="687" end="711" title="Cambridge Muslim College" label="Cambridge Muslim College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095713" start="788" end="811" title="Chicago Musical College" label="Chicago Musical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126318" start="888" end="913" title="Claremont McKenna College" label="Claremont McKenna College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148844" start="965" end="990" title="Colorado Mountain College" label="Colorado Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984573" start="1052" end="1073" title="Computer Music Center" label="Computer Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168753" start="1159" end="1182" title="Copper Mountain College" label="Copper Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124877" start="1233" end="1257" title="Clackamas Middle College" label="Clackamas Middle College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015644" start="1305" end="1324" title="Cable Music Channel" label="Cable Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020702" start="1401" end="1425" title="California Music Channel" label="California Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544472" start="1471" end="1492" title="Country Music Channel" label="Country Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140696" start="1561" end="1583" title="Croatian Music Channel" label="Croatian Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603158" start="1678" end="1698" title="Cutie Mark Crusaders" label="Cutie Mark Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="1839" end="1874" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission (China)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712482" start="1877" end="1940" title="Central Military Commission of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Central Military Commission of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107357" start="1943" end="2004" title="Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068099" start="2007" end="2046" title="Chairman of the NATO Military Committee" label="Chairman of the NATO Military Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152095" start="2093" end="2127" title="Command master chief petty officer" label="Command master chief petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115074" start="2199" end="2243" title="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps" label="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2347" end="2370" title="List of mine warfare vessels of the United States Navy#Coastal minelayers (CMc)" label="Coastal minelayer (CMc)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480529" start="2416" end="2442" title="Cannonball Motorcycle Club" label="Cannonball Motorcycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205826" start="2480" end="2502" title="Carnegie Moscow Center" label="Carnegie Moscow Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103521" start="2603" end="2629" title="Cluster Munition Coalition" label="Cluster Munition Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023871" start="2722" end="2733" title="CMC Markets" label="CMC Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155289" start="2772" end="2793" title="Compact Model Council" label="Compact Model Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013369" start="2833" end="2861" title="COMSAT mobile communications" label="COMSAT mobile communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193228" start="2913" end="2939" title="Cultural Ministers Council" label="Cultural Ministers Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030313" start="3070" end="3091" title="Canadian Meat Council" label="Canadian Meat Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945893" start="3196" end="3226" title="Canadian Meteorological Centre" label="Canadian Meteorological Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105251" start="3306" end="3336" title="Christian Mennonite Conference" label="Christian Mennonite Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012867" start="3385" end="3400" title="CMC Electronics" label="CMC Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3438" end="3454" title="CMC Microsystems" label="CMC Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q126685255" start="3500" end="3532" title="Co-operatives and Mutuals Canada" label="Co-operatives and Mutuals Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984105" start="3586" end="3640" title="China National Machinery Import and Export Corporation" label="China National Machinery Import and Export Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15939798" start="3643" end="3662" title="China Media Capital" label="China Media Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061452" start="3681" end="3693" title="Central Mint" label="Central Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q712707" start="3755" end="3774" title="Chi Mei Corporation" label="Chi Mei Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099789" start="3806" end="3829" title="China Motor Corporation" label="China Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474321" start="3873" end="3886" title="CMC Magnetics" label="CMC Magnetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514683" start="3989" end="4013" title="Carolinas Medical Center" label="Carolinas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053195" start="4069" end="4092" title="Catholic Medical Center" label="Catholic Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784306" start="4253" end="4303" title="Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association" label="Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098168" start="4306" end="4341" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Cleveland" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124322" start="4344" end="4362" title="Civic Media Center" label="Civic Media Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148843" start="4430" end="4452" title="Colorado Mountain Club" label="Colorado Mountain Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q745019" start="4514" end="4547" title="Colt&amp;#x27;s Manufacturing Company" label="Colt&amp;#x27;s Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152510" start="4585" end="4610" title="Commercial Metals Company" label="Commercial Metals Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163052" start="4738" end="4766" title="Rosedale Network of Churches" label="Rosedale Network of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q111948039" start="4797" end="4821" title="Cossacks Motorcycle Club" label="Cossacks Motorcycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380128" start="4941" end="4949" title="Entegris" label="Entegris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039396" start="4985" end="5012" title="Caribbean Media Corporation" label="Caribbean Media Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41738" start="5123" end="5151" title="Catholic University of Korea" label="Catholic University of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012868" start="5154" end="5167" title="CMC (company)" label="CMC (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323960" start="5243" end="5251" title="Cerrejón" label="Cerrejón"/>
<link wikidata="Q169339" start="5312" end="5320" title="Glencore" label="Glencore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148029" start="5349" end="5374" title="Colombo Municipal Council" label="Colombo Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160697" start="5419" end="5459" title="Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix" label="Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129814" start="5507" end="5531" title="Cooper Motor Corporation" label="Cooper Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200470" start="5563" end="5587" title="Cyprus Mines Corporation" label="Cyprus Mines Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q411030" start="5670" end="5693" title="Carboxymethyl cellulose" label="Carboxymethyl cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q477605" start="5742" end="5766" title="Ceramic matrix composite" label="Ceramic matrix composite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5888" end="5912" title="Drug development#Pre-clinical" label="drug development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q56679001" start="5915" end="5937" title="Chlormadinone caproate" label="Chlormadinone caproate"/>
<link wikidata="Q607000" start="5977" end="6007" title="Critical micelle concentration" label="Critical micelle concentration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6158" end="6179" title="Disk encryption theory#CBC-mask-CBC (CMC) and ECB-mask-ECB (EME)" label="encrypting hard disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190347" start="6182" end="6212" title="Central Management and Control" label="Central Management and Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065071" start="6292" end="6323" title="Certificate Management over CMS" label="Certificate Management over CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924011" start="6406" end="6449" title="Messaging Application Programming Interface" label="Messaging Application Programming Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q180034" start="6452" end="6479" title="Community multimedia center" label="Community multimedia center"/>
<link wikidata="Q796573" start="6496" end="6527" title="Computer-mediated communication" label="Computer-mediated communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238499" start="6607" end="6628" title="Monte Carlo algorithm" label="Monte Carlo algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946418" start="6700" end="6716" title="CMC (basketball)" label="CMC (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963034" start="6793" end="6800" title="CMC Cup" label="CMC Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020684" start="6832" end="6860" title="California Men&amp;#x27;s Colony" label="California Men&amp;#x27;s Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945374" start="6908" end="6929" title="Canadian Music Centre" label="Canadian Music Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12383338" start="6947" end="6968" title="Carpometacarpal joint" label="Carpometacarpal joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065270" start="7047" end="7078" title="Certified Management Consultant" label="Certified Management Consultant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7210" end="7268" title="American Culinary Federation#Certification" label="culinary certification by the American Culinary Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065266" start="7271" end="7300" title="Certified mortgage consultant" label="Certified mortgage consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863050" start="7360" end="7402" title="Cincinnati Museum Center at Union Terminal" label="Cincinnati Museum Center at Union Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621996" start="7471" end="7490" title="Christian McCaffrey" label="Christian McCaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303750" start="7526" end="7537" title="C-M-C&amp;#x27;" label="C-M-C&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093480" start="7594" end="7611" title="CMC International" label="CMC International"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392104" start="7699" end="7734" title="law of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="law of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7766" end="7790" title="combustion models for CFD#Conditional Moment Closure" label="combustion model for CFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163611" start="7793" end="7816" title="Constant mean curvature" label="Constant mean curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185245" start="7871" end="7902" title="Crime and Misconduct Commission" label="Crime and Misconduct Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="7995" end="8015" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705799" start="8080" end="8113" title="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis" label="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755208" start="8271" end="8303" title="The Opera Song (Brave New World)" label="The Opera Song (Brave New World)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8312" end="8329" title="Choke_(electronics)#Common-mode_choke" label="Common-mode choke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181230" start="8370" end="8388" title="Craig Memorial Cup" label="Craig Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570286" start="8441" end="8478" title="Global Environmental Multiscale Model" label="Global Environmental Multiscale Model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381917" wikidata="Q3494197" url="?curid=381917" title="Space-division multiple access">
<text>Space-division multiple access (SDMA) is a channel access method based on creating parallel spatial pipes (focused signal beams) using advanced antenna technology next to higher capacity pipes through spatial multiplexing and/or diversity, by which it is able to offer superior performance in radio multiple access communication systems (where multiple users may need to use the communication media simultaneously). In traditional mobile cellular network systems, the base station has no information on the position of the mobile units within the cell and radiates the signal in all directions within the cell in order to provide radio coverage. This method results in wasting power on transmissions when there are no mobile units to reach, in addition to causing interference for adjacent cells using the same frequency (so-called co-channel cells). Likewise, in reception, the antenna receives signals coming from all directions including noise and interference signals. By using smart antenna technology and differing spatial locations of mobile units within the cell, space-division multiple access techniques offer attractive performance enhancements. The radiation pattern of the base station, both in transmission and reception, is adapted to each user to obtain highest gain in the direction of that user. This is often done using phased array techniques.

==See also==
* Co-channel interference
* Multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO)
* History of smart antennas

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3494197" start="0" end="30" title="Space-division multiple access" label="Space-division multiple access"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494197" start="32" end="36" title="Space-division multiple access" label="SDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665191" start="43" end="64" title="channel access method" label="channel access method"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="438" end="454" title="cellular network" label="cellular network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379116" start="468" end="480" title="base station" label="base station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="764" end="776" title="co-channel interference" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="832" end="842" title="co-channel" label="co-channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="879" end="886" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187868" start="982" end="995" title="smart antenna" label="smart antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="1161" end="1178" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="1339" end="1351" title="phased array" label="phased array"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="1380" end="1403" title="Co-channel interference" label="Co-channel interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q738298" start="1406" end="1421" title="Multi-user MIMO" label="Multi-user MIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030166" start="1434" end="1459" title="History of smart antennas" label="History of smart antennas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381920" wikidata="Q1110507" url="?curid=381920" title="Coat of arms of Ontario">
<text>The coat of arms of Ontario is the armorial emblem representing the Canadian province of Ontario. The arms contain symbols reflecting Ontario&#x27;s British heritage, along with local symbols. At the upper part of the shield is the red cross of St. George, representing England. The lower portion of the shield features three golden maple leaves on a green background.

The original arms, consisting of only the shield, were granted by royal warrant of Queen Victoria on 26 May 1868. The arms were further augmented with supporters, a crest and a motto, by royal warrant of King Edward VII on 27 February 1909.

The shield, on a Red Ensign, features in the provincial flag of Ontario.

== History ==
The year following Confederation, arms were granted by royal warrant from Queen Victoria on 26 May 1868 to Ontario, along with the three other provinces of the new Dominion of Canada, Quebec, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. The Dominion Arms were simple and lacked supporters. The Arms of Ontario comprised what is now the escutcheon or shield of the current Arms of Ontario. This original arms can be seen on the Flag of Ontario, which consists of a defaced Red Ensign, with the Royal Union Flag in the canton and the arms in the fly. Also seen on the Arms used by the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario surrounded by a wreath of gold maple leaves.

In the warrant, Queen Victoria authorized the four arms of the first provinces to be quartered for use on the Great Seal of Canada, and while this was not done for the first Great Seal, it is through this reference it became the &quot;de facto&quot; Arms of Canada until 1921. That arms was then also used in the first Canadian Red Ensign, which was flown at the Battle of Vimy Ridge.

The supporters, crest, and motto, designed by Toronto barrister Edward Marion Chadwick, were added on 27 February 1909, by warrant of King Edward VII.

The province&#x27;s arms stand out for being without royal symbols, namely a crown—although the motto of Ontario, which translates from the Latin &quot;Ut Incepit Fidelis Sic Permanet&quot; as &quot;Loyal She Began, Thus She Remains&quot; references perpetual loyalty to the Crown.

== Symbolism ==
Crest
:The crest is a black bear, native to Ontario, passant sable, on a gold and green wreath.

Shield
:The shield of arms consists of three gold maple leaves, representative of Ontario, on a green background, above which on the upper third is a wide white band with a red Saint George&#x27;s Cross, which recalls the historic connection with Britain in Upper Canada.

Supporters
:A moose (dexter) and a deer (sinister), which are native to Ontario.

Motto
:The motto is &quot;Ut incepit fidelis sic permanet&quot;, Latin for &quot;Loyal she began, loyal she remains&quot;. It refers to the Loyalist refugees from the American Revolution, who settled in the colony of Quebec, and for whom the area was separated as Upper Canada.

== Legislative Assembly variant ==

=== History ===
As part of the celebration in 1992 of the bicentennial of the first meeting of the legislature of Upper Canada at Newark (Niagara-on-the-Lake) on 17 September 1792, a petition was made by the then-Speaker, David Warner, to the Chief Herald of Canada for the granting of a unique coat of arms which would emphasize the distinctive character of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario and distinguish the assembly&#x27;s identity from the government&#x27;s. To that point, the assembly had used the coat of arms of the Government of Ontario. The petition was granted and the new coat of arms was presented by then Governor-General Ramon Hnatyshyn at a ceremony in the Legislative Chamber on 26 April 1993. Ontario&#x27;s is the first legislature in Canada with a coat of arms separate from the provincial coat of arms.

=== Symbolism ===

Crest
:The crest has a green griffin holding a gold calumet.
:The griffin is an ancient symbol of justice and equity. The calumet symbolizes the meeting of spirit and discussion that Ontario&#x27;s first peoples believe accompanies the use of the pipe.

Coronet
:The coronet on the wreath represents national and provincial loyalties. Its rim is studded with the provincial gemstone (amethyst), and the coronet is topped with three red maple leaves (symbolizing Canada) and two white trilliums (the flower of Ontario).

Shield
:The shield of arms consists of two crossed maces, joined by the shield of arms of Ontario, on a field of green with a gold rim. 
:The mace is the traditional symbol of the authority of the Speaker. Shown on the left is the current mace. On the right is the original from the time of the first parliament in 1792.

Supporters
:A white-tailed doe (dexter) and a white-tailed stag (sinister), which are native to Canada.
:These animals represent the natural riches of the province. 
:The Loyalist coronets at their necks honour the original European settlers in Ontario who brought with them the parliamentary form of government. 
:The Royal Crowns, left 1992, right 1792, recognize the parliamentary bicentennial and recall Ontario&#x27;s heritage as a constitutional monarchy. They were granted as a special honour by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on the recommendation of the Governor General.

Compartment
:In the base, the maple leaves are for Canada, the white trilliums for Ontario and the roses for York (now Toronto), the provincial capital.

Motto
:The motto is &quot;Audi alteram partem&quot;, one of a series of Latin phrases carved in the Chamber of the Ontario Legislative Building. It challenges MPPs to &quot;hear the other side&quot;.

== See also ==
*Arms of Canada
*Canadian heraldry
*Coat of arms of Toronto
*Flag of Ontario
*Heraldry
*List of Canadian provincial and territorial symbols
*National symbols of Canada
*Ontario
*Symbols of Ontario

== References ==
== External links ==

*Arms of the Province of Ontario – Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada
*Coat of arms of Ontario – Government of Canada website
*Ontario&#x27;s Coat of Arms – Legislative Assembly of Ontario
*Arms of Canada&#x27;s Provinces – Royal Heraldry Society of Canada
*Royal Warrant granting Armorial Bearings for the Provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and a Great Seal for the Dominion of Canada. &quot;Canada Gazette&quot;, volume 3, number 22, 27 November 1869, page 36.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1110507" start="4" end="27" title="Coat of arms of Ontario" label="coat of arms of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="35" end="50" title="Coat of arms" label="armorial emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="89" end="96" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q614328" start="232" end="255" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="red cross of St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="436" end="449" title="Warrant (law)" label="royal warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="453" end="467" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="579" end="589" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105142" start="629" end="639" title="Red Ensign" label="Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165949" start="657" end="683" title="Flag of Ontario" label="provincial flag of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="719" end="732" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="755" end="768" title="Warrant (law)" label="royal warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="774" end="788" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="807" end="814" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="884" end="890" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="892" end="903" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="908" end="921" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="1022" end="1032" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165949" start="1113" end="1128" title="Flag of Ontario" label="Flag of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899714" start="1150" end="1157" title="defacement (flag)" label="defaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105142" start="1158" end="1168" title="Red Ensign" label="Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1179" end="1195" title="Union Jack#Canada" label="Royal Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q952860" start="1203" end="1209" title="flag terminology" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q952860" start="1230" end="1233" title="flag terminology" label="fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544432" start="1269" end="1299" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario" label="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1362" end="1376" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356606" start="1456" end="1476" title="Great Seal of Canada" label="Great Seal of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1581" end="1589" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q41549" start="1596" end="1610" title="Arms of Canada" label="Arms of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q326826" start="1665" end="1684" title="Canadian Red Ensign" label="Canadian Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q393299" start="1709" end="1729" title="Battle of Vimy Ridge" label="Battle of Vimy Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1778" end="1785" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1786" end="1795" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1871" end="1881" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898080" start="2159" end="2164" title="Monarchy in Ontario" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="2183" end="2188" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="Crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="2205" end="2215" title="american black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="2271" end="2277" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="2280" end="2286" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q614328" start="2457" end="2482" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="2538" end="2550" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="2553" end="2562" title="Supporter" label="Supporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="2567" end="2572" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268470" start="2574" end="2580" title="Dexter and sinister" label="dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="2588" end="2592" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268470" start="2594" end="2602" title="Dexter and sinister" label="sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="2635" end="2640" title="Motto" label="Motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2700" end="2705" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="2775" end="2783" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2802" end="2821" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="2842" end="2858" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="colony of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="2899" end="2911" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="3064" end="3076" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096751" start="3193" end="3215" title="Chief Herald of Canada" label="Chief Herald of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="3313" end="3344" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="3574" end="3590" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q509426" start="3591" end="3606" title="Ramon Hnatyshyn" label="Ramon Hnatyshyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="3799" end="3804" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="Crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="3828" end="3835" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253390" start="3851" end="3858" title="Ceremonial pipe" label="calumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294983" start="4053" end="4060" title="Coronet" label="Coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661224" start="4162" end="4181" title="Symbols of Ontario" label="provincial gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="4183" end="4191" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548077" start="4277" end="4292" title="Trillium grandiflorum" label="white trilliums"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="4319" end="4325" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432431" start="4370" end="4375" title="Ceremonial mace" label="maces"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="4641" end="4650" title="Supporter" label="Supporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="4655" end="4671" title="White-tailed deer" label="white-tailed doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268470" start="4673" end="4679" title="Dexter and sinister" label="dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268470" start="4706" end="4714" title="Dexter and sinister" label="sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="4812" end="4820" title="Loyalist" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294983" start="4821" end="4829" title="coronets" label="coronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="4920" end="4952" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary form of government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4960" end="4972" title="Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom#Crowns" label="Royal Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="5078" end="5101" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251238" start="5223" end="5234" title="Compartment (heraldry)" label="Compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548077" start="5286" end="5301" title="Trillium grandiflorum" label="white trilliums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600811" start="5332" end="5336" title="York, Upper Canada" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="5342" end="5349" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="5377" end="5382" title="Motto" label="Motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5449" end="5454" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q980270" start="5492" end="5520" title="Ontario Legislative Building" label="Ontario Legislative Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392575" start="5536" end="5540" title="Member of Provincial Parliament (Ontario)" label="MPPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41549" start="5594" end="5608" title="Arms of Canada" label="Arms of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030815" start="5610" end="5627" title="Canadian heraldry" label="Canadian heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q919602" start="5629" end="5652" title="Coat of arms of Toronto" label="Coat of arms of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165949" start="5654" end="5669" title="Flag of Ontario" label="Flag of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="5671" end="5679" title="Heraldry" label="Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052061" start="5681" end="5732" title="List of Canadian provincial and territorial symbols" label="List of Canadian provincial and territorial symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328602" start="5734" end="5760" title="National symbols of Canada" label="National symbols of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="5762" end="5769" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661224" start="5771" end="5789" title="Symbols of Ontario" label="Symbols of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099766" start="6263" end="6277" title="Canada Gazette" label="Canada Gazette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381921" wikidata="Q215459" url="?curid=381921" title="Kippah">
<text>A &#x27; (plural: kippot), &#x27;, or  is a brimless Jewish skullcap, usually made of cloth, traditionally worn by Jewish males to fulfill the customary requirement that the head be covered. It is the most common type of head-covering worn by men in Orthodox Jewish communities during prayers and by most Orthodox Jewish men at most other times. Among non-Orthodox Jewish individuals, some wear them at most times, while most wear them only during prayer, while attending a synagogue, or at other ceremonies, and others wear them rarely or never.

== Etymology ==
The term () literally means &quot;dome&quot; as the kippah is worn on the head like a dome.

The Yiddish term () might be derived from the Polish or the Ukrainian and perhaps ultimately from the Medieval Latin (&quot;cowl&quot; or &quot;hood&quot;). The word is often associated with the phrase (), formed from the Aramaic word for &#x27;king&#x27; and the Hebrew root , meaning &#x27;fear&#x27;. or is another Yiddish term for the same thing.

== Jewish law ==

&quot;Halachic&quot; authorities debate as to whether wearing a at all times is required. According to Maimonides, Jewish law dictates that a man is required to cover his head during prayer.

In non-Orthodox communities, some women also wear , and people have different customs about when to wear a when eating, praying, studying Jewish texts, or entering a sacred space such as a synagogue or cemetery. The Reform movement has historically been opposed to wearing , but wearing a &quot;kippah&quot; during Torah study and/or prayer has become more common and accepted as an option among Reform men and women. 

According to several authorities, however, the practice has since taken on the force of law because it is an expression of (&quot;reverence for Heaven&quot;; i.e., respect for God). The 17th-century authority David HaLevi Segal held that the reason is to enforce the &quot;Halachic&quot; rule to avoid practices unique to non-Jews. Segal reasons that, as Europeans are accustomed to going bareheaded, and their priests insist on officiating with bare heads, this constitutes a uniquely non-Jewish practice. Therefore, he posits that Jews should be prohibited from behaving similarly and rules that wearing a is required by &quot;Halacha&quot;.

Other &quot;Halachic&quot; authorities, like the Sephardi posek Chaim Yosef David Azulai, hold that wearing a head covering is a —an additional measure of piety. In a recent &quot;responsum&quot;, former Sephardic Chief Rabbi of Israel Ovadia Yosef ruled that it should be worn to show affiliation with the religiously observant community.

The Talmud states, &quot;Cover your head in order that the fear of heaven may be upon you.&quot; Rabbi Huna ben Joshua never walked four cubits () with his head uncovered, saying &quot;because the Divine Presence is always over my head.&quot; This was understood by Rabbi Yosef Karo in the &quot;Shulchan Arukh&quot; as indicating that Jewish men should cover their heads and should not walk more than four cubits bareheaded. Covering one&#x27;s head, such as by wearing a , is described as &quot;honoring God&quot;. The modifies this ruling by adding that the &quot;Achronim&quot; established a requirement to wear a head covering even when traversing fewer than four cubits, and even when one is standing still, indoors, or outside. &quot;Kitzur Shulchan Aruch&quot; cites a story from the Talmud (tractate Shabbat 156b) about Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak, who might have become a thief had his mother not saved him from this fate by insisting that he cover his head, which instilled in him the fear of God. In Orthodox communities, boys are encouraged to wear a from a young age in order to ingrain the habit.
The argument for the has two sides. The Vilna Gaon said one can make a without a , for wearing a is only a (&quot;exemplary attribute&quot;). In the 21st century, there has been an effort to suppress earlier sources that practiced this leniency, including erasing lenient &quot;responsa&quot; from newly published books. Isaac ben Moses of Vienna, in the thirteenth century, wrote that &quot;our rabbis in France&quot; customarily made blessings while bareheaded, but he criticized this practice.

According to 20th-century rabbi Isaac Klein, a male Conservative Jew ought to cover his head when in the synagogue, at prayer or sacred study, when engaging in a ritual act, and when eating. In the mid-19th century, early Reform Jews led by Isaac Mayer Wise completely rejected the after an altercation in which Wise&#x27;s was knocked off his head. Nowadays, almost all Conservative synagogues require men to wear a head covering (usually a ), but in Reform synagogues there is no requirement. However, may be provided to anybody who wishes to wear them. 

The &quot;kippah&quot; was not always as widely used as it is today: Promotional images used by the Orthodox Yeshiva University show board members bareheaded as late as 1954.  

== Types and variation ==

In the Middle Ages in Europe, the distinctive Jewish headgear was the Jewish hat, a full hat with a brim and a central point or stalk. Originally used by choice among Jews to distinguish themselves, it was later made compulsory by Christian governments in some places as a discriminatory measure. In the early 19th century in the United States, rabbis often wore a scholar&#x27;s cap (large saucer-shaped caps of cloth, like a beret) or a Chinese skullcap. Other Jews of this era wore black pillbox-shaped .

Often, the color and fabric of the can be a sign of adherence to a specific religious movement, particularly in Israel. Knitted or crocheted , known as , are usually worn by Religious Zionists and Modern Orthodox Jews. They also wear suede or leather . Knitted were first made in the late 1940s, and became popular after being worn by Rabbi Moshe-Zvi Neria. Members of most Haredi groups wear black velvet or cloth .

More recently, in specific colors are sometimes worn to indicate political or community affiliation, such as the LGBT community, or in the colors of sports teams, especially football. In the United States, children&#x27;s featuring cartoon characters or themes such as &quot;Star Wars&quot; have become popular; in response to this trend, some Jewish schools have banned with characters that do not conform to traditional Jewish values. have been inscribed on the inside as a souvenir for a celebration (bar/bat mitzvah or wedding). for women are also being made and worn. These are sometimes made of beaded wire to seem more feminine. A special baby has two strings on each side to fasten it and is often used in a ceremony.

== Head coverings in ancient Israelite culture ==
The Israelites might have worn a headdress similar to that worn by the Bedouins, but it is unknown whether a fixed type of headdress was used. That the headdress of the Israelites might have been in the style may be inferred from the use of the noun (the verb meaning &quot;to roll like a ball&quot;, Isaiah 22:18) and by the verb (&quot;to wind&quot;, compare Ezekiel 16:10; Jonah 2:6). As to the form of such turbans, nothing is known, and they may have varied according to the different classes of society. This was customary with the Assyrians and Babylonians, for example, whose fashions likely influenced the costume of the Israelites—particularly during and after the Babylonian Exile. In Yemen, the wrap around the cap was called ; the head covering worn by women was a .

== Civil legal issues ==

In &quot;Goldman v. Weinberger&quot;, 475 U.S. 503 (1986), the United States Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that active military members were required to remove the indoors, citing uniform regulations that state only armed security police may keep their heads covered while indoors.

Congress passed the Religious Apparel Amendment after a war story from the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing about the &quot;camouflage &quot; of Jewish Navy Chaplain Arnold Resnicoff was read into the &quot;Congressional Record&quot;. Catholic Chaplain George Pucciarelli tore off a piece of his Marine Corps uniform to replace Resnicoff&#x27;s when it had become blood-soaked after being used to wipe the faces of wounded Marines after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing. This amendment was eventually incorporated into U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) regulations on the &quot;Accommodation of Religious Practices Within the Military Services&quot;.

This story of the &quot;camouflage &quot; was re-told at many levels, including a keynote speech by President Ronald Reagan to the Baptist Fundamentalism Annual Convention in 1984, and another time during a White House meeting between Reagan and the American Friends of Lubavitch. After recounting the Beirut story, Reagan asked them about the religious meaning of the . Rabbi Abraham Shemtov, the leader of the group, responded: &quot;Mr. President, the to us is a sign of reverence.&quot; Rabbi Feller, another member of the group, continued: &quot;We place the on the very highest point of our being—on our head, the vessel of our intellect—to tell ourselves and the world that there is something which is above man&#x27;s intellect: the infinite Wisdom of God.&quot;

Passage of the Religious Apparel Amendment and the subsequent DOD regulations were followed in 1997 by the passing of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA). However, the Supreme Court struck down RFRA as beyond Congress&#x27; powers to bind the states in the 1997 case &quot;City of Boerne v. Flores&quot;. RFRA is constitutional as applied to the Federal government, as seen in &quot;Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal&quot;.

The Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000 (RLUIPA), 114 Stat. 804, 42 U. S. C. §2000cc-1(a)(1)-(2), upheld as constitutional in &quot;Cutter v. Wilkinson&quot;, 44 U.S. 709 (2005), requires by inference that Orthodox Jewish prisoners be reasonably accommodated in their request to wear .

The French government banned the wearing of , hijabs, and large crosses in public primary and secondary schools in France in March 2004.

The government of Quebec, Canada passed &quot;An Act respecting the laicity of the State&quot; in June 2019, which prohibits the wearing of &quot;religious symbols&quot; by government employees including teachers, police officers, judges, prosecutors, and members of certain commissions.

== Wearing by non-Jews==

Though it is not required, when a non-Jew wears a in a synagogue, it is considered a sign of respect. are often provided to guests at a Bar or Bat Mitzvah. They are also often provided at bereavement events and at Jewish cemeteries. According to the Conservative Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, there is no halakhic reason to require a non-Jew to cover their head, but it is recommended that non-Jews be asked to wear a where ritual or worship is being conducted, both out of respect for the Jewish congregation and as a gesture of respect to include the non-Jewish guest.

 were adopted as a symbol by some of the non-Jewish African American marchers in the 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches, most prominently by James Bevel.

== See also ==
* Kufi, a similar cap culturally worn by Muslim and African men
* , a similar skullcap culturally worn by Muslim men
* Head covering for Jewish women
* Zucchetto
* The Philippi Collection
* Kid Yamaka, Jewish American boxer
* Knit cap
* , an Israeli television show named after the knit worn by Religious Zionists
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215459" start="38" end="38" title="Kippah" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="53" end="59" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147804" start="60" end="68" title="cap" label="skullcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q14952" start="174" end="189" title="Head covering" label="head be covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="250" end="258" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="285" end="292" title="Jewish prayer" label="prayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="474" end="483" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="703" end="709" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="717" end="726" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="759" end="773" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="879" end="886" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="1033" end="1041" title="Halakha" label="Halachic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="1130" end="1140" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="1339" end="1346" title="Jewish prayer" label="praying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068324" start="1348" end="1369" title="Torah study" label="studying Jewish texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="1435" end="1450" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="1815" end="1818" title="God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q913414" start="1848" end="1866" title="David HaLevi Segal" label="David HaLevi Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="1961" end="1969" title="Gentile" label="non-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="2342" end="2347" title="posek" label="posek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058991" start="2348" end="2372" title="Chaim Yosef David Azulai" label="Chaim Yosef David Azulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="2464" end="2473" title="Responsa" label="responsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622615" start="2498" end="2519" title="Chief Rabbi of Israel" label="Chief Rabbi of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q467172" start="2520" end="2532" title="Ovadia Yosef" label="Ovadia Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="2629" end="2635" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637336" start="2728" end="2743" title="Huna ben Joshua" label="Huna ben Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="2762" end="2768" title="cubits" label="cubits"/>
<link wikidata="Q942141" start="2822" end="2837" title="Shekhinah" label="Divine Presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="2897" end="2907" title="Joseph Karo" label="Yosef Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="2921" end="2935" title="Shulchan Arukh" label="Shulchan Arukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q510005" start="3192" end="3200" title="Achronim" label="Achronim"/>
<link wikidata="Q21145445" start="3366" end="3387" title="Kitzur Shulchan Aruch (book)" label="Kitzur Shulchan Aruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703125" start="3425" end="3441" title="tractate Shabbat" label="tractate Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124834" start="3454" end="3478" title="Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak" label="Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="3774" end="3784" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="4012" end="4020" title="responsa" label="responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q647348" start="4055" end="4080" title="Isaac ben Moses of Vienna" label="Isaac ben Moses of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076609" start="4264" end="4275" title="Isaac Klein" label="Isaac Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="4284" end="4300" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673434" start="4473" end="4489" title="Isaac Mayer Wise" label="Isaac Mayer Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="4899" end="4917" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5002" end="5013" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432287" start="5065" end="5075" title="Jewish hat" label="Jewish hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193188" start="5624" end="5628" title="Knit" label="Knit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208386" start="5635" end="5642" title="crochet" label="crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="5678" end="5696" title="Religious Zionist movement" label="Religious Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771622" start="5701" end="5716" title="Modern Orthodox Judaism" label="Modern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910391" start="5845" end="5860" title="Moshe-Zvi Neria" label="Moshe-Zvi Neria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="5878" end="5884" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="6096" end="6104" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="6197" end="6206" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="6770" end="6778" title="Bedouins" label="Bedouins"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="7374" end="7390" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580250" start="7515" end="7536" title="Goldman v. Weinberger" label="Goldman v. Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7569" end="7596" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="7872" end="7900" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombing" label="1983 Beirut barracks bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795216" start="7959" end="7975" title="Arnold Resnicoff" label="Arnold Resnicoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="8089" end="8101" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8554" end="8567" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="8651" end="8662" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896034" start="8821" end="8836" title="Abraham Shemtov" label="Abraham Shemtov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311296" start="9338" end="9371" title="Religious Freedom Restoration Act" label="Religious Freedom Restoration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123597" start="9498" end="9522" title="City of Boerne v. Flores" label="City of Boerne v. Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582156" start="9608" end="9666" title="Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal" label="Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311300" start="9679" end="9731" title="Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act" label="Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196948" start="9832" end="9851" title="Cutter v. Wilkinson" label="Cutter v. Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784012" start="10009" end="10027" title="French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools" label="banned the wearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="10033" end="10038" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="10051" end="10058" title="Christian cross" label="crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="10143" end="10149" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="10576" end="10594" title="Bar or Bat Mitzvah" label="Bar or Bat Mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="10628" end="10639" title="Bereavement in Judaism" label="bereavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q846659" start="10654" end="10671" title="Jewish cemetery" label="Jewish cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153075" start="10703" end="10740" title="Committee on Jewish Law and Standards" label="Committee on Jewish Law and Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10754" end="10762" title="halakhic" label="halakhic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="11111" end="11138" title="Selma to Montgomery marches" label="Selma to Montgomery marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="11160" end="11171" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078333" start="11191" end="11195" title="Kufi" label="Kufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625118" start="11308" end="11338" title="Head covering for Jewish women" label="Head covering for Jewish women"/>
<link wikidata="Q668648" start="11341" end="11350" title="Zucchetto" label="Zucchetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q159556" start="11353" end="11376" title="The Philippi Collection" label="The Philippi Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064002" start="11379" end="11389" title="Zachary Wohlman" label="Kid Yamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q795738" start="11415" end="11423" title="Knit cap" label="Knit cap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381922" wikidata="Q366181" url="?curid=381922" title="Clifford Berry">
<text>Clifford Edward Berry (April 19, 1918 – October 30, 1963) helped John Vincent Atanasoff create the first digital electronic computer in 1939, the Atanasoff–Berry computer (ABC).

==Biography==
Clifford Berry was born April 19, 1918, in Gladbrook, Iowa, to Fred and Grace Berry. His father owned an appliance repair shop, where he was able to learn about radios. He graduated from Marengo High School in Marengo, Iowa, in 1934 as the class valedictorian at age 16. He went on to study at Iowa State College (now known as Iowa State University), eventually earning a bachelor&#x27;s degree in electrical engineering in 1939 and followed by his master&#x27;s degree in physics in 1941.

In 1942, he married an ISU classmate and Atanasoff&#x27;s secretary, Martha Jean Reed.

By 1948, he earned his PhD in physics from Iowa State University.

He died in 1963, attributed to &quot;possible suicide&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*1942 and 1962 photos of Berry, Ames Laboratory Archive, Iowa State
*Atanasoff-Berry Computer Archive, Computer Science Dept., Iowa State
*June 7, 1972 interview with Atanasoff on Berry, Smithsonian National Museum of American History
*A. R. Mackintosh, “Dr. Atanasoff’s Computer”, Scientific American, August 1988 (Archived 2009-10-31)
*&quot;ABC - Atanasoff-Berry Computer&quot;, I Programmer
*IEEE Computer Pioneers Biography Entry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366181" start="0" end="21" title="Clifford Berry" label="Clifford Edward Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q314308" start="65" end="87" title="John Vincent Atanasoff" label="John Vincent Atanasoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="124" end="132" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q522906" start="146" end="170" title="Atanasoff–Berry computer" label="Atanasoff–Berry computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933415" start="236" end="245" title="Gladbrook, Iowa" label="Gladbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904351" start="403" end="410" title="Marengo, Iowa" label="Marengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="487" end="505" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381923" wikidata="Q236678" url="?curid=381923" title="Katharine, Duchess of Kent">
<text>Katharine, Duchess of Kent (born Katharine Lucy Mary Worsley; 22 February 1933) is a member of the British royal family. She is married to Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, a grandson of King George V.

The Duchess of Kent converted to Catholicism in 1994; she was the first member of the royal family to convert publicly since the passing of the Act of Settlement 1701. The Duchess is strongly associated with the world of music and has performed as a member of several choirs.

On 8 September 2022, she became the oldest living member of the British royal family following the death of Queen Elizabeth II.

==Early life and education==
Katharine Lucy Mary Worsley was born at Hovingham Hall, Yorkshire, the fourth child and only daughter of Sir William Worsley, 4th Baronet, Lord-lieutenant of North Riding, and his wife Joyce Morgan Brunner (1895–1979). Her mother was the only daughter of Sir John Brunner, 2nd Baronet, and granddaughter of Sir John Brunner, 1st Baronet, the founder of Brunner Mond, which later became ICI (Imperial Chemical Industries). She is a descendant of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector and a member of the Cromwell family, through his daughter Frances Cromwell, Lady Russell. Worsley was christened at All Saints&#x27; Church, Hovingham, on 2 April 1933. Her godparents were her maternal uncle Sir Felix Brunner, 3rd Baronet, Major Sir Digby Lawson, 2nd Baronet, her paternal aunt Lady Colegate, and Margaret D&#x27;Arcy Fife of Nunnington Hall.

Worsley received no formal education until she was 10. She was educated at Queen Margaret&#x27;s School, York, and at Runton Hill School in North Norfolk. At school, she was introduced to music, and was taught to play the piano, organ and violin, which she still plays today. In her final year at Runton Hill, she was formally elected music secretary; in this role, she organized school recitals in Norwich. She left school with a pass in oral French and a &quot;very good&quot; in English literature.

The Duchess has stated her admiration for the late cellist Jacqueline du Pré in the documentary &quot;Who is Jacqueline du Pré?&quot; by Christopher Nupen. She later worked for some time in a children&#x27;s home in York and worked at a nursery school in London. She failed to gain admission to the Royal Academy of Music, but followed her brothers to Oxford – where they were at the University – to study at Miss Hubler&#x27;s Finishing School, 22 Merton Street, devoting much of her time to music. She was one of only eight pupils there and was instructed by three different teachers: The principal, Miss Hubler, taught French literature, painting, and history; a French woman taught cookery; and a Viennese lady taught music.

==Marriage==

Worsley met Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, the eldest son of Prince George, Duke of Kent, and Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, while he was based at Catterick Camp. On 8 June 1961, the couple married at York Minster, the first royal marriage in that location in 633 years (the last one being between Edward III and Philippa of Hainault). The bride&#x27;s father escorted her, and the best man was Edward&#x27;s brother Prince Michael of Kent. Princess Anne was one of the bridesmaids. The Archbishop of York Michael Ramsey conducted the marriage service. Guests included actors Noël Coward and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. as well as members of the British, Greek, Danish, Norwegian, Yugoslavian, Romanian, and Spanish royal families. Her white silk gauze dress was designed by John Cavanagh, used 273 yards of fabric and had &quot;a high neckline and long sleeves and a commanding train&quot;. The Kent Diamond and Pearl Fringe Tiara secured her veil.

The couple have three living children: 

* George, Earl of St Andrews, born 26 June 1962 at Coppins; married Sylvana Tomaselli
* Lady Helen Taylor, born 28 April 1964 at Coppins; married Timothy Taylor
* Lord Nicholas Windsor, born 25 July 1970 at King&#x27;s College Hospital in London; married, 2006, Paola Doimi de Lupis de Frankopan

Katharine had a miscarriage in 1975 owing to rubella and gave birth to a stillborn son, Patrick, in 1977; this loss sent her into a severe depression about which she has spoken publicly. &quot;It had the most devastating effect on me,&quot; she told &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; in 1997. &quot;I had no idea how devastating such a thing could be to any woman. It has made me extremely understanding of others who suffer a stillbirth.&quot;

The Duchess moved to the married quarters in Hong Kong and Germany while her husband was serving in the military. The couple later took numerous royal engagements on behalf of the Queen, including the Ugandan independence celebrations and the coronation of the King of Tonga.

==Roman Catholicism==
The Duchess of Kent formally converted into the Roman Catholic Church in 1994. This was a personal decision, and she received the approval of the reigning Queen at the time, Elizabeth II. As she explained in an interview on BBC:

Although the Act of Settlement 1701 means a member of the royal family marrying a Catholic relinquishes their right of succession to the British throne, the Act does not include marriage to an Anglican who subsequently becomes a Catholic. Therefore, the Duke of Kent did not lose his place in the line of succession to the British throne.

Since then, the couple&#x27;s younger son, Lord Nicholas, their grandson Lord Downpatrick, and their granddaughter Lady Marina have also become Catholics. Their elder son, Earl of St Andrews, father of Lord Downpatrick, married a Catholic and thus, had been excluded from the succession until the Succession to the Crown Act revoked that exclusion in 2015. The Dukedom of Kent is not subject to the Act of Settlement, so Downpatrick is in line to become the Duke of Kent.

==Later years==

In 1978, the Duchess was hospitalised for several weeks owing to &quot;nervous strain&quot;. Reports by the BBC stated that the Duchess suffers from coeliac disease and Epstein–Barr virus, whose symptoms resemble those of ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis, also known as &quot;chronic fatigue syndrome&quot;). She stepped down from her role as head of the ME Society in the UK, and has since energetically worked with various charities and schools.

In 1999, the Duchess was refused permission to seat the 12-year-old son of a bereaved friend in the Royal Box at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. Alternative seating outside the box was offered. She later received what &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; reported in a front-page story was a &quot;curt letter&quot; from club chairman John Curry, reminding her that children, other than members of the royal family, were not permitted in the Royal Box. She, in turn, threatened a boycott of the Royal Box.

The Duchess of Kent decided in 2002 not to use the style &quot;Her Royal Highness&quot; herself and to reduce her royal duties. Since then, she has been informally known as Katharine Kent or Katharine, Duchess of Kent, although her formal style (e.g., in the Court Circular) remains HRH The Duchess of Kent. Despite her decision to stay away from public life, the Duchess continued to appear at major events including the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton in 2011, the concert at Buckingham Palace and thanksgiving service at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral during the Queen&#x27;s Diamond Jubilee celebrations in 2012, and the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in 2018. However, she did not attend the Queen&#x27;s funeral in 2022 or the coronation of King Charles III in 2023.
In December 1989, Katharine was a guest on the BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot;, choosing Mozart&#x27;s &quot;Ave verum corpus&quot; (sung by the Swedish Radio Choir with the Berlin Philharmonic), a DIY manual, and a lamp with solar batteries as her favourite song, book and luxury item respectively. In keeping with her withdrawal from full royal duties in 1996, the Duchess took a position as a music teacher in Wansbeck Primary School in Kingston upon Hull. She also gave piano lessons in a rented studio flat near her official residence at Kensington Palace. The Duchess of Kent had served as the president of the Royal Northern College of Music, and was the director of National Foundation for Youth Music from 1999 to 2007. In March 2004, Katharine was the subject of &quot;Real Story&quot; on BBC One. She talked about her career as a music teacher saying &quot;teaching [the children] is very satisfying. It&#x27;s a privilege. To me it&#x27;s one of the most exciting jobs anyone can do.&quot; In 2005, the Duchess spoke in an interview on BBC Radio 3 of her liking of rap music and of the singer/songwriter Dido, whose song &quot;Thank You&quot; she chose as one of her favourite pieces of music. She is patron of the charity Making Music, the National Federation of Music Societies, an umbrella organisation for amateur and voluntary music groups. Katharine is among the co-founders of Future Talent, a charity that helps young children with low-income backgrounds pursue a career in music. She was Patron of BBC Young Musician in 2004 and 2006.

In 2011, close associates of Jonathan Rees, a private investigator connected to the News International phone hacking scandal, stated that he had penetrated Katharine and Edward&#x27;s bank accounts.

In May 2016, she hosted a concert for young children at Buckingham Palace in her capacity as founder of Future Talent. In August 2016, the Duchess became an ambassador for Samaritans after a volunteer at the Teesside branch contacted her. She had previously been its Royal Patron from 1971 until 1999. The Duchess is also a supporter of UNICEF. In 2022, the Duchess expressed her love and penchant for gangsta rap, typified by Eminem and Ice Cube.

==Titles, styles, honours and arms==
===Titles and styles===
Since her marriage, Katharine has been styled &quot;Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent&quot;.

===Honours===
* 1961: Recipient of the Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II
* 9 June 1977: Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO)

====Freedom of the City====
* 1989: Freeman of the City of York

====Honorary military appointments====
; United Kingdom
Formerly
* Honorary Colonel, Yorkshire Volunteers
* Honorary Major-General, Controller Commandant, Women&#x27;s Royal Army Corps
* Colonel-in-Chief, of The Prince of Wales&#x27;s Own Regiment of Yorkshire
* Deputy Colonel-in-Chief, of Adjutant General&#x27;s Corps
* Deputy Colonel-in-Chief, of Royal Dragoon Guards
* Deputy Colonel-in-Chief, of Royal Logistic Corps

====Civilian offices====
* Chancellor of the University of Leeds (1966–1999)

===Arms===
==Issue==
==See also==
* List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease
* The Duchess of Kent Children&#x27;s Hospital at Sandy Bay, Hong Kong Island

==References==
==External links==

* The Duchess of Kent at the Royal Family website
* Future Talent Charity Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236678" start="0" end="26" title="Katharine, Duchess of Kent" label="Katharine, Duchess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q236678" start="33" end="60" title="Katharine, Duchess of Kent" label="Katharine Lucy Mary Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="99" end="119" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q158258" start="139" end="166" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent" label="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="182" end="195" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="231" end="242" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="342" end="364" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q56255853" start="511" end="531" title="List of longest-living members of the British royal family" label="oldest living member"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="583" end="601" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037113" start="653" end="660" title="Worsley baronets" label="Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917233" start="673" end="687" title="Hovingham Hall" label="Hovingham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="689" end="698" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020573" start="738" end="770" title="Sir William Worsley, 4th Baronet" label="Sir William Worsley, 4th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="772" end="787" title="Lord-lieutenant" label="Lord-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="791" end="803" title="North Riding" label="North Riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979087" start="831" end="838" title="Brunner baronets" label="Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527629" start="888" end="917" title="Sir John Brunner, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir John Brunner, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097186" start="940" end="969" title="Sir John Brunner, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Brunner, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926607" start="986" end="998" title="Brunner Mond" label="Brunner Mond"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="1019" end="1022" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="ICI"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1078" end="1093" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="1095" end="1109" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970095" start="1130" end="1145" title="Cromwell family" label="Cromwell family"/>
<link wikidata="Q17362794" start="1168" end="1198" title="Frances Cromwell" label="Frances Cromwell, Lady Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009930" start="1318" end="1348" title="Felix Brunner" label="Sir Felix Brunner, 3rd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1356" end="1385" title="Lawson baronets#Lawson baronets, of Weetwood Grange (1900)" label="Sir Digby Lawson, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1405" end="1418" title="Arthur Colegate#Personal life" label="Lady Colegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069860" start="1453" end="1468" title="Nunnington Hall" label="Nunnington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270432" start="1546" end="1580" title="Queen Margaret&amp;#x27;s School, York" label="Queen Margaret&amp;#x27;s School, York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748757" start="1589" end="1607" title="West Runton" label="Runton Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545713" start="1611" end="1624" title="North Norfolk" label="North Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1693" end="1698" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="1700" end="1705" title="Organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="1710" end="1716" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="1870" end="1877" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q228888" start="2033" end="2050" title="Jacqueline du Pré" label="Jacqueline du Pré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="2273" end="2295" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="2358" end="2368" title="University of Oxford" label="University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820731" start="2423" end="2436" title="Merton Street" label="Merton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q158258" start="2730" end="2757" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent" label="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160770" start="2777" end="2804" title="Prince George, Duke of Kent" label="Prince George, Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170184" start="2810" end="2847" title="Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark" label="Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q386087" start="2871" end="2885" title="Catterick Camp" label="Catterick Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="2925" end="2937" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="3022" end="3032" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="3037" end="3057" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q313752" start="3141" end="3163" title="Prince Michael of Kent" label="Prince Michael of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q151754" start="3165" end="3178" title="Princess Anne" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="3211" end="3229" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="3230" end="3244" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="3300" end="3311" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q528428" start="3316" end="3337" title="Douglas Fairbanks Jr." label="Douglas Fairbanks Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q114088580" start="3450" end="3476" title="Wedding dress of Katharine Worsley" label="Her white silk gauze dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15443219" start="3493" end="3506" title="John Cavanagh (designer)" label="John Cavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009513" start="3712" end="3738" title="George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews" label="George, Earl of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777752" start="3761" end="3768" title="Coppins" label="Coppins"/>
<link wikidata="Q763241" start="3778" end="3795" title="Sylvana Tomaselli" label="Sylvana Tomaselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q674343" start="3798" end="3815" title="Lady Helen Taylor" label="Lady Helen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217757" start="3873" end="3894" title="Lord Nicholas Windsor" label="Lord Nicholas Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="3917" end="3945" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350285" start="3972" end="4005" title="Lady Nicholas Windsor" label="Paola Doimi de Lupis de Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="4023" end="4034" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="4052" end="4059" title="rubella" label="rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="4263" end="4282" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866984" start="4652" end="4672" title="Ugandan independence" label="Ugandan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q273739" start="4712" end="4725" title="Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV" label="King of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4798" end="4819" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4974" end="4977" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="4993" end="5015" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="5277" end="5317" title="line of succession to the British throne" label="line of succession to the British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736843" start="5393" end="5409" title="Edward Windsor, Lord Downpatrick" label="Lord Downpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743334" start="5435" end="5446" title="Lady Marina Windsor" label="Lady Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632629" start="5617" end="5644" title="Succession to the Crown Act 2013" label="Succession to the Crown Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5918" end="5921" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="5959" end="5974" title="coeliac disease" label="coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="5979" end="5997" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein–Barr virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="6036" end="6061" title="myalgic encephalomyelitis" label="myalgic encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815369" start="6373" end="6413" title="All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club" label="All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="6494" end="6513" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178219" start="7031" end="7045" title="Court Circular" label="Court Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q486814" start="7194" end="7243" title="wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton" label="wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174602" start="7257" end="7264" title="Diamond Jubilee Concert" label="concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="7314" end="7338" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191088" start="7350" end="7378" title="Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Diamond Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43890449" start="7409" end="7450" title="wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle" label="wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="7492" end="7520" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s funeral in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q113857620" start="7528" end="7566" title="Coronation of Charles III and Camilla" label="coronation of King Charles III in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7615" end="7626" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="7643" end="7662" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="7679" end="7685" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q955663" start="7699" end="7715" title="Ave verum corpus (Mozart)" label="Ave verum corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212259" start="7735" end="7754" title="Swedish Radio Choir" label="Swedish Radio Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="7764" end="7783" title="Berlin Philharmonic" label="Berlin Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="7788" end="7791" title="DIY" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="8030" end="8048" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="8133" end="8150" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544384" start="8207" end="8238" title="Royal Northern College of Music" label="Royal Northern College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301069" start="8369" end="8379" title="Real Story" label="Real Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="8389" end="8396" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="8667" end="8670" title="Hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q202550" start="8706" end="8710" title="Dido (singer)" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635376" start="8729" end="8738" title="Thank You (Dido song)" label="Thank You"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739616" start="8825" end="8837" title="Making Music (National Federation of Music Societies)" label="Making Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739616" start="8843" end="8881" title="National Federation of Music Societies" label="National Federation of Music Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164032" start="9176" end="9189" title="Jonathan Rees" label="Jonathan Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057189" start="9231" end="9271" title="News International phone hacking scandal" label="News International phone hacking scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408851" start="9519" end="9529" title="Samaritans (charity)" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="9684" end="9690" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q93960" start="9995" end="10029" title="Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II" label="Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="10045" end="10090" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="10158" end="10162" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055759" start="10249" end="10269" title="Yorkshire Volunteers" label="Yorkshire Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031054" start="10319" end="10348" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Corps" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244369" start="10372" end="10424" title="Prince of Wales&amp;#x27;s Own Regiment of Yorkshire" label="The Prince of Wales&amp;#x27;s Own Regiment of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683223" start="10455" end="10484" title="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892355" start="10515" end="10535" title="Royal Dragoon Guards" label="Royal Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="10566" end="10586" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="Royal Logistic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="10633" end="10652" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164454" start="10702" end="10747" title="List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease" label="List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731115" start="10750" end="10807" title="The Duchess of Kent Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital at Sandy Bay" label="The Duchess of Kent Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital at Sandy Bay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="381925" wikidata="Q185318" url="?curid=381925" title="Mount Carmel">
<text>Mount Carmel (; ), also known in Arabic as Mount Mar Elias (; ), is a coastal mountain range in northern Israel stretching from the Mediterranean Sea towards the southeast. The range is a UNESCO biosphere reserve. A number of towns are situated there, most notably Haifa, Israel&#x27;s third largest city, located on the northern and western slopes.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;karmel&quot; (&quot;garden-land&quot;) has been explained as a compound of &quot;kerem&quot; and &quot;el&quot; meaning &quot;vineyard of God&quot; or a clipping of &quot;kar male,&quot; meaning &quot;full kernel.&quot; Martin Jan Mulder suggested a third etymology, that of &quot;kerem + l&quot; with a lamed , meaning only &quot;vineyard&quot;, but this is considered unlikely as evidence for the existence of a lamed sufformative is weak.

In Song of Songs 7:6, &quot;karmel&quot; is generally interpreted as a color, perhaps &quot;crimson&quot; or &quot;yellow&quot;. suggests connecting it to the yellow &quot;&quot;karmel&quot; lily&quot; mentioned by the Jerusalem Talmud (y. Sukkah 3:6 ) in the version of REbYH.

==Geography and geology==
The phrase &quot;Mount Carmel&quot; has been used in three distinct ways, referring to either one of the following three areas:
*The long mountain range all the way to Jenin, including the Manasseh Hill Country and the heights southeast of it.
*The northwestern of the mountain range.
*The headland at the northwestern end of the range.

The Carmel range is approximately wide, sloping gradually towards the southwest, but forming a steep ridge on the northeastern face, high. The Jezreel Valley lies to the immediate northeast. The range forms a natural barrier in the landscape, just as the Jezreel Valley forms a natural passageway, and consequently the mountain range and the valley have had a large impact on migration and invasions through the Levant over time.

The mountain formation is an admixture of limestone and flint, containing many caves, and covered in several volcanic rocks. While most of the sedimentary rock originates in the late Cretaceous, some of the north east sediments are from the early Cretaceous, and the edges also feature sediments from the pleistocen.

The sloped side of the mountain is covered with luxuriant vegetation, including oak, pine, olive, and laurel trees.

Several modern towns are located on the range, including Yokneam on the eastern ridge; Zikhron Ya&#x27;akov on the southern slope; the Druze communities of Daliyat al-Karmel and Isfiya on the more central part of the ridge; and the towns of Nesher, Tirat Hakarmel, and the city of Haifa, on the far northwestern promontory and its base. There is also a small kibbutz called Beit Oren, which is located on one of the highest points in the range to the southeast of Haifa. Mount Carmel Naval Base is also located just near the mountain and is the logistical hub of Israeli Navy.

==History==

===Palaeolithic and Epipalaeolithic===

As part of a 1929–1934 campaign, between 1930 and 1932, Dorothy Garrod excavated four caves, and a number of rock shelters, in the Carmel mountain range at el-Wad, el-Tabun, and Es Skhul. Garrod discovered Neanderthal and early modern human remains, including the skeleton of a Neanderthal female, named Tabun I, which is regarded as one of the most important human fossils ever found. The excavation at el-Tabun produced the longest stratigraphic record in the region, spanning 600,000 or more years of human activity. 

The four caves and rock-shelters, Tabun, Jamal, el-Wad, and Skhul, together yield results from the Lower Paleolithic to the present day, representing roughly a million years of human evolution. There are also several well-preserved burials of Neanderthals and &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; and the transition from nomadic hunter-gatherer groups to complex, sedentary agricultural societies is extensively documented at the site. Taken together, these emphasize the paramount significance of the Mount Carmel caves for the study of human cultural and biological evolution within the framework of palaeo-ecological changes.&quot;

In 2012, UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage Committee added the sites of human evolution at Mount Carmel to the List of World Heritage Sites. The World Heritage Site includes four caves (Tabun, Jamal, el-Wad, and Skhul) on the southern side of the Nahal Me&#x27;arot/Wadi El-Mughara Valley. The site fulfils criteria in two separate categories, &quot;natural&quot; and &quot;cultural&quot;.

Of great interest for the Near East Epipalaeolithic is Kebara Cave.

In December 2020, archaeologists from the University of Haifa announced the discovery of the oldest known tool used for grinding or scraping, dating back about 350,000 years at the Tabun Cave at Mount Carmel site. According to researchers, this cobble belongs to the Acheulo-Yabrudian complex from the late Lower Paleolithic and was used by hominids for abrading surfaces.

===Ancient agriculture: olive oil and wine===
Archaeologists have discovered ancient wine and oil presses at various locations on Mount Carmel.

===As a strategic location===
====Hebrew Bible====

Due to the lush vegetation on the sloped hillside, and many caves on the steeper side, Carmel became the haunt of criminals. Thickly-wooded Carmel was seen as a hiding place, as implied by the Book of Amos. According to the Books of Kings, Elisha travelled to Carmel straight after cursing a group of young men because they had mocked him and the ascension of Elijah by jeering, &quot;Go on up, bald man!&quot; After this, bears came out of the forest and mauled 42 of them. This does not necessarily imply that Elisha had sought asylum there from any potential backlash, although the description in the Book of Amos, of the location being a refuge, is dated by textual scholars to be earlier than the accounts of Elisha in the Books of Kings.

==== Ottoman period ====
During the Ottoman Period, Mount Carmel was part of Turabay Emirate (1517–1683), which encompassed also the Jezreel Valley, Haifa, Jenin, Beit She&#x27;an Valley, northern Jabal Nablus, Bilad al-Ruha/Ramot Menashe, and the northern part of the Sharon plain.

The Druze settlement in the Carmel region is relatively recent, with the exact timing unclear. According to one tradition accepted by scholars, they settled in the ruins of ancient &quot;Huseife&quot;, now Isfiya after the defeat of the Lebanon-centered House Ma&#x27;an. Daliyat al-Karmel&#x27;s population consisted of refugees from Aleppo who arrived in the early 19th century. Despite facing attacks from neighboring villages, the largest towns, Isfiya and Daliyat al-Carmel, persevered, possibly following the withdrawal of Ibrahim Pasha&#x27;s army.&quot;&quot;

====World War I====
During World War I, Mount Carmel played a significant strategic role. The Battle of Megiddo took place at the head of a pass through the Carmel Ridge, which overlooks the Valley of Jezreel from the south. General Edmund Allenby led the British in the battle, which was a turning point in the war against the Ottoman Empire. The Jezreel Valley had played host to many battles before, including the historically very significant Battle of Megiddo between the Egyptians and Canaanites in the 15th century BCE, but it was only in the 20th-century battle that the Carmel Ridge itself played a significant part, due to the development in artillery and munitions.

===As a sacred location===
====Canaanites====
In ancient Canaanite culture, &quot;high places&quot; were frequently considered to be sacred, and Mount Carmel appears to have been no exception; Egyptian pharaoh Thutmose III lists a &quot;holy headland&quot; among his Canaanite territories, and if this equates to Carmel, as Egyptologists such as Maspero believe, then it would indicate that the mountain headland was considered sacred from at least the 15th century BCE.

====Israelites and Hebrew Bible====
=====Altar to God=====
According to the Books of Kings, there was an altar to God on the mountain, which had fallen into ruin by the time of Ahab, but Elijah built a new one ().

=====Elijah=====
In mainstream Jewish, Christian, and Islamic thought, Elijah is indelibly associated with the mountain, and he is regarded as having sometimes resided in a grotto on the mountain. Indeed, one Arabic name for Mount Carmel is جبل مار إلياس (&quot;Jabal Mar Elyas&quot;, lit. &quot;Mount of Saint Elias&quot;). In the Books of Kings, Elijah challenges 450 prophets of &quot;Baal&quot; to a contest at the altar on Mount Carmel to determine whose deity was genuinely in control of the Kingdom of Israel. The role of the mountain in this story reflects its status as sacred. As the narrative is set during the rule of Ahab and his association with the Phoenicians, biblical scholars suspect that the &quot;Baal&quot; in question was probably Melqart.

According to chapter 18 of the Books of Kings in the Hebrew Bible, the challenge was to see which deity could light a sacrifice by fire. After the prophets of Baal had failed, Elijah had water poured upon his sacrifice to saturate the altar. He then prayed. Fire fell and consumed the sacrifice, wood, stones, soil and water, which prompted the Israelite witnesses to proclaim, &quot;Yahweh, He is God! Yahweh, He is God!&quot; In the account, Elijah also announced the end to a long three-year drought, which had previously been sent as divine punishment for Israel&#x27;s idolatry.

Though there is no biblical reason to assume that the account of Elijah&#x27;s victory refers to any particular part of Mount Carmel, Islamic tradition places it at a point known as &quot;El-Maharrakah&quot; or rather El-Muhraqa, meaning &quot;the burning&quot;.

Two areas have been hypothesized as the possible site for the story about the battle against the priests of Baal. The slaughter could have taken place near the river Kishon, at the mountain base, in an amphitheater-like flat area. The site where the offering took place is traditionally placed on the mountain above Yokneam, on the road to the Druze village of Daliyat el-Karmil, where there is a monastery, built in 1868, called El-Muhraqa (&quot;the burning&quot;, possibly related to the burnt sacrifice&quot;). It is regarded as one of the must-visit tour sites in the area of Haifa. (See below under &quot;Carmelites (12th c.–present): El-Muhraqa site&quot; for more).

Although archaeological clues are absent, the site is favoured because it has a spring, from which water could have been drawn to wet Elijah&#x27;s offering. There is also a sea view, where Elijah looked out to see the cloud announcing rain. However, the biblical text states that Elijah had to climb up to see the sea. There is an altar in the monastery which is claimed to be that which Elijah built in God&#x27;s honour, but that is unlikely, as it is not made of the local limestone.

Druze venerate Elijah, and he is considered a central figure in Druzism, and due to his importance in Druzism, the settlement of Druze on Mount Carmel had partly to do with Elijah&#x27;s story and devotion. There are two large Druze towns on the eastern slopes of Mount Carmel: Daliyat al-Karmel and Isfiya.

====Hellenistic and Roman periods====
Iamblichus describes Pythagoras visiting the mountain on account of its reputation for sacredness, stating that it was &quot;the most holy of all mountains, and access was forbidden to many&quot;, while Suetonius states that there was an oracle situated there, which Vespasian visited for a consultation; Tacitus states that there was an altar there, but without any image upon it, and without a temple around it.

The existence of a pagan temple on Mount Carmel is supported by the &quot;Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax&quot;, a fourth century periplus that mentions Mount Carmel as the &quot;mount and temple of Zeus&quot;.

====Carmelites (12th century – present)====

A Catholic religious order was founded on Mount Carmel in 1209, named the Carmelites, in reference to the mountain range; the founder of the Carmelites is still unknown (d.1265). In the original Rule or &#x27;Letter of Life&#x27; given by Albert, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem who was resident in Acre, around the year 1210, this hermit is referred to simply as &#x27;Brother B&#x27;; he probably died around the date 1210 and could have been either a pilgrim, someone serving out a penance or a crusader who had stayed in the Holy Land.

Although Louis IX of France is sometimes named as the founder, he was not, and had merely visited it in 1252.

:Stella Maris site
The Order was founded at the site that it claimed had been the location of Elijah&#x27;s cave, above sea level at the northwestern end of the mountain range.

Though there is no documentary evidence to support it, Carmelite tradition suggests that a community of Jewish hermits had lived at the site from the time of Elijah until the Carmelites were founded there; prefixed to the Carmelite Constitution of 1281 was the claim that from the time when Elijah and Elisha had &quot;dwelt devoutly on Mount Carmel&quot;, priests and prophets, Jewish and Christian, had lived &quot;praiseworthy lives in holy penitence&quot; adjacent to the site of the &quot;fountain of Elisha&quot; in an uninterrupted succession.

A Carmelite monastery was founded at the site shortly after the Order itself was created, and was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary under the title of &quot;Star of the Sea&quot; (&quot;stella maris&quot; in Latin), a common medieval presentation of her.

The Carmelite Order grew to be one of the major Catholic religious orders worldwide, although the monastery at Carmel has had a less successful history. During the Crusades the monastery often changed hands, frequently being converted into a mosque. In 1799 the building was finally converted into a hospital, by Napoleon, but in 1821 the surviving structure was destroyed by the pasha of Damascus. A new monastery was later constructed directly over a nearby cave, after funds were collected by the Carmelite Order for restoration of the monastery. The cave, which now forms the crypt of the monastic church, is termed &quot;Elijah&#x27;s grotto&quot; by the Discalced Carmelite friars who have custody of the monastery.

:El-Muhraqa site

Under Islamic control the location at the highest peak of the Carmel came to be known as &quot;El-Maharrakah&quot; or &quot;El-Muhraqa&quot;, meaning &quot;place of burning&quot;, in reference to the account of Elijah&#x27;s challenge to the priests of Hadad. This, perhaps not coincidentally, is also the highest natural point of the mountain range.

:The Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
One of the oldest scapulars is associated with Mount Carmel and the Carmelites. According to Carmelite tradition, the Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel was first given to St. Simon Stock, an English Carmelite, by the Blessed Virgin Mary. The Carmelites refer to her under the title &quot;Our Lady of Mount Carmel,&quot; and celebrate 16 July as her feast day.

====Baháʼí Faith====

Mount Carmel is considered a sacred place for followers of the Baháʼí Faith, and is the location of the Baháʼí World Centre and the Shrine of the Báb. The location of the Baháʼí holy places has its roots in the imprisonment of the religion&#x27;s founder, Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh, near Haifa by the Ottoman Empire during the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s rule over Palestine.

The Shrine of the Báb is a structure where the remains of the Báb, the founder of Bábism and forerunner of Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh in the Baháʼí Faith, have been laid to rest. The shrine&#x27;s precise location on Mount Carmel was designated by Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh himself and the Báb&#x27;s remains were laid to rest on March 21, 1909, in a six-room mausoleum made of local stone. The construction of the shrine with a golden dome was completed over the mausoleum in 1953, and a series of decorative terraces around the shrine were completed in 2001. The white marbles used were from the same ancient source that most Athenian masterpieces were using, the Penteliko Mountain.

Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh, the founder of the Baháʼí Faith, writing in the &quot;Tablet of Carmel&quot;, designated the area around the shrine as the location for the administrative headquarters of the religion; the Baháʼí administrative buildings were constructed adjacent to the decorative terraces, and are referred to as &quot;the Arc&quot;, on account of their physical arrangement.

====Ahmadiyya Muslims====
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has its largest Israeli mosque on Mount Carmel, in the Kababir quarter of Haifa, known as the Mahmood Mosque. It is a unique structure with two minarets. The mosque was once visited by the president of Israel, Shimon Peres, for an iftar dinner.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Mount Carmel National Park
* Nahal Me&#x27;arot Nature Reserve
* Mount Carmel Forest Fire (2010)
* Sacred Heart Chapel, Haifa
* Our Lady of Mount Carmel
* Palestine Final Fortress

==References==
==External links==

* UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Directory
* UNESCO World Heritage List
* Mount Carmel – BiblePlaces.com, pictures and text illuminating the biblical site (archived 5 July 2012)
* Carmel Holy Land, the website of the Carmelite monastery at the traditional site of Elijah&#x27;s confrontation with the priests of Baal.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="0" end="12" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="43" end="58" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Mar Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="78" end="92" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="105" end="111" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="132" end="149" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="188" end="194" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="195" end="212" title="biosphere reserve" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="265" end="270" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="518" end="521" title="El (deity)" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="826" end="839" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="1042" end="1058" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360791" start="1094" end="1099" title="Eliezer ben Joel HaLevi" label="REbYH"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="1296" end="1301" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152764" start="1317" end="1338" title="Manasseh Hill Country" label="Manasseh Hill Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="1418" end="1426" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="1609" end="1623" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1939" end="1948" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="1953" end="1958" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="2075" end="2090" title="late Cretaceous" label="late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="2138" end="2154" title="early Cretaceous" label="early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2202" end="2212" title="Pleistocene" label="pleistocen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="2295" end="2298" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="2300" end="2304" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="2306" end="2311" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q26538" start="2317" end="2323" title="Lauraceae" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167582" start="2389" end="2396" title="Yokneam Illit" label="Yokneam"/>
<link wikidata="Q198399" start="2419" end="2439" title="Zikhron Ya&amp;#x27;akov" label="Zikhron Ya&amp;#x27;akov"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="2467" end="2472" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667061" start="2488" end="2505" title="Daliyat al-Karmel" label="Daliyat al-Karmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890836" start="2510" end="2516" title="Isfiya" label="Isfiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q135432" start="2573" end="2579" title="Nesher" label="Nesher"/>
<link wikidata="Q168215" start="2581" end="2595" title="Tirat Hakarmel" label="Tirat Hakarmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="2613" end="2618" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245089" start="2644" end="2654" title="promontory" label="promontory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888904" start="2706" end="2715" title="Beit Oren" label="Beit Oren"/>
<link wikidata="Q61125401" start="2803" end="2826" title="Mount Carmel Naval Base" label="Mount Carmel Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q510534" start="2895" end="2907" title="Israeli Navy" label="Israeli Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275622" start="3019" end="3033" title="Dorothy Garrod" label="Dorothy Garrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906739" start="3127" end="3135" title="Tabun, Israel" label="el-Tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q287341" start="3141" end="3149" title="Es Skhul" label="Es Skhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3169" end="3180" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="3397" end="3417" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphic record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="3584" end="3601" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="3662" end="3677" title="human evolution" label="human evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3751" end="3763" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147477" start="4132" end="4156" title="World Heritage Committee" label="World Heritage Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="4215" end="4243" title="World Heritage Site" label="List of World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q99463725" start="4521" end="4546" title="Epipalaeolithic Near East" label="Near East Epipalaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737670" start="4550" end="4561" title="Kebara Cave" label="Kebara Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q591115" start="4606" end="4625" title="University of Haifa" label="University of Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906739" start="4745" end="4755" title="Tabun Cave" label="Tabun Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="4809" end="4815" title="Hammerstone" label="cobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673637" start="4831" end="4856" title="Acheulo-Yabrudian complex" label="Acheulo-Yabrudian complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="4877" end="4888" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="4905" end="4913" title="Hominidae" label="hominids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819233" start="4918" end="4926" title="Abrasion (mechanical)" label="abrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4984" end="4997" title="Archaeologist" label="Archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174677" start="5328" end="5340" title="Book of Amos" label="Book of Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="5359" end="5373" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206238" start="5375" end="5381" title="Elisha" label="Elisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5916" end="5930" title="Ottoman period" label="Ottoman Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q105282340" start="5957" end="5964" title="Turabay dynasty" label="Turabay"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="6013" end="6027" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Jezreel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="6029" end="6034" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="6036" end="6041" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909317" start="6043" end="6066" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;an Valley" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;an Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948374" start="6077" end="6089" title="Jabal Nablus" label="Jabal Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152764" start="6091" end="6118" title="Manasseh Hills" label="Bilad al-Ruha/Ramot Menashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q218907" start="6149" end="6161" title="Sharon plain" label="Sharon plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="6168" end="6173" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890836" start="6370" end="6376" title="Isfiya" label="Isfiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667061" start="6436" end="6453" title="Daliyat al-Karmel" label="Daliyat al-Karmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="6693" end="6706" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6760" end="6771" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q199371" start="6827" end="6844" title="Battle of Megiddo (1918)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822904" start="6871" end="6877" title="Wadi Ara" label="a pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="6890" end="6902" title="Carmel Ridge" label="Carmel Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q763829" start="6924" end="6941" title="Jezreel Valley" label="Valley of Jezreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="6958" end="6980" title="Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby" label="General Edmund Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7061" end="7075" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q733364" start="7180" end="7197" title="Battle of Megiddo (15th century BC)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="7385" end="7394" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="7399" end="7408" title="munitions" label="munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="7468" end="7474" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="7613" end="7620" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q157899" start="7621" end="7633" title="Thutmose III" label="Thutmose III"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="7735" end="7748" title="Egyptology" label="Egyptologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="7757" end="7764" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="7959" end="7973" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="8060" end="8064" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="8070" end="8076" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8129" end="8132" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8137" end="8146" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8152" end="8159" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="8169" end="8175" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="8271" end="8277" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8307" end="8313" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="8430" end="8444" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="8486" end="8490" title="Baal" label="Baal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="8596" end="8613" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="8728" end="8732" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="8762" end="8771" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="8775" end="8792" title="biblical criticism" label="biblical scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="8852" end="8859" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12470160" start="8875" end="8885" title="1 Kings 18" label="chapter 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="8893" end="8907" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="8915" end="8927" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="9207" end="9216" title="Israelite" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="9436" end="9444" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743701" start="9877" end="9883" title="Kishon River" label="Kishon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167582" start="10027" end="10034" title="Yokneam Illit" label="Yokneam"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="10055" end="10060" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667061" start="10072" end="10089" title="Daliyat al-Carmel" label="Daliyat el-Karmil"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="10875" end="10880" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="10939" end="10946" title="Druzism" label="Druzism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="10977" end="10984" title="Druzism" label="Druzism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667061" start="11153" end="11170" title="Daliyat al-Karmel" label="Daliyat al-Karmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890836" start="11175" end="11181" title="Isfiya" label="Isfiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q310916" start="11222" end="11232" title="Iamblichus" label="Iamblichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="11243" end="11253" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="11425" end="11434" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="11460" end="11466" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="11489" end="11498" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780915" start="11711" end="11736" title="Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax" label="Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax"/>
<link wikidata="Q636946" start="11761" end="11769" title="periplus" label="periplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="11830" end="11834" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391009" start="11890" end="11914" title="Catholic religious order" label="Catholic religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="11962" end="11972" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="12439" end="12457" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="12655" end="12670" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="12823" end="12826" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="12830" end="12836" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="12877" end="12883" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q206238" start="13021" end="13027" title="Elisha" label="Elisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="13163" end="13172" title="penitence" label="penitence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606585" start="13283" end="13292" title="Stella Maris Monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="13386" end="13405" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186717" start="13431" end="13446" title="Our Lady, Star of the Sea" label="Star of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="13482" end="13487" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="13587" end="13602" title="religious order" label="religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="13694" end="13702" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="13772" end="13778" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="13830" end="13838" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="13843" end="13851" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="13910" end="13915" title="pasha" label="pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="13919" end="13927" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="14110" end="14115" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="14190" end="14209" title="Discalced Carmelite" label="Discalced Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14277" end="14282" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="14683" end="14691" title="scapular" label="scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q568699" start="14783" end="14819" title="Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721003" start="14839" end="14854" title="Simon Stock" label="St. Simon Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="14859" end="14866" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="14885" end="14904" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="14956" end="14980" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="15114" end="15126" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q494706" start="15155" end="15174" title="Baháʼí World Centre" label="Baháʼí World Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462314" start="15183" end="15200" title="Shrine of the Báb" label="Shrine of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="15307" end="15328" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="15348" end="15362" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="15406" end="15415" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="15480" end="15483" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q204128" start="15500" end="15506" title="Bábism" label="Bábism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735357" start="15908" end="15927" title="Terraces (Baháʼí)" label="decorative terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="15980" end="15986" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="16037" end="16045" title="Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125206" start="16075" end="16093" title="Penteliko Mountain" label="Penteliko Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="16096" end="16117" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16173" end="16189" title="Tablets of Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh#Lawh-i-Karmil (Tablet of Carmel)" label="Tablet of Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q494706" start="16259" end="16286" title="Baháʼí World Centre" label="administrative headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149036" start="16423" end="16430" title="The Arc (Baháʼí)" label="the Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="16511" end="16537" title="Ahmadiyya Muslim Community" label="Ahmadiyya Muslim Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897547" start="16593" end="16600" title="Kababir" label="Kababir"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="16612" end="16617" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884952" start="16632" end="16646" title="Mahmood Mosque (Kababir)" label="Mahmood Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="16727" end="16746" title="president of Israel" label="president of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="16748" end="16760" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q577401" start="16769" end="16774" title="iftar" label="iftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410485" start="16811" end="16837" title="Mount Carmel National Park" label="Mount Carmel National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443478" start="16840" end="16873" title="Nahal Me&amp;#x27;arot Nature Reserve" label="Nahal Me&amp;#x27;arot Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322189" start="16876" end="16907" title="Mount Carmel Forest Fire (2010)" label="Mount Carmel Forest Fire (2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27272596" start="16910" end="16936" title="Sacred Heart Chapel, Haifa" label="Sacred Heart Chapel, Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="16939" end="16963" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411988" start="16966" end="16990" title="Palestine Final Fortress" label="Palestine Final Fortress"/>
</links>
</doc>
