<doc id="383602" wikidata="Q716001" url="?curid=383602" title="Artúr Görgei">
<text>Artúr Görgei de Görgő et Toporc (born Arthur Görgey; , ; 30 January 181821 May 1916) was a Hungarian military leader renowned for being one of the greatest generals of the Hungarian Revolutionary Army.

In his youth, Görgei was a talented chemist, with his work in the field of chemistry being recognized by many renowned Hungarian and European chemists. However, now he is more widely known for his role in the Hungarian Revolution and War of Independence of 1848–1849. As the most successful general and greatest military genius of the Hungarian Revolutionary Army, he was the leader of the victorious Spring Campaign and liberated almost all of Western Hungary from Austrian occupation. In recognition of his military successes, he was awarded by the Hungarian Government and was appointed Minister of War. In the last days of the revolution, he was appointed the &quot;dictator&quot; of Hungary. On 13 August 1849, when he realised that he would not be able to fight newly arrived and superior Austrian and Russian armies, he surrendered his troops to the Russians at Világos, thus ending the revolution.

Görgei&#x27;s difficult relationship with Lajos Kossuth, the foremost politician and president-governor of revolutionary Hungary, impacted the course of the war of independence, Görgei&#x27;s military career, and his post-revolutionary life until his death. During his campaigns in the winter and summer of 1848–1849. Görgei clashed with Kossuth over their differing opinions on military operations and because Görgei disapproved of the Declaration of the Hungarian Independence, whose chief proponent was Kossuth. The latter refrained from naming Görgei as commander-in-chief of the Hungarian army, naming weak commanders, such as Henryk Dembiński or Lázár Mészáros, instead, thus weakening the army.

After his surrender to the Russian army, he was not executed, like many of his generals, due to Russian intercession, but was taken by the Austrians to Klagenfurt, in Carinthia, and was kept under surveillance until 1867, when amnesty issued as a result of the Hungarian-Austrian Compromise and the founding of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. He then was able to return to Hungary. Over several years of hardships in different parts of Hungary, Görgei unsuccessfully tried to find a suitable job; and his brother, István Görgey, provided him with a place to live in Visegrád, where Görgei lived the last decades of his life.

After Görgei&#x27;s return and for the rest of his life, Hungarian public opinion was hostile, because of some false accusations. Kossuth&#x27;s &quot;Letter from Vidin&quot;, written in the aftermath of Görgei&#x27;s surrender, instilled a long-lasting hatred of Görgei amongst the Hungarians, many of whom came to believe that he was a traitor. In the 20thcentury, this characterization was challenged by modern research. As a result, Görgei is less often considered treasonous, and his reputation as one of the most talented and successful Hungarian generals of the 19thcentury has been restored, being now regarded as one of Hungary&#x27;s greatest historical heroes.

==Görgey or Görgei?==
The earlier books and articles about Artúr Görgei usually gave his surname as &quot;Görgey&quot;, which is how it had been given at his birth. For example, Sándor Pethő&#x27;s bibliographical book &quot;Görgey&quot; Artúr (Budapest, 1930), or Artúr&#x27;s younger brother István Görgey&#x27;s &quot;Görgey Arthur ifjusága és fejlődése a forradalomig&quot; [The youth of Artúr Görgey, and his development until the revolution] (Budapest, 1916) and &quot;Görgey Arthur a száműzetésben 1849–1867&quot; [Artúr Görgey in exile, 1849–1867] (Budapest, 1918). But, recent historiography spells it &quot;Görgei&quot; (Róbert Hermann&#x27;s and Tamás Csikány&#x27;s works, for example).

In Hungarian surnames, the &quot;y&quot; instead of an &quot;i&quot; (used today), usually appears as the last letter of the names of nobles (as a locative adverb suffix: for example, &#x27;Debreceni&#x27;, meaning &quot;from Debrecen&quot;), because their names appeared in writing earlier than the names of people of common origin, so the nobiliary surnames retained the archaic spelling of the period when they were first written down. The surnames of the common people, which appeared later, after Hungarian spelling changed, had an &quot;i&quot; as the last letter.

Being of noble birth, initially, Görgei had a &quot;y&quot; at the end of his surname; but during the 1848–49 revolution, a period of an anti-nobiliary reaction, many Hungarians from noble families changed the last letter of their surnames from &quot;y&quot; to &quot;i&quot;. For example, the renowned novelist Mór Jókay became Mór Jókai. Görgei similarly changed his name, because of his progressive liberal views. Even after the revolution was suppressed, he kept using Görgei instead of Görgey; and although in some works which appeared after his death, and translations to Hungarian of his works—such as &quot;Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849&quot; [My life and work in Hungary in 1848 and 1849], translated by his younger brother István Görgey in 1911, when the &quot;Görgey&quot; form is used—Görgei was the preferred form until his death, which is why this article also uses this form.

==Early life==
Görgei was born as &quot;Johannes Arthur Woldemár Görgey&quot; at Toporc in Upper Hungary (today Toporec, Slovakia) on 30 January 1818 to an impoverished Hungarian noble family of Zipser German descent who immigrated to the Szepes (today Spiš) region during the reign of King Géza II of Hungary (1141–1162). During the Reformation, they converted to Protestantism. The family name refers to their origin from Görgő village (, lit. &quot;of Görgő&quot;), today Spišský Hrhov in Slovakia.

In 1832, Görgei enrolled in the sapper school at Tulln, profiting from a tuition-free place offered by a foundation. Because his family was poor, this was a great opportunity for him; but initially, he did not want to be a soldier. During this period, he wrote to his father that he would rather be a philosopher or scientist than a soldier. He spent almost thirteen years in this school, receiving a military education. He decided not to accept money from his family, and ate very little, and wore poor clothes in an effort to train himself for a hard life. Records from the school show that his conduct was very good, he had no errors, his natural talents were exceptional, and his fervency and diligence were constant, being very severe with himself but also with the others.

Despite this, in his letters he wrote that he despised the life of a soldier because he had to obey officers whom he did not respect and that he dreamed about a free and active life that he could not find in the army. Following graduation, he served in the Nádor Hussar regiment, undertaking the role of adjutant. By 1837, he had reached the rank of lieutenant and entered the Hungarian Noble Guard at Vienna, where he combined military service with a course of study at the university.

==Start of a promising career in chemistry==
In 1845, on his father&#x27;s death, Görgei happily left the army, feeling that the military life did not suit him, to be a student of chemistry at the University of Prague. He loved chemistry, writing this to his friend, Gusztáv Röszler, who had recommended him to professor Josef Redtenbacher, a great chemist at that time:

Görgei&#x27;s work in chemistry from this period are worthy of note: he conducted research into coconut oil, discovering the presence in it of decanoic acid and lauric acid. He started his research in the spring of 1847 in Prague but finished the experiments at home in Toporc, sending the results to the Imperial and Royal Academy of Vienna on 21 May 1848. His method for the separation of the fatty acids homologs was not the traditional way of using fractional distillation, but instead using the solubility of barium salts. His research can be summarized as follows:
* He detected the presence of lauric acid (C12) and decanoic acid (C10) in coconut oil.
* He produced lauric ethyl ether.
* He determined some physical properties of the distillation of lauric acidic barium.
* He discovered that, in coconut oil, the undecylic acid (C11) was a mixture of lauric and decanoic acids.

Just before Görgei started his study, a French chemist named Saint-Évre wrote an article in which he announced the discovery of the undecylic acid. At first, Görgei was disappointed that with this announcement his work would be pointless, but then he noticed that the French chemist was wrong in thinking that the undecylic acid was an original, undiscovered acid rather than a mixture of lauric and decanoic acids, which he demonstrated in his study.

Görgei&#x27;s results were published by Redtenbacher under the title: &quot;Über die festen, flüchtigen, fetten Säuren des Cocusnussöles&quot; [About the solid, volatile, fatty acids of coconut oil] (Sitzungsberichte der mathematisch-naturwissenschaftlichen Classe der k. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien [Meeting reports of the mathematical and scientific department of the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Vienna]. 1848. 3.H. p.208–227); by Justus von Liebig in Heidelberg (Annalen der Chemie und Pharmazie. 1848. 66. Bd. 3.H. p.290–314); and again, more than 50 years later, by Lajos Ilosvay in 1907 in the &quot;Magyar Kémiai Folyóirat&quot; [Hungarian Chemistry Magazine]. Görgei&#x27;s skills and achievements in chemistry were praised by Vojtěch Šafařík and Károly Than.

Redtenbacher wanted to hire Görgei as a chemist at the university of Lemberg, but in the end Görgei retreated to the family domains at Toporc, because his uncle Ferenc had died and his widow had asked him to come home and help the family. After the defeat of the revolution, in 1851, Görgei received an award and 40 Hungarian pengős, as an honorarium, from the Hungarian Academy of Sciences for his achievements in chemistry during the two and a half years he worked in this field.

==Military career==

=== Becoming a general ===
In March 1848, during the early days of the Hungarian revolution, Görgei was in Vienna and Prague, preparing to marry Adéle Aubouin, a French-Huguenot girl, who was the lady companion of a maiden relative of Redtenbacher. Görgei married her in the Lutheran church in Prague. After he finished his research in chemistry at his home at Toporc, he went to Pest, hearing about the 17 May 1848 call of the Hungarian government for decommissioned officers to join the newly established Hungarian army. He was conscripted into the revolutionary honvéd (army) at the rank of captain, with the 5thHungarian battalion, from Győr, to train newly enlisted men. Shortly after that, a former companion-in-arms, Lieutenant Imre Ivánka, Prime Minister Lajos Batthyány&#x27;s secretary, recommended him to Batthyány to work in the ministry. Görgei worked with Ivánka on a plan to organize the voluntary mobile national guards into four camps and was named captain of the national guard camp at Szolnok. Görgei was later assigned to go to Istanbul and Smyrna (today İzmir) to buy weapons for the newly conscripted Hungarian troops; but soon it became clear that their merchants were not trustworthy. Instead, Görgei was sent to the state factory at Wiener Neustadt to buy percussion caps and to Prague to buy primers from the Sellier &amp; Bellot factory; he accomplished this mission successfully. The egalitarian ideals of the revolution made him change his noble surname from Görgey to Görgei. He first met Kossuth on 30 August 1848, when he proposed building a factory to produce percussion caps and primers, for which the politician promised to obtain funds.

In August 1848, the danger of an imperial attack against Hungary grew day by day. Finally, at the beginning of September, King FerdinandV of Hungary, the Habsburg emperor under the name Ferdinand I of Austria, dismissed the Batthyány Government and authorized the Ban of Croatia, Josip Jelačić. On 11 September 1848, when the troops of Jelačić crossed the Dráva river to enter Hungary, Görgei&#x27;s national guards were ordered to come from Szolnok to Csepel Island to keep an eye on the movements of Croatian supplies. Here, Görgei organized the villagers from the region to observe and capture the envoys and supply carriages sent from Croatia to Jelačić and back. On 29 September, the Croatian ban sent the wealthy pro-Habsburg Hungarian noble, Count Ödön Zichy, to inform the commanders of the Croatian reserve troops, led by Major General Karl Roth and Major General Nicolaus Philippovich vonPhilippsberg, about his decision to attack the Hungarian capitals of Buda and Pest. Görgei&#x27;s troops captured Zichy, who was charged with treason for his pro-Austrian activities, court-martialed, and hanged. This bold act of Görgei impressed Kossuth, who saw in him a great future leader of the Hungarian armed forces, promoting the 30-year-old major to the rank of general. Later, when a conflict between the two arose, Kossuth tried to prevent Görgei from becoming the leader of the main Hungarian forces because he saw him as his greatest opponent; this conflict caused difficulties in the Hungarian struggle for independence.

=== Autumn and winter campaigns, 1848–49 ===
After the Battle of Pákozd of 29 September 1848—in which the Hungarian troops, led by János Móga, defeated the troops of Jelačić, saving the Hungarian capitals—Görgei&#x27;s 2,500 troops, reinforced by 16,500 peasant militia from Tolna county, observed the movements of the Croatian reinforcements, led by Roth and Philipovich, blocked their retreat, and eventually forced them to surrender. Görgei&#x27;s superior was General Mór Perczel, a nobleman with almost no military experience, who lacked Görgei&#x27;s knowledge of the theory and practice of warfare. Seeing that some of Perczel&#x27;s orders were wrong and could allow for the escape of the enemy, Görgei gave contradictory orders to his troops. Perczel became angry and wanted to put Görgei in front of a firing squad; but when the latter explained to the officers&#x27; council the reasons for his actions, Perczel accepted his plans and ostensibly pardoned, but continued to resent, him. On 7 October 1848, thanks to Görgei&#x27;s plans, Roth&#x27;s and Philipovich&#x27;s Croatian troops were forced to surrender at Ozora, the Hungarians taking almost 9,000 prisoners, together with their weapons and ammunition, including 12 guns; this being the most successful pincer maneuver of the Hungarian freedom war.


On 6 October, after the defeat of Jelačić&#x27;s army, the people of Vienna revolted, forcing the emperor to flee to Olmütz. The Hungarian troops led by János Móga, who had defeated Jelačić at Pákozd, advanced to the Hungarian–Austrian border; and many people thought that it should come to the aid of the revolutionaries in the imperial capital, which was at that time defended only by the troops of Jelačić. The Hungarian officers, many of whom were foreign and unsure of what to do, said that they would agree to this only if the people of Vienna asked them to do it; but the Viennese revolutionaries were reluctant to officially ask for Hungarian aid. In the meantime, the Austrian commander Windisch-Grätz, having crushed the revolution in Prague, came with his army to Vienna to crush the revolution there, with an overwhelming numerical superiority (80,000 Austrian soldiers against 27,000 Hungarians).

Kossuth, waiting in vain for the Hungarian troops to cross the Austrian border, decided to personally encourage the Hungarian army. In a war council, the old commanders, led by Móga, declared that an assault on the Austrian border would bring with it a Hungarian defeat, pointing at the numerical superiority of the enemy. Kossuth argued, &quot;Our cause is linked with Viennaseparated from it, nobody will give us any importance.&quot; He warned that the enlistment period of the Hungarian national guards would expire soon; and if they did not engage the Austrians, they would go home without any fighting. He also said that if only one of the Hungarian commanders would say that he would attack, showing a plan by which success could be achieved, he would make that person the commander. At that moment Görgei stood up and said, &quot;We have no other choice than to advance because if we do not advance, we will lose more than losing three battles.&quot; Hearing that, Kossuth wanted to give him the command; Görgei refused.

In the end, Móga remained the commander during the Battle of Schwechat, where the Austrian troops of Windisch-Grätz and Jelačić routed the Hungarian army, which was composed mainly of inexperienced national guards and peasants. Görgei led the advance guard and achieved some success, but the lack of experience of the soldiers and the commanders made all his actions useless, and the panic of the volunteers, who started to flee, decided the battle&#x27;s outcome. Görgei successfully protected the retreating Hungarians, preventing a complete rout.

On 9 October, after the battle of Schwechat, Görgei was named colonel. On 1 November, Görgei, only 32, was named general and appointed commander of the army of the Upper Danube, being charged with protecting Hungary&#x27;s western frontier against the imperial army&#x27;s imminent attack. While he waited for the attack, which ultimately came on 14 December 1848, Görgei reorganized his army, sending home the national guards and the peasant militias—who had been the first to flee from the Schwechat battlefield and were deemed ineffective in fighting against the well trained, professional imperial army—and increased the number of the battalions of the Hungarian &quot;Honvéd&quot; army, training them for future battles. He debated with Kossuth about how to organize an effective defense of the border, and was forced to accept Kossuth&#x27;s idea of aligning his units along the border, although he thought that grouping them further back would be a better choice. When, in the middle of December, the Austrian troops under Windisch-Grätz advanced across the Lajta river (the border between Austria and Hungary), Görgei slowly retreated, thus angering Kossuth, who thought that he should fight for every inch of Hungarian territory. Görgei understood that if he would have followed Kossuth&#x27;s wishes, he would certainly have been crushed by the much superior imperial army (he had 28,000 inexperienced soldiers against Windisch-Grätz&#x27;s 55,000 imperial troops). On 30 December 1848, at Kossuth&#x27;s urging and before Görgei arrived, Mór Perczel engaged and was heavily defeated by imperial troops led by Josip Jelačić in the Battle of Mór, thus leaving Görgei alone in a hopeless struggle against a vastly superior Austrian army.

Görgei&#x27;s retreat from the Hungarian border to Pest, can be seen as only partly successful; but this campaign was his first as commander of such a large, the main army of Hungary, being responsible for retreating before the numerically and technologically superior enemy forces without suffering a decisive defeat, having subordinates and the majority of his soldiers who were equally inexperienced. Although, strategically his decisions were not faultless, tactically he was mostly successful. The maximal goal of defending the border and repulsing the enemy was impossible to achieve, even if Perczel&#x27;s troops would have joined him at Győr. He managed to accomplish the minimal goal, that of saving his troops from destruction at the hands of the superior forces of Windisch-Grätz. He suffered only two defeats that can be deemed important—at Nagyszombat on 16 December, and at Bábolna on the 28th—but these were mostly due to the inattention of his brigade commanders.

Görgei understood that with his inferior troops he could not stop the main Austrian army; and if he risked battle, he would have suffered a decisive defeat, which would have ended Hungary&#x27;s bid for independence. In the war council held on 2 January 1849, Görgei convinced the other commanders that there was no other choice than to retreat from the Hungarian capitals. In spite of remonstrations from Kossuth, who wanted him to accept a decisive battle before the Hungarian capitals, Görgei maintained his resolve and retreated to Vác, letting Buda and Pest fall into the hands of the enemy, who entered the cities on 5 January 1849. The Hungarian Committee of National Defense, which temporarily functioned as the executive power in Hungary after the resignation of the Batthyány government on 2 October 1848, retreated to Debrecen.

This retreat had a negative effect on the officers of foreign origin in the Hungarian army, who left in great numbers, which threatened to cause the army&#x27;s total dissolution. On 5 January 1849, in Vác, irritated by these events and blaming his defeats on the government&#x27;s interference, Görgei issued the Proclamation of Vác, which blamed the government for the recent defeats and the evacuation of the capitals, but also declared that he, along with his army, would not put down their weapons and that he would fight with all his energy and power against the imperials to defend the Hungarian revolution and the April laws. This proclamation was seen at once by Kossuth as a revolt against his authority, but it convinced the majority of the foreign or wavering officers and soldiers to remain with the army, halting its dissolution, and to defend Hungary with all determination.

After the proclamation, Görgei chose to retreat eastward, through the northern Gömör-Szepes Ore and Tátra mountain ranges, and to conduct operations on his own initiative, forcing the Austrian commander Windisch-Grätz to send troops in pursuit as well as keep the bulk of his army around Buda and Pest, to prevent Görgei turning to the west and attacking Vienna, thus preventing the Austrians from attacking the provisional capital of Debrecen, and providing time for the Hungarian troops east of Tisza to reorganize. He also sent needed money and ore supplies from mining towns such as Körmöcbánya, Selmecbánya, and Besztercebánya to Debrecen.

Another of Görgei&#x27;s goals was to relieve the border fortress of Lipótvár from an enemy siege and to take the defenders and the provisions from this fort to Debrecen; but he saw that this would be too risky, due to the danger of encirclement by the enemy. So, he renounced this plan, and Lipótvár was forced to surrender to the Austrians on 2 February 1849. Despite this, he succeeded in accomplishing other goals mentioned earlier. In the harsh winter, marching in the mountains, several times Görgei and his troops escaped encirclement by the Austrian troops (at one point escaping by opening a formerly closed mine tunnel and passing through it to the other side of a mountain). Then, on 5 February 1849, they broke through the mountain pass of Branyiszkó, defeated General Deym in the Battle of Branyiszkó, and united with the Hungarian troops led by György Klapka on the Hungarian plains.

According to the military historian Róbert Hermann, the one-and-a-half months of Görgei&#x27;s campaign to the east through northern Hungary was a strategic success, because Görgei prevented Windisch-Grätz from attacking with all his forces towards Debrecen, where the Hungarian government had taken refuge, thus putting an end to the Hungarian revolution, and because he provided enough time for the concentration of the Hungarian forces behind the Tisza river, clearing the Szepes region of enemy troops, and thus securing with this the whole territory between Szeged and the Galician border as a Hungarian hinterland from which a future counterattack could be launched. During his retreat, he fought five notable battles, of which he lost two (Szélakna on 21 January 1849, and Hodrusbánya on the 22nd), scored a draw (at Turcsek 17 January 1849), and won two (Igló on 2 February 1849, and Branyiszkó on the 5th).

Kossuth, who did not want to give the supreme command to Görgei, conferred it on the Polish general Henryk Dembiński. Many officers from Görgei&#x27;s Army of the Upper Danube (György Kmety, Lajos Aulich) were astonished at Kossuth&#x27;s decision and sought to protest, but Görgei ordered them to accept it. One of the first decisions of the new commander was to order many of the Hungarian units, under the lead of Görgei and Klapka, to retreat, enabling the Austrian troops of General Franz Schlik to escape from their encirclement. On 25–27 February 1849, Dembiński, after making mistake after mistake, lost the Battle of Kápolna (in which Görgei&#x27;s VII corps could not participate; because of Dembiński&#x27;s poor deployment, the VII corps arriving at the battlefield only after the battle ended). The Hungarian officers revolted against the Polish commander and demanded his dismissal and that a Hungarian general be put in his place.

Among the generals whom the Hungarian officers would accept as the supreme commander, Görgei was the most popular; and in an officers meeting held in Tiszafüred, in the presence of the government&#x27;s chief commissary Bertalan Szemere, they elected Görgei as the commander-in-chief, with their decision ratified by Szemere. When Kossuth heard about this, he was angered and rushed to the military camp, thinking that Görgei was its organizer and declaring that he would order Görgei executed for this revolt. But when he arrived at Tiszafüred and saw that the majority of the officers supported Görgei, Kossuth was forced to accept the situation. However, he declared that the final decision about who would be the commander would be announced after he presented the facts to the Parliament. In Debrecen, Kossuth and his political supporters ignored the wishes of the Hungarian generals to name Görgei and designated Antal Vetter as commander-in-chief. On 8 March, by way of consolation, Görgei was decorated with the Second Class Military Order of Merit.

=== Spring campaign and Minister of War ===
In the middle of March, Vetter planned a Hungarian campaign to chase Windisch-Grätz and his troops out of Hungary. On 16–17 March, the Hungarian troops crossed the Tisza river; but, due to some unfounded rumors, Vetter decided to retreat to the starting position. During these events, Görgei was the only military commander who achieved notable success, by advancing from the north through Tokaj, Gyöngyös, Miskolc, and Mezőkövesd, by which he succeeded in diverting Windisch-Grätz&#x27;s attention from the crossing of the main Hungarian forces at Cibakháza, forcing the Austrian commander to take a defensive position, and thus ceding the initiative to the Hungarians before the start of their Spring Campaign.

At the end of March 1849, Görgei was named as acting commander by Kossuth because Vetter had fallen ill. Before this, Kossuth again hesitated, trying to find somebody else, even thinking of taking command of the army himself; but when the corps commanders—György Klapka, Lajos Aulich, János Damjanich—declared that Görgei was the ablest commander for that job, he had to accept it. Thus, Görgei became acting head only a few days before the start of the spring campaign.

The plan of the spring campaign had to take into account the fact that the enemy troops were numerically superior to the Hungarians. So, it was decided to defeat them in detail. The plan was that the VIIth Hungarian Corps would feint to divert the attention of the Austrian commanders, while the other three Hungarian army corps (the Ist, the IInd, and the IIIrd) would advance from the south, getting around the enemy, and fall on their rear, forcing them to retreat over the Danube, leaving the Hungarian capitals (Pest and Buda) in the hands of the Hungarian army. The minimal objective of the Hungarians was to force the Austrians to retreat from the Danube–Tisza Interfluve. During these operations, due to the faults of some of Görgei&#x27;s corps commanders (György Klapka and András Gáspár), as well to Windisch-Grätz cautiousness, the latter managed to escape the trap of being surrounded; but nevertheless, because of his defeats at Hatvan (2 April), Tápióbicske (4 April), and Isaszeg (6 April), Windisch-Grätz was forced to retreat from the interfluve, taking refuge in the Hungarian capitals. In two of these battles (Tápióbicske and Isaszeg), the intervention of Görgei on the battlefield, who spoke personally to the hesitant Klapka, ordering him to hold his position and to counterattack, decided the battle for the Hungarians.

The second part of the spring campaign resulted in three important successes for the Hungarian armies: Vác (10 April), Nagysalló (19 April), and Komárom (26 April). The plan was similar to the first part: this time the IInd corps led by General Lajos Aulich, and two brigades led by colonels György Kmety and Lajos Asbóth demonstrated, diverting the attention of Windisch-Grätz from the Ist, IIId, and VIIth corps&#x27; pincer maneuver from the northwest, in order to relieve the besieged fortress of Komárom, force the Austrians to retreat from the capitals, and eventually to encircle them. This maneuver resulted in success, except for the encirclement of the enemy troops, which escaped, retreating from all Hungary, except for a strip of land near the Austrian border. These Hungarian successes were achieved despite the changing of the Austrian high command (Alfred Zu Windisch-Grätz, Josip Jelačić, and Ludwig von Welden) and the sending of reinforcement troops under Ludwig von Wohlgemuth from the Austrian hereditary provinces to Hungary.

The spring campaign led by Artúr Görgei, combined with the successes of the Hungarian armies in the other fronts, forced the armies of the Austrian Empire and its allies, which at the beginning of March had controlled three-quarters of Hungary, to evacuate almost all of Hungary, except for a narrow strip of land in the west, Croatia, and a few land pockets and forts. In the battle of Isaszeg, Görgei had been close to encircling and completely destroying Windisch-Grätz&#x27;s main Austrian army, which could have brought about a decisive end to the war; but the refusal of one of his army corps commanders, András Gáspár, to attack from the north, made possible the enemy escape. Görgei shared some responsibility for the failure to make the best of this opportunity because, wrongly thinking that Gáspár had already begun to attack, he did not urge his general on. Also playing an important role in the liberation of the country were the troops of Józef Bem, who liberated Transylvania, and Mór Perczel, who liberated much of southern Hungary, except for Croatia. However, Görgei was the commander who achieved the greatest success by defeating the main Austrian army—which constituted the most experienced, and best-equipped forces of the Austrian Empire, and had Austria&#x27;s best as its commanders—forcing them to retreat from the most developed central and western parts of the country, including the capitals.

Görgei achieved his successes with a numerically and technologically inferior army (47,500 Hungarian soldiers, having 198cannons, vs 55,000 Austrian soldiers with 214cannons and rockets), which lacked heavy cavalry (relying almost completely on the light Hussar cavalry), and having relatively very few soldiers fighting in the other types of units common in the armies of that period (chasseurs, grenadiers, lancer cavalry, dragoons, cuirassiers), and with constant shortages of weapons and ammunition. Several times these shortages caused the Hungarian infantry to not engage in long shooting duels with the Austrians, but to employ bayonet charges, which were repeated if the initial attempt to break through was unsuccessful, causing the Hungarian infantry heavy casualties.

During the spring campaign, Görgei&#x27;s tactical outlook changed drastically, from being an extremely cautious commander who planned for slow, calculated movements, to a general full of energy, quick in action and ready to take risks if necessary to achieve his goals. Görgei understood that the main cause of Dembiński&#x27;s failure was the latter&#x27;s extreme cautiousness, which prevented him from concentrating his troops before the Battle of Kápolna. Fearful of being encircled, Dembiński had deployed his units so far from each other that they could not support each other when attacked. Görgei started the spring campaign as a mature commander, who let his corps commanders (János Damjanich, Lajos Aulich, György Klapka, András Gáspár) make independent decisions while following a general battle plan, intervening only when needed, as he did at Tápióbicske and Isaszeg, where he turned, by his presence and decisiveness, the tide of battle in his favor. He took great risks at the start of both phases of his spring campaign because he left only a few troops in front of the enemy, while sending the bulk of his army to make encircling maneuvers, which, if discovered, could have led to a frontal attack of the enemy, the breaking of the weak Hungarian front line, cutting of his supply lines, and the occupation of Debrecen, the temporary Hungarian capital. Görgei later wrote in his memoirs that he knew that he could take these risks against such a weak commander as Windisch-Grätz.

According to József Bánlaky and Tamás Csikány, Görgei failed to follow up his successes by taking the offensive against the Austrian frontier, contenting himself with besieging Buda, the Hungarian capital, taking the castle of Buda on 21 May 1849 instead of attacking Vienna and using that strategic opportunity, which the Hungarian victories from the spring campaign created, to win the war.

Some of the representatives of the new generation of Hungarian historians, such as Róbert Hermann, believe that the siege of Buda was not a mistake by Görgei because at that point he had not enough troops to attack towards Vienna because the Austrians had concentrated around Pozsony a fresh army that was two times the size of Görgei&#x27;s, and also far better equipped. To achieve a victory with his tired troops, who had almost completely run out of ammunition, would have been virtually impossible. Görgei hoped that, while he was conducting the siege of Buda, new Hungarian troops would be conscripted, the Hungarian generals who were operating in southern Hungary would send him reinforcements, the issue of lack of ammunition would be resolved; and that then he would have a chance to defeat the Austrian troops. He also knew that the castle of Buda had a 5,000-strong Austrian garrison that controlled the only stone bridge across the Danube, the Chain Bridge, which disrupted the Hungarian supply lines and threatened the Hungarian troops and supply carriages, causing the Hungarians to make a long detour, which caused weeks of delay, and prevented their use of the Danube as a transport route. Besides that, he had to deploy a considerable portion of his force in order to monitor the Austrian troops in Buda, thus weakening any attack westward. Also, the presence in southern Hungary of the 15,000-strong Austrian troops led by Josip Jelačić, which might come north by surprise to help the garrison of Buda, threatened to cut Hungary in two; and only the liberation of Buda could diminish this danger. Kossuth also urged Görgei to take the capital; he hoped that such a success would convince the European powers to recognize Hungary&#x27;s independence, and prevent a Russian invasion.

All the military and political advice seemed in favor of taking Buda first, rather than moving towards Vienna. According to Hungarian Historian Róbert Hermann, the capture of Buda after three weeks of siege (the only siege of the Hungarian Freedom War that ended in the taking of a fortress by assault; the remaining fortresses and castles were taken, by one or the other side, only after negotiations and then surrender) was one of the greatest Hungarian military successes of the war.

Görgei was not in sympathy with the new regime, and he had refused the First Class Military Order of Merit for the taking of Buda, and also Kossuth&#x27;s offer of a field-marshal&#x27;s baton, saying that he did not deserve these and did not approve of the greed of many soldiers and officers for rank and decorations, wanting to set an example for his subordinates. However, he accepted the portfolio of minister of war, while retaining the command of the troops in the field.

Meanwhile, at the parliament in Debrecen, Kossuth formally proposed the dethronement of the Habsburg dynasty, which the parliament accepted, declaring the total independence of Hungary on 14 April 1849. Although he did not oppose it when Kossuth divulged his plan at Gödöllő after the battle of Isaszeg, Görgei was against dethronement because he thought that this would provoke the Austrians into asking for Russian intervention. He thought that declining to demand dethronement and using the significant military successes he had achieved as arguments in an eventual negotiation with the Austrians might convince them to recognize Hungary&#x27;s autonomy under the rule of the House of Habsburg, and the April Laws of 1848. He believed that this was the only choice to convince the Habsburgs not to ask Russia&#x27;s help against Hungary, which he thought would cause destruction and national tragedy.

Preventing Russian intervention is why Görgei attempted to initiate secret talks with the Hungarian Peace Party (who were in favor of a compromise with the Austrians), to help him stage a coup d&#x27;état to overthrow Kossuth and the Hungarian government led by Szemere, to achieve the position of leadership necessary to start talks with the Habsburgs; but the Peace Party refused to help him, fearing a military dictatorship. So, he abandoned this plan. However, Görgei was wrong when he thought that the Hungarian Declaration of Independence had caused the Russian intervention when it came, because the Austrians had asked for, and the Czar agreed to, Russia&#x27;s sending troops to Hungary before learning of the 14 April declaration.

=== Supreme commander and dictator of Hungary ===
The Russians intervened in the struggle and made common cause with the Austrians, in mid-June 1849 the allies advanced into Hungary from all sides. Görgei found himself before a greatly superior enemy. The reinforcements that Kossuth had promised did not came, because on 7 June General Perczel, the commander of the southern Hungarian army, had suffered a heavy defeat in the Battle of Káty, from an Austro-Croatian army, reinforced with Serbian rebels, led by Josip Jelačić. Perczel could not send the reinforcements because he needed them there. A second problem was that many of his experienced generals, who had proved their talent in the spring campaign, were no longer available: (János Damjanich had broken his leg, Lajos Aulich was ill, and András Gáspár had resigned from the Hungarian army for political reasons.) Görgei was forced to put in their place other officers, who were capable soldiers, but were not experienced as army corps leaders, many of them lacking the capacity to act independently when needed. A third problem was that he could not adequately fulfill the duties of being both supreme commander and head of the war ministry at the same time, being forced to move frequently between Pest and his general staff office near Tata.

Nevertheless, Görgei decided to attack Haynau&#x27;s forces, hoping to break them and advance towards Vienna before the main Russian troops led by Paskevich arrived from the north. Despite an initial victory in the Battle of Csorna on 13 June, his troops were not so successful afterwards. In the next battle, fought at Zsigárd on 16 June 1849, while he was in the capital to participate in the meeting of the ministry council, his troops were defeated; his presence on the battlefield could have brought a better result. In the next battle, at Pered, fought at 20–21 June, he was present; but, despite all his efforts, the intervention on Haynau&#x27;s behalf of a Russian division of more than 12,000 soldiers led by Lieutenant General Fyodor Sergeyevich Panyutyin decided the fate of this engagement.

On 26 June Görgei was again in the capital at a ministry council, and tried to convince Kossuth to concentrate all the Hungarian troops, except those from Transylvania and southern Hungary, around Komárom, to decisively strike against Haynau&#x27;s troops, before the main Russian forces arrived. This plan was maybe the only rational way to end—if not with full success, but with at least a compromise—this war against overwhelmingly superior enemy forces. The place for the Hungarian concentration, the fortress of Komárom (one of the strongest fortresses of the empire), was the best choice, if they wanted to have a chance of success, and avoid having to retreat to the Ottoman Empire. The ministry council accepted Görgei&#x27;s plan, but unfortunately because of his required presence at the council, Görgei was unable to concentrate his troops against Haynau&#x27;s army, freshly deployed from the northern to the southern banks of the Danube, when they attacked Győr on 28 June. Görgei arrived only at the end of the battle, when it was too late to rescue the situation for the overwhelmed Hungarian forces (17,000 Hungarians against 70,000 Austro-Russian soldiers); but he managed nevertheless to successfully cover their retreat towards Komárom, by personally leading hussar charges against the advancing enemy forces. 

After learning about the defeat at Győr, and the advance of the main Russian forces led by Field Marshal Ivan Paskevich from the north, the Hungarian government—following Kossuth&#x27;s lead in another ministry council, held this time without Görgei—abandoned Görgei&#x27;s plan of concentration and ordered him to abandon the fortress and move with the bulk of his troops to southern Hungary, to the confluence of the rivers Maros and Tisza. Görgei thought this new plan completely wrong: that the region which they wanted to concentrate the troops was completely racked by the war, that the most important fortress of the region, Temesvár was in the hands of the enemy, and that this retreat would provide enough time for Haynau and Paskevich to unite their forces against the Hungarians, creating an even greater numerical superiority. Despite this Görgei agreed to follow the government&#x27;s plan, in order to avoid an open conflict with them. So, he promised to lead his troops to southern Hungary, starting 3 July, hoping that until that day all the scattered units of his army would be able to gather and join his army.

But before he had the chance to accomplish this task, Görgei&#x27;s troops were attacked on 2 July at Komárom by Haynau&#x27;s force, which was twice the size of his, reinforced by Panyutyin&#x27;s Russian division. Görgei defeated them, upsetting Haynau&#x27;s plan to quickly conquer the capitals. However, at the end of the battle, Görgei sustained a severe head wound: a shell splinter shot by an enemy cannon made a long cut in his skull, opening it and leaving his brain exposed. Despite this he remained conscious, led his troops until the end of the battle, only after which he fainted, losing consciousness for several days, during which time he underwent several surgeries, which prevented him from taking advantage of his victory.

Before the battle, because of a misunderstanding, Kossuth removed Görgei from the command and demanded that he go to Pest, naming Lázár Mészáros, the former minister of war, who was a weak general, in his place. When Mészáros went towards Komárom to inform Görgei of the change, he heard along the way the sound of the cannonade of the battle of Komárom, and returned to Pest. The cause of Kossuth&#x27;s drastic act was as follows. Görgei on 30 June, wrote two letters to Kossuth. In the first he reaffirmed his decision to remain with the main Hungarian forces in Komárom and fight a decisive battle against Haynau. The second letter he wrote later that day, after a meeting with a government delegation, who came with the order for Görgei to leave Komárom and march towards Szeged, in southern Hungary. In this letter, as shown before, he agreed to follow the governments new order. Görgei&#x27;s two letters were sent on the same day, Kossuth did not notice their registration number, but he read the letters in the wrong order, reading the second one (in which Görgei had written that he would march towards Szeged) first, then the first letter (in which Görgei had written that he would engage in battle at Komárom) second. Thinking that Görgei had changed his mind, and had chosen not to obey the order directing the concentration around Szeged, and probably remembering Görgei&#x27;s refusal in the winter campaign to follow his orders and the Proclamation of Vác of 5 January, which he considered an act of revolt, and Görgei&#x27;s critique of the dethronement of the Habsburg dynasty issued by Kossuth on 14 April 1849, the Kossuth called Görgei a traitor and removed Görgei from command, and demanded that he come to Pest to take over the war ministry and let Mészáros lead the army.

Because Mészáros returned to Pest, Görgei did not learn about his removal from command; and, because of Haynau&#x27;s attack on 2 July, he had to postpone temporarily the retreat towards Szeged, being forced to enter in battle with the enemy. The letter containing Görgei&#x27;s removal arrived on 3 July, while Görgei was unconscious from his wound. His officers, led by György Klapka, were against the decision to remove their chief. Kossuth came to understood that Görgei had not disobeyed him, but he lacked the courage to admit his mistake and rescind Görgei&#x27;s dismissal. Görgei remained the commander of the northern Danube army until he had the opportunity to hand it over, which meant until he would arrive at the concentration at Szeged, but he resigned as Minister of Defence. The disastrous military events that unfolded at the beginning of August in southern Hungary, where he was to lead his army, restored Görgei&#x27;s reputation somewhat. On the other hand, Kossuth&#x27;s silence regarding being mistaken about Görgei cast a shadow on the reputation of the politician.

Klapka, the senior officer who took over the invalided Görgei&#x27;s duties, was reluctant to act on the government&#x27;s order to lead the troops to southern Hungary. He decided to lead an attack against Haynau&#x27;s forces, hoping to defeat them; but in the Third Battle of Komárom on 11 July, the troops led by Klapka suffered a defeat. The not-fully-recovered Görgei watched the battle from the fortress. The result of this battle was that Görgei, who soon took the command of his army, was forced to retreat eastwards and let the capitals fall again into enemy hands. The Hungarian parliament demanded that the government re-appoint Görgei to supreme command, but Kossuth and prime minister Bertalan Szemere, because of their hatred and envy of Görgei, appointed and dismissed, one after another, Lázár Mészáros, Henryk Dembiński, and Mór Perczel, as they failed to oppose Haynau&#x27;s advance.

Leaving the capitals, Görgei managed to stop the greatly superior forces of the main Russian commander Ivan Paskevich in the second battle of Vác on 15–17 July, although he was suffering because of his head wound, and underwent a surgery on his skull on the second day of the battle. Then, because his way to south, towards Szeged, was blocked by the Russian army, he retreated to the northeast, in almost the same way as he had done in the winter of 1848–1849, luring after himself the five-times-greater Russian forces, diverting them for almost a month from attacking the main Hungarian troops on the Hungarian plain. He accomplished this through forced marches (40–50 km per day), avoiding the Russians&#x27; repeated attempts to encircle him or to cut him from the main Hungarian troops in southern Hungary. Using a roundabout mountain route, Görgei managed to arrive in Miskolc before the Russians, who used a shorter route through the plain between the two cities. After successfully defending the Hungarian positions along the banks of the Sajó and Hernád rivers, Görgei heard that the Russian troops had crossed the Tisza river and were heading towards the main Hungarian army in the south. Görgei again, using a much longer route, marched round the Russian army, outran them, and arrived in Arad four days before them.

During his march through Northern Hungary, Görgei defeated the Russian troops in seven defensive engagements: (Miskolc, 23–24 July; Alsózsolca, 25 July; Gesztely, 28 July; etc.); losing only one, Debrecen, 2 August. This slowed the Russian advance and won time for the rest of the Hungarian army to prepare itself for a decisive battle, creating the opportunity for the supreme commander to defeat Haynau&#x27;s Austrian forces, which his troops were equal to in numbers.

Czar, Nicholas I of Russia was impressed by Görgei&#x27;s brilliant manoeuvers, comparing him twice to Napoleon, writing this to Paskevich:

With Russian intervention, the cause of Hungarian independence seemed to be doomed. As a last try to save it, the Hungarian government tried to enter into negotiation with Paskevich, attempting to lure him with different proposals that conflicted with Austrian interests, one of them being to offer the Holy Crown of Hungary to the Russian Czar or to a Russian prince. But the Russian commander declared that he came to Hungary to fight and not to negotiate with politicians, and that he would discuss only the unconditional surrender of Hungary, which meant that he would not talk with politicians but only the leaders of the Hungarian army. So, with the knowledge and encouragement of the Hungarian government, Görgei began negotiations with the Russian commander regarding an eventual Hungarian surrender. So, during his operations against and battles with the Russians, he also negotiated with Paskevich and his generals, to obtain favorable conditions from them, or to start a conflict between the Austrians and the Russians. All the while Görgei kept the Hungarian government informed (there were unfounded rumors about an alleged Russian plan to hire Görgei and his generals for the Russian army). But the Russian commander responded that they would talk only about unconditioned surrender.

In spite of Görgei&#x27;s successes, in other theaters of operation the other Hungarian generals were not so successful. Dembinski, after being defeated on 5 August in the Battle of Szőreg by Haynau, instead of moving his troops north to Arad—having been asked to do this by the Hungarian government, to join with Görgei, who had won his race against the pursuing Russians, and together engage in a battle against Haynau—he moved south, where the Hungarian main army suffered a decisive defeat in the Battle of Temesvár on 9 August. Thus, Dembinski&#x27;s decision prevented Görgei from taking part with his 25,000 troops in the decisive battle. After this defeat, Kossuth saw the impossibility of continuing the struggle and resigned from his position as regent–president.

On 10 August 1849. Görgei and Kossuth met for the last time in their lives at Arad. During their discussions, according to Görgei, Kossuth said that he would commit suicide, but the general convinced him not to do this, to escape and take refuge in another country, and, using the reputation that he had won as the leader of the revolution, to fight for Hungary&#x27;s cause there. From Görgei&#x27;s declarations from that period, and also from his later writing, we can understand that he wanted to become Hungary&#x27;s only martyr, hoping that this would save his country from other retributions. Kossuth then handed over all political power to Görgei, giving him the title of dictator, while he and many of his ministers, politicians, and generals went south and entered Ottoman territory, asking for refuge.

As in the spring campaign, in the summer campaign Görgei&#x27;s personal intervention on the battlefield was crucial in the important battles, preventing defeat (as in the second battle of Vác) or even bringing about victory (as in the second battle of Komárom). From the three Hungarian operational plans elaborated during the summer campaign two were made (the plan of the concentration around Komárom) or decided in haste (the plan of the pincer maneuver towards the northeast after the second battle of Vác) by him, and both were strategically correct. His presence on the battlefield could intimidate a numerically far superior enemy, such as when his troops were stationed around Komárom, Haynau could not move towards Pest, or when he campaigned through northern Hungary, Paskevich&#x27;s main forces could not move towards Szeged. During the summer campaign, Görgei reached his peak as a military commander. His last campaign in northern Hungary against the five-times-larger Russian main force can be regarded as a tactical masterpiece, due to his audacious decisions, quick troop movements, rapid forced marches around and between enemy troops—outrunning them, winning several-days&#x27; distance, cleverly slipping out at the last moment from enemy encirclements—perfectly chosen positions, surprising counter-strikes, and accomplishing all this with a sizeable army, show us a great military tactician, unique among the Hungarian generals of the Freedom War.

=== Surrender at Világos/Nagyszöllős ===
On 11 August, Görgei gathered his officers in a military council about what to do next. The council almost unanimously (excepting two officers) decided that the only option in the grave situation they faced was to surrender to the Russian army, because they hoped for milder conditions from the Russians than from the Austrians.

Görgei was of the same opinion as his officers. He thought that if he surrenders to the Austrians, they would show no mercy to his troops and officers. He believed that surrendering to the Russians, would lead to the czar asking Franz Joseph I to pardon them; and his hope was supported by the promise of Paskevich, who declared that he would use all his influence in this matter. Görgei thought that the surrender to the Russians would save his troops, and the only man executed by the Austrians would be himself. Görgei declared that he was ready to accept this sacrifice in order to save the others. He also believed that he would be able to convince Paskevich to ask mercy for the people of Hungary too. Görgei thought that if he surrendered to the Austrians, he would give the impression to the world that the Hungarian revolution was an unlawful uprising, and the rebels had surrendered to their lawful ruler. The surrender to the Russians symbolized the rightful protest of the Hungarians against the oppression of Hungarian freedom by the united armies of two of the world&#x27;s most powerful empires; and although Austria&#x27;s and Russia&#x27;s numerical and technological superiority emerged victorious, the Hungarians didn&#x27;t renounce their ideal of national freedom.

Days before the surrender Görgei wrote a letter to the Russian general Theodor von Rüdiger, in which he presented his wish to surrender to the Russian general, whom he respected very much for his bravery and military talent, explaining, among other things, why he decided to surrender to the Russian troops and not the Austrians:

On 11 August, Görgei sent his envoys to Rüdiger with his offer to surrender, saying that he would bring his troops to Világos. On 12 August, Görgei arrived with his troops in Világos, and was housed in the mansion of Antónia Szögény Bohus. Here he was visited at noon of the same day by Rüdiger&#x27;s military envoys, which whom he agreed about the place and time of the surrender, and to prevent any Austrian presence at the surrender.
The Russian Lieutenant Drozdov, who was present on the discussions at Világos wrote a description of Görgei:

During the discussions, Görgei pointed out that the Russian troops should position themselves between Görgei and the direction from which an Austrian advance could be expected. On 11 August, he wrote to Rüdiger that it was out of the question for him to surrender in front of Austrian troops, and he would rather fight until the total annihilation of his army, and his death in battle, instead of surrendering in front of Austrian units.

In the morning of 13 August, the Hungarian troops (29,494 soldiers, 7,012 horses, 142 guns, and 23,785 rifles, with only 1.5 cartridges per rifle remaining) in the meadows at Szöllős surrendered (not at Világos as is often believed). The soldiers put down their arms, and the hussars tearfully said farewell to their horses. Then General Rüdiger rode to the ranks of Hungarian soldiers and officers and reviewed them. After the Russian general left, Görgei rode to his soldiers, who all shouted: &quot;Long live Görgei!&quot; Hearing this the Hungarian general wept. The army then shouted repeatedly &quot;Farewell Görgei!&quot;

On the next day Rüdiger held a dinner for Görgei and the Hungarian officers, warmly praising their bravery and raising his glass to them. But that evening, Görgei was separated from his army and brought to Paskevich&#x27;s headquarters in Nagyvárad. The commander of the Russian army received him courteously, but told him that he can assure him only his life, while the Austrians will decide about the fate of the other officers and soldiers of his army. Görgei argued that his army and officers bore no fault, they only followed his orders, and thus he was the only one who bore every responsibility for their actions; but Paskevich replied that he could not do anything, promising only that he would advocate on their behalf. The Russian commander indeed wrote letters to Field Marshall Haynau, Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg the minister-president of Austria, and to Franz Joseph I, and even Czar Nicholas I wrote a letter to the emperor, trying to convince them to be merciful; but the answer was that the current situation necessitated bloodshed. Their answer was that Görgei would not be court-martialed and executed, and would be kept in confinement at Klagenfurt; but they did not pardon his generals, who were executed on 6 October 1849 at Arad. After of the execution of his generals, Görgei was accused by the Hungarians of betraying them, and of causing their deaths.

==After the Revolution==

=== Exile in Klagenfurt ===
The Austrians brought Görgei and his wife, Adéle to Klagenfurt, where he lived, chiefly employed in chemical work, under constant and strict police supervision, being prohibited from leaving the town and its surroundings.

Later, from a part of his wife&#x27;s inheritance, Görgei bought a house in the village of Viktring, near Klagenfurt; with hard work he started a garden and started to grow vegetables and fruits to feed his family.

Görgei, in order to assure an income, thus freeing himself and his family from the dependence of the Austrian subsidy, decided to write a book about his role in the Hungarian Freedom War. He spoke with the Viennese publisher Friedrich Manz, who agreed to print the book. Görgei wrote his book with the knowledge of the Austrian secret police. The Austrians hoped that Görgei, looking for milder treatment from them, would write a book that would criticize Kossuth, their enemy in exile, and present the Habsburgs in a positive light. But Görgei&#x27;s work &quot;Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849&quot; (My Life and Works in Hungary in the Years 1848 and 1849) didn&#x27;t show any moderation when it came to the Austrian government and military leadership, listing their weaknesses, errors, and inhuman policies. When Manz read the manuscript, he understood after the first pages that this book could not be published in Austria, because the state censorship would not allow it. So Manz smuggled the manuscript to the Kingdom of Saxony, to Leipzig, where the F. A. Brockhaus AG published the book in the summer of 1852. When the Austrian authorities learned about the book and its contents, they were outraged, many of the Austrian politicians and military leaders whom Görgei presented a negative way (among them Windisch-Grätz), demanding his punishment; and the Police Minister, Johann Franz Kempen von Fichtenstamm, was eager to start a prosecution against Görgei, who was forced by Austria&#x27;s agreement with the Russians from 1849 to renounce the book. Manz was arrested and sent to prison, and all the books that had been brought into the Habsburg Empire were destroyed.

Unlike Artúr Görgei, his wife and his children, who were born in exile, could move wherever they wanted. So, in 1856–1857 Adéle and the children went to Hungary, staying a year at Artúr&#x27;s younger brother, István in Pest, and in Szepes county with other relatives of Görgei.

On another occasion, Adéle and their daughter Berta, went to Paris to see her relatives; and Görgei, knowing that the son of one of Adéle&#x27;s sister, Edouard Boinvillers, was a confidant of Napoleon III, gave to Adéle a memorandum, in which he tried to convince the French emperor that Kossuth and his entourage of Hungarian politicians and officers in exile have contrary interests, and that in his opinion Napoleon should support a Hungarian-Austrian compromise. After reading Görgei&#x27;s memorandum, Boinvillers wrote to him, asking some questions, and Görgei replied quickly; but it seems that the memorandum was never forwarded to Napoleon III.

Görgei paid close attention to the political developments in Hungary, reacting to every important event of Hungarian politics. The main cause of this was that Görgei believed that he could return to Hungary only if the oppressive Austrian policy towards Hungary would be relaxed, and that moderate Hungarian politicians would take the lead in Hungary. He was filled with hope when he heard about the moderate politics of Ferenc Deák. He started to look to Deák as his future savior from his exile. He photographed himself with a copy of the Hungarian newspaper &quot;Pesti Napló&quot;, which published Deák&#x27;s petition about the necessity of a compromise with the Austrians, if they accept the April Laws of the Hungarian Revolution as the basic laws of Hungary. In one of his letters to Gábor Kazinczy, one of the former leaders of Peace Party, from 1848 to 1849, Görgei wrote that he had the portraits of István Széchenyi and Ferenc Deák (the two most proeminent Hungarian moderate politicians) on his desk. He wrote an article in &quot;Pesti Napló&quot; in which he asked Hungarians to compromise with the Austrians, while demanding that the latter accept the Hungarian laws enacted from 1847 to 1848.

At the end of 1863, Görgei sent his wife and children to Hungary, and his son to a Hungarian public school. He hoped that his wife would have the opportunity to get acquainted with Hungarian politicians, and other important persons, whom she would convince to support her husband&#x27;s return to Hungary. But many of these politicians, as a result of Kossuth&#x27;s false accusations of treason, were unsympathetic. She still found some who did not believe Kossuth&#x27;s accusations—such as Antónia Bohus-Szőgyény, in whose castle near Világos Görgei, on 13 August 1849, signed the surrender of the Hungarian army—and politicians who were ready to support his return, such as Sr. László Szögyény-Marich, Baron Miklós Vay (royal commissioner of Transylvania from 1848), Ágoston Trefort (court chancellor, 1860–1861), and Béni Kállay. She met also with the wholesaler Frigyes Fröhlich, a friend of Görgei&#x27;s father, who presented her and her children to Ferenc Deák, who was sympathetic with Görgei&#x27;s wish to return home. She assured Deák that Görgei&#x27;s political views were similar to his, and if he could come home, would support him in every way. She also begged him to fight against the false accusations of high treason of which Görgei was accused by a large part of the Hungarian people. In 1866, Görgei&#x27;s younger brother, István, also sent him encouraging news about another politician whom he knew from 1848 to 1849, Pál Nyáry, who was sympathetic to Görgei&#x27;s cause, and believed that after the Hungarian-Austrian compromise, he would return, and his image in Hungary would also improve.

Beginning in 1862, Görgei had a fellow Hungarian in Klagenfurt, László Berzenczey, a radical politician of the 1848–1849 independence movement, who, after returning from\ exile, was interned in Klagenfurt. He and Görgei argued daily about Hungarian internal politics, including Ferenc Deák&#x27;s domestic policies: Berzenczey being very critical of them, while Görgei defended Deák&#x27;s policies.

When the Austro-Prussian War broke out, Görgei declared that he was afraid of Kossuth&#x27;s interference in Hungarian politics from outside, and that he was against any idea of a Garibaldist revolution against the Austrians, which, in his opinion, Kossuth wanted to start, to liberate Hungary with French help. After the Austrian defeat at the Battle of Königgrätz, and the Peace of Prague, the chances of a Hungarian-Austrian compromise started to materialize.

==== Army reform proposals ====
As a result of the 1866 battle of Königgrätz being lost by the Austrians, the probability of a Hungarian-Austrian compromise was increased. Görgei was asked by his old friend from the War of Independence, Imre Ivánka, now a member of the Hungarian parliament, to give his opinion on the bill about general liability for military service of the Hungarian military units, and their unification into a common army. The bill was to be issued as law after an eventual compromise. Görgei started to work on this, and finished it in the first months of 1867, sending it to Deák.

At the beginning of the 31-page manuscript Görgei expressed his fundamental ideas as follows:
* To keep the system of recruitment by counties;
* To avoid provoking the anger of the Austrian military command in achieving the goals of the Hungarian army reform;
* To awake again Hungarian sympathy for the army, which was lost after the defeat of the War of Independence, and convince them to become soldiers;
* To make it possible for soldiers to marry earlier, removing the bureaucratic obstacles that prevented this, and allowing it as virtuousness;
* To accustom the Hungarian youth to learn and study, and to think of the public good at an early age;
* To increase the defense power of Hungary to the highest level.

Görgei criticised a proposed law that would diminish the Hungarian war ministry&#x27;s responsibility for the internal organization of the Hungarian army. He believed that this would endanger the ability of the emperor to control the army. He proposed instead that the Hungarian and Austrian war ministries put forward a joint proposal on the national defense to the ministry council, to be legislated.

Secondly, Görgei pointed out that the cause of the defeat of the imperial army against the Prussian troops in 1866 was caused by the shortage of weapons and manpower, as well as poor organization of defense forces. He pointed to the fact that the Prussians had mostly modern breech-loading rifles, while the Austrians still used outdated muzzle-loading rifles. It had been a mistake to send troops over an open field to charge the Prussian soldiers, protected by trenches, who, with their breech-loading rifles caused catastrophic damage. Based on contemporary sources, Görgei concluded that the Austrians were numerically superior in the majority of the battles, but the outdated weapons and the wrong tactics used by them, led to their defeat. Görgei&#x27;s opinion was that it was not numbers of soldiers that determined the strength of an army, but their love of and attachment to their country.

In the third part of the memorandum, Görgei criticized the bill in question, which proposed to recruit, and to put under military jurisdiction, all men who turned 20–22 for 12 years, thus preventing young intellectuals during their most productive ages, to exercise their political rights and duties. He wrote that with this bill the government wants to neutralize &quot;the Hungarian intellectuals with democratic political credo&quot;.

Görgei proposed the following:
* In the regular army the men must serve six years, the first and the second reservists three years. Liability for service in the national guards, as well as those who had to participate in the &quot;general uprising&quot; (when the country was attacked and it was in grave danger, it was a Hungarian tradition that the nobles &quot;upraised&quot;, gathered together and fought the enemy; after 1848, not only the nobles had to uprise but all the nation). would continue until the age of 45;
* The most important duty of the army in peacetime must be the military exercises of the recruits and reservists. This training should be conducted every autumn. During these military exercises, soldiers must remain under civil law. Besides this, the armed units should perform a &quot;ceremonial general national review&quot;.
* The regular army should be composed of the volunteers, recruits, soldiers on leave, those who are conscripted as punishment, and students of military academies. The recruits who can read and write, can prove their unimpeachable character, are peasants, work on their parents&#x27; land, are craftsmen or merchants, are civil servants or junior clerks, are enrolled in the university or courses of equal value will serve only a year. The people who are not in these categories, will serve two years.
* If the old traditions of harsh military discipline must be relaxed, and educational opportunities in the army increased, because this will convince more and more young people to join the army and make possible a volunteer army.
* The parliament has the responsibility of recruiting troops, if the number of the volunteers is not enough, and in special cases it must conscript soldiers for three years of service.
* The military companies and regiments must remain in the countries in which they were conscripted. And the king has to send home all Hungarian troops that were brought outside of Hungary.
* Regimental districts, whence each regiment will receive its recruits, should be the same as the parliamentary electoral districts.
* The right that somebody liable for service could pay a substitute to take their place must be abrogated.
* Those in military service must be compensated by a specified amount of money.
* Volunteers and recruits under 21 can choose the branch of service in which they want to serve.
* Military education should be introduced in the high schools.
* In case of war, all units must be a part of the army, the first reservists included, while the second reservists will assure the defense of the hinterland. If needed, also the National Guards and the National Insurrection must be called to duty. The clerks, civil servants, those who assured order and the security (police, firemen, etc.), as well as those who work in the transport, catering service, and education, must be exempted.

At the same time as Görgei, also Klapka, Antal Vetter, and Imre Ivánka made their memorandums on the reform of the Hungarian army. When Count Gyula Andrássy went to the debates about the future military organization of Austria-Hungary, the Hungarian plan included Görgei&#x27;s modern &quot;intellectual-friendly&quot; and pro-socialization views. Görgei&#x27;s proposition about the right of the Hungarian parliament to decide the recruitment of the new troops, and the remaining of the recruits and reservists, during their military exercises, under the civil law, entered in the future Law of the Defense of Hungary.

==== Return to Hungary====
After the Austro-Hungarian compromise of 1867, it was well known that an amnesty would be promulgated for Hungarian soldiers and politicians, and this meant a chance for Görgei to finally return home. Although he wanted very much to return, Görgei was pessimistic about this. His brother, István, proposed to ask Ferenc Deák to help Görgei to obtain permission to return, but István said that he considered that the constitution would be considered as restored in Hungary only after the coronation of Franz Joseph as King of Hungary, so he believed that only after that event would he be granted leave to return. István also pointed out that, for the time being, Görgei&#x27;s only income was the subsidy he received from the Austrian government, which would stop if Görgei would go back to Hungary. István told Görgei that he must find a job in Hungary to sustain his family, before he returned, because he would not want to live on the charity of others.

On 9 June 1867, the amnesty was granted; but when he read its text, Görgei didn&#x27;t find in it any reference to what would happen to somebody in his situation. He thought that those politicians who formulated the text of the amnesty deliberately omitted him, in order to prevent his return. He even heard about the words of Ferenc Pulszky, one of Kossuth&#x27;s closest friends, newly returned from exile, who said about him: &quot;Let him [remain] there [in Klagenfurt]&quot;.

Before 20 June, Görgei&#x27;s wife, Adéle Aubouin, had an audience with the new Hungarian prime minister, Gyula Andrássy. She asked him if her husband had received amnesty or not? Andrássy replied that he did not know anything about this, because the amnesty was the king&#x27;s decision; but he promised that he would ask the Austrian prime minister, Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust, about this. During this time, Görgei&#x27;s daughter Berta married László Bohus, the son of Antónia Szögény Bohus, his hostess when he signed the surrender of the Hungarian army at her castle near Világos.

Finally, on 16 July, the chief of police of Klagenfurt announced to Görgei that his internment had ended, and that he could return to Hungary. On 19 July, the day on which he received the official decision of his amnesty, he took the train to Hungary.

=== Revolution scapegoat ===
In the military council held in Arad on 11 August 1849, two days before he surrendered to the Russians, Görgei made a speech in which he foresaw that he would be regarded as a traitor to his nation for his surrender:

The surrender, and particularly the fact that his life was spared while his generals and many of his officers and men were hanged or shot, led to his being accused of treason by public opinion. The main cause of these accusations was a letter written on 12 September 1849 by Kossuth, from his exile in Vidin, declaring unfairly that Görgei had betrayed Hungary and its nation when he laid his weapons down. In his letter Kossuth wrote: &quot;...I uplifted Görgei from the dust in order to win for himself eternal glory, and freedom for his fatherland. But he cowardly became the executioner of his country.&quot;

The accusations made by Kossuth&#x27;s circle against Görgei were:
* From the beginning of his career as a general, Görgei wanted to be a dictator;
* He organized a camarilla around him;
* After the victorious spring campaign, instead of attacking towards Vienna, he attacked Buda, and with this he lost the opportunity to defeat the Habsburgs once and for all;
* He was against the concentration of the Hungarian troops at Szeged;
* He used his extorted dictatorship to commit high treason;
* He did not respect and love his country and nation;
* He had pro-aristocratic views.

The letter from Vidin misled many people: on 10 October 1849, one of Hungary&#x27;s greatest poets, Mihály Vörösmarty, who also played a role in the revolution as a member of the Hungarian parliament, wrote an angry poem about Görgei, with the title &quot;Átok&quot; (Curse), naming him a &quot;worthless villain&quot;, &quot;worm&quot;, and &quot;traitor&quot;, and cursing Görgei for his &quot;treason&quot; against the Hungarian land, to be chased by hate and misfortune and his soul to be damned after his death. These accusations, have their root in Kossuth&#x27;s Vidin letter. After the revolution, Kossuth became one of the most respected and beloved politicians and the symbol of Hungarian revolution and independence, being known internationally, as well. Many newspapers and books depicted Görgei as a traitor of the revolution and freedom. For example, in an Italian book with allegorical drawings, &quot;Don Pirlone a Roma. Memorie di un Italiano dal 1 Settembre 1848 al 31 dicembre 1850&quot; (Don Pirlone in Rome: Memories of an Italian from 1 September 1848 to 31 December 1850), Görgei is portrayed as a traitor who hands over Hungary&#x27;s head to Russia, and receives sacks of gold in return.

At the end of December 1849—two months after Kossuth&#x27;s letter from Vidin and the execution of the 13 Hungarian generals of Görgei&#x27;s army at Arad—Görgei wrote,in a letter to his younger brother, István:

During his exile at Klagenfurt and Vitring, Görgei vaguely heard about the accusations of Kossuth&#x27;s circle against him, but he learned about the details of them only after he met with László Berzenczey in August 1862. At first, Berzenczey was under the influence of Kossuth&#x27;s accusations and confronted Görgei; but after long discussions with the general, he became an ardent supporter of Görgei&#x27;s innocence. Berzenczey continued to support Görgei after they returned to Hungary and convinced Görgei to respond to these accusations. So, Görgei wrote a booklet in German, called &quot;Briefe ohne Adresse&quot; (Letters without Address). In 1867, he responded to the above-mentioned accusations in &quot;Briefe ohne Adresse&quot; as follows:
* If he did not love his country and nation, why did he put his life in danger so many times during the war?
* If he was pro aristocracy why did he execute Ödön Zichy?
* He accepted the accusation that he had the right to surrender as a general, but as a dictator, no.
* He said that Kossuth and his circle of Hungarian politicians and commanders had no right to leave the country, so they too were guilty, the same as he.

The German &quot;Briefe ohne Adresse&quot; was published in Leipzig by F. A. Brockhaus AG. At the end of May 1867, after Görgei wrote a Preface and an Epilogue for it, his younger brother István published a Hungarian translation, &quot;Gazdátlan levelek&quot;, in Hungary. Hungarian newspapers wrote almost nothing about it, and the majority of those that did were negative; so, this book didn&#x27;t much improve Hungarians&#x27; negative opinion of Görgei. Some Hungarian officers who fought in the War of Independence—such as Colonel Lajos Asbóth and Colonel Lajos Zámbelly—attacked &quot;Gazdátlan levelek&quot;, while others—such as Colonel Ferenc Aschermann (Asserman)—defended Görgei. The Hungarian literary critic Ferenc Toldy congratulated Görgei, in a letter, naming him a great writer, and asking him to write another, more comprehensive book, in which he would refute all false accusations against him.

Hearing about the approaching Hungarian-Austrian compromise, from Paris, Lajos Kossuth wrote on 22 May 1867 his famous &quot;Kassandra Letter&quot;, in which he accused Ferenc Deák of sealing Hungary&#x27;s doom if he accepts this compromise. Once again in this letter Kossuth alluded to Görgei&#x27;s &quot;treason&quot; of surrendering to the Russians instead of continuing the fight, to which Görgei responded with an article called &quot;Nyílt kérelem Kossuth Lajos úrhoz&quot; (Open Request to Mr. Lajos Kossuth) published in &quot;Pesti Napló&quot;, pointing out that on 11 August 1849 Kossuth himself wrote that there was no chance of continuing the fight. In this open letter Görgei begged Kossuth to stop misleading the Hungarians with false statements, and to let Deák lead the Hungarians in the right direction: the compromise with Austria. &quot;Pesti Napló&quot; published Görgei&#x27;s letter with a note in which the editors asked to be excused for publishing Görgei&#x27;s letter, saying that they felt obliged to give him the right to defend himself if he felt offended by Kossuth&#x27;s letter. István Görgey protested against this note, saying the editors did not tell him or his brother anything about this note before they published it together with Görgei&#x27;s letter.

Seeing that almost no Hungarian newspaper or magazine wrote about his &quot;Gazdátlan levelek&quot; and his other articles, Görgei said that &quot;the generation of today do not want me in any way&quot;.

During his first return to Hungary, Görgei was visited by a group of men, among whom were some old revolutionary soldiers, who gave him a crumpled image of the 13 Martyrs of Arad, signifying their opinion that Görgei bore responsibility for their deaths.

After he returned to Hungary for good, he played no further part in public life, but had to suffer many attacks from his countrymen who believed that he was a traitor. He faced all these accusations with stoicism and resignation.

He was many times attacked by the people who believed in the slanders against him. Once, after working on the railroad near Torda, in Transylvania, he lay down on a bench near a railway station to sleep. He was recognized by some people, and a crowd quickly gathered around him, screaming that he must be beaten to death for his treason. He didn&#x27;t move, pretending to sleep, and the people calmed down, and left him alone. On another occasion, near Pozsony, when he was also working on the railroad, a worker attacked him with a spade, calling him &quot;traitor&quot;; but Görgei parried the blow and replied: &quot;I forgive him, because he does not know what is he doing.&quot;

Once, Görgei was invited by the literary critic Pál Gyulay to a meeting of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in Budapest. When the meeting ended and Görgei tried to come down from the gallery on a spiral staircase, he was blocked by an angry mob of students, who looked threateningly at him, and shouted: &quot;here is the traitor!&quot; The aging Görgei was prepared to defend himself, because he had iron brass knuckles in his pocket. He put his hand in his pocket, grabbed them without taking them out, and continued to descend, staring in their eyes, while they stepped back, stair by stair, as he advanced. They cursed and slandered him, but did not attack.

Ferenc Deák related that Görgei once went to Budapest to meet with him, and asked him to officially refute all those slanders and accusations which filled the Hungarian media about the &quot;treason&quot; of the general, and to make clear to the nation that, in the summer of 1849, facing the superior Russian and Austrian armies, Görgei had no other choice than to surrender. Deák replied that although he knew that Görgei was right, and feels sympathy for him, that he, as a Hungarian, cannot destroy the belief that the Hungarians could be defeated only because of a treason, rather because of the superior strength of the enemy forces. He said that he did not want to shatter the belief of the Hungarians in their invincibility. So, he advised Görgei to live in seclusion and accept the fate of a man sacrificed for a greater cause, which is the pride of the nation and honor of the country.

Starting in 1874, Görgei lived in Visegrád, and here he also had to suffer the attacks of Hungarians. The beautiful historical city was often visited by schoolchildren, who, provoked by their teachers, booed and catcalled when they passed by the house in which he lived, or met him on their way. Once Görgei heard a young mother saying to her child: &quot;Look my boy, this is the man who betrayed our country.&quot; Görgei replied to her, maybe remembering Deák&#x27;s words to him: &quot;Madam, maybe its not totally true what you said about me, and perhaps that&#x27;s for the better. Let the Hungarians believe that they could be defeated only because of treason. This belief, even if I suffer because of it, maybe it&#x27;s a guarantee for a [bright] national future.&quot;

Despite Kossuth&#x27;s accusations about him, which were never retracted, Görgei respected the former governor–president of Hungary, declaring in 1848 that Kossuth was a great man, without whom nothing would have happened, while he [Görgei] was only a bubble thrown on the surface by the wave of events.

In 1885, an attempt by a large number of his old comrades to rehabilitate him was not favorably received in Hungary. For decades he had been considered a traitor, often humiliated in public places; but in the last years of his life, his very important role during the war and unique military talent were acknowledged by many of his compatriots. Only after his death was he definitively discharged of the accusations of treason by historians. General Görgei wrote a justification of his operations (, Leipzig, 1852), an anonymous paper under the title (1875), and a reply to Kossuth&#x27;s charges (signed Joh. Demar) in , 1881, pp.25–26. Amongst those who wrote in his favor were Captain István Görgey (, Budapest, 1885), and Colonel Aschermann (, Klausenburg, 1867).

=== Later life ===
After returning home, Görgei visited Ferenc Deák, the architect of the Hungarian-Austrian compromise of 1867, who played an important role in allowing him to return home. In gratitude, after Deák&#x27;s death, Görgei—upon returning to Budapest after summering in Visegrád—every year would put fresh violets on Deák&#x27;s grave.

In Hungary, only after a long search, could he find a job that assured the support of his family. First, he was hired at the Chain Bridge in Budapest, because his schooling made him suitable for this job. Unfortunately, after a year the bridge was nationalized and he was not needed anymore. After this, he was hired to a stone-and-coal mining company; but this job, too, didn&#x27;t last long. Then, his friends suggested he to go to Transylvania, to work on railway constructions; so, he went there, to work on the railroad between Alvinc and Bene. In his letters, he complained about the inhuman conditions that made this work very difficult. After a while, he was hired by an Austrian bank at Lunka (near Alvinc), where he became virtually their utility-man. Görgei liked this job. Unfortunately, after a year, the Austrians sold their property; so, Görgei had to leave. At this time Görgei&#x27;s younger brother, István worked as notary public; and he hired his brother as a clerk.

In 1874, Görgei moved to Visegrád, to István Görgey s property, to be the custodian of the house, the gardener, and the viticultor of his vineyards. In reality, István gave that property over totally to his older brother&#x27;s use. Thus Visegrád became Görgei&#x27;s home for the rest of his life, ending his long years of exile.

In Visegrád Görgei finally found tranquility and a circle of sincere, educated, helping friends, who refused to be influenced by the accusations of treason. As aforesaid, Görgei settled in his brothers property, and started to take care of its garden and vineyards. One of his neighbours, Dr. Frigyes Latinovits offered some rooms of his palace for Görgei to live and to receive guests.

Görgei liked very much to farm, developing on his brother&#x27;s property a model farm. He bought the latest books and magazines about horticulture and viticulture. His friends admired his garden. The famous medic Dr. József Szohner, when he visited Görgei, exclamed at the sight of the garden: &quot;This is a real Bulgaria!&quot; In those times Bulgarian horticulture was renowned in Hungary. Until his last years, Görgei tried to apply the most modern agricultural techniques, and searched for new vegetable species to grow.

To thank him for these improvements, Görgei&#x27;s brother, István, built Görgei a big and beautiful house in the garden-suburb of Visegrád. The architect made a plan of the house in 1888, and the building commenced; but the contractor faced problems with the roofing of the house. So, István, asked Artúr to manage the construction; and the old general successfully finished the task. Görgei and István&#x27;s second wife and three daughters could move there. In this new house, the circle of friends and admirers around Görgei became larger. It included two prime ministers, István and Kálmán Tisza; writers and poets such as Pál Gyulai, Andor Kozma, Emil Ábrányi, and Kálmán Mikszáth; journalists such as Sándor Pethő, who in 1930 would write a biography of the general; artists such as Philip de László and Mór Than, who earlier, in 1849, working in camp, painted many of Görgei&#x27;s battles (Isaszeg, Tápióbicske, Komárom); actors and actresses such as Mari Jászai; and medical doctors such as Sándor Korányi and Lajos Markusovszky who treated Görgei when he was ill. Besides such notable people, Görgei&#x27;s old soldiers visited him frequently. Also, the citizens of Visegrád respected Görgei very much, refusing to believe in the allegations regarding his treason, which the majority of the people of Hungary believed until the end of the 19th century.

Among the people who respected and admired Görgei was the young writer Zsigmond Móricz, who visited the general when he spent the winters in Budapest in the castle of the renowned factory owner Manfréd Weiss. Later Móricz bought a house in Leányfalu, near Visegrád, so he could visit Görgei more often, sometimes bringing his wife and three daughters. Later Móricz wrote an article in the literary journal &quot;Nyugat&quot; about one of these meetings with the aging general.

The death in 1912 of his younger brother István Görgey—who, starting at a young age, was beside Artúr, participating in his campaigns as one of his best officers, and after 1867 writing several books and articles where István tried to convince the Hungarians that his brother was not a traitor (&quot;Görgey Arthurról&quot; 1889, &quot;Kossuth és Görgey&quot; 1891, &quot;Görgey Arthur ifjusága és fejlődése a forradalomig&quot; 1916, &quot;Görgey Arthur a száműzetésben 1849–1867&quot; 1918, the latter two published posthumously), and supported and helped him after he returned to Hungary from Vitring, giving him even one of his houses in which Görgei spent the last part of his life—was a harsh blow for the old general. Initially, Görgei was cared by one of the daughters of István; but, because Görgei was too old to work, the income of the property slowly dwindled, so Görgei moved to a smaller house near the Danube, where he spent his days with the help of a valet. The widow of István Görgey demanded subsidies from the government, but the new labour party government refused to help.

After the First World War broke out in 1914, Görgei received the last honours given him during his lifetime. In April 1915, he was visited by a group of German officers and soldiers, who showed their respect for the Hungarian general who &quot;fought with glory against the Russian armies&quot;. They formed into a line before his house and sung &quot;Die Wacht am Rhein&quot; in his honor. The people from the streets also joined the celebration, singing and cheering together with the German soldiers. Görgei was pulled before them in a wheelchair, and with tears in his eyes he thanked them for this voluntary salute.

=== Personal life ===
As mentioned above, in 1848 Artúr Görgei married a French woman named Adéle d&#x27;Aubouin. She was born in 1822 in Alsace to an impoverished family, and was orphaned very early. She became lady companion to the daughter of Josef Redtenbacher. In her memoirs she remembered Görgei&#x27;s modesty in his behavior; but when talking he quickly became the leader of the discussion with his mild warmth, at the same time giving cutting looks with sarcastic and sharply critical remarks, this combination showing, in her opinion, a very extraordinary personality. Before their marriage, Görgei hadn&#x27;t courted her; but when he was preparing to go back to Hungary, out of the blue he proposed marriage, just as she was preparing to go back to her country. She accepted. They wed in Prague in March 1848, then they went to Toporc, to the domains of the Görgei family. Instead of Adéle, Görgei called her by the Hungarian name of Etelka.

In June 1848, when Görgei started his career with the Hungarian revolutionary army, she lived the usual life of soldiers&#x27; wives: waiting for news, writing letters to him, and from time to time having the occasion to meet with him for short periods. After a while, she decided to go to Pest, where they had more occasions to meet than in Toporc. Starting with the winter campaign, she followed her husband and the Hungarian army in its retreat through the mountains of northern Hungary; she participated in a ball in Lőcse, given by the town council in honor of the Hungarian army, which just arrived there. In May 1849—at the peak of his glory, after Görgei had liberated central and western Hungary, along with the capitals—she was with her husband when the people cheered him everywhere he went. During this period Görgei repeatedly told her to dress modestly.

After the Hungarian surrender of 13 August 1849, the couple were sent to exile in Klagenfurt, then Viktring. In 1850, their daughter, and in 1855 their son Kornél, were born. The harsh conditions of life, their poverty and the continuous police supervision, caused a slow deterioration in relations between the two. Although, in 1867, Adéle played an important role in convincing Ferenc Deák and Gyula Andrássy to grant them the right to return to Hungary, their relationship didn&#x27;t improve. From 1876, when Görgei started to work in the building of railways in Transylvania, Adéle moved to Toporc, to the lands of the Görgei family, and they never lived together afterward. In the beginning they exchanged some letters, but after a while they stopped even that interaction. When, in 1900, Adéle died, Görgei didn&#x27;t go to her funeral. In 1912, when the writer Zsigmond Móricz interviewed Görgei and asked him about his wife, he shouted with tears in his eyes: &quot;That didn&#x27;t count... I don&#x27;t want to talk about that! That was nothing!&quot;

Róbert Hermann claims that the main cause of the worsening of their relations was their children. Görgei was angry because Adéle defended their children when he complained to them of their weaknesses and failures in their studies, lives, and careers. Artúr Görgei called the result of his wranglings with his wife and children one of his greatest defeats, comparable only to his military defeat at Hodrusbánya in the winter of 1849. Because of these, Görgei didn&#x27;t help his children, both of whom ended their lives in misery. In the last years of her life, his daughter, Berta, accused Görgei of helping his illegitimate daughter, Klára Gambelli—from the years spent in Klagenfurt, whom he later adopted—more than his legitimate children. Berta even accused her father of having had relations with the wife of his younger brother, István.

=== Death and funeral ===
In his last years, Görgei was often ill, his sight and hearing deteriorated, and, usually during the spring, he had serious illnesses. In January 1916 he came through after having influenza; but when, in May he came down with Pneumonia, his resistance was low. A month before his death, he was brought from Visegrád to Budapest to the home of his sister-in-law, and he was treated here by two doctors. On the morning of 20 May, his health greatly worsened. According to the obituary notices, Görgei died on 21 May 1916, Sunday, at 1 o&#x27;clock a.m., (the 67th anniversary of one of his greatest victories, the taking of Buda castle) at the age of 98. His loved ones dressed him in his favourite black &quot;&quot; (the elaborate court dress of Hungarian aristocracy) and covered him with a white shroud. His catafalque was decorated with violets, Görgei&#x27;s favourite flowers, brought from Visegrád. Two artists were allowed to enter to see him before his funeral: the wife of the painter Gyula Glatter and Alajos Stróbl. Gyula Glatter did a painting showing the general on the catafalque, and Alajos Stróbl created a bust of his head with the deep scar received on 2 July 1916 visible.

The whole nation, from notables (the actress Mari Jászai, the historian Henrik Marczali, prime minister István Tisza, literary historian Zsolt Beöthy) to the common people, expressed its sorrow on the death of the soldier who had been detested and called a traitor only a few decades earlier by almost every Hungarian. His body was carried to the Hungarian National Museum, where on 23 May 1916 the Hungarian government and army celebrated the liberation of the castle of Buda, and where, earlier, the bodies of important politicians such as Lajos Kossuth, Ferenc Kossuth, and László Teleki had received the last honours.

In the National Museum, before his catafalque, were exhibited a flag of his army, a shako of a Hungarian soldier, a cavalry officer&#x27;s sword of 1848–1849, and two of his decorations. His funeral was held on 25 May at 3 o&#x27;clock p.m., in accordance with the Lutheran liturgy. The funeral was attended by many of the ministers and state secretaries of the Tisza government, led by the prime minister himself; the mayor of Budapest István Bárczy; and 12 Honvéd&#x27;s (veteran soldiers) who fought in his army in 1848–1849. The museum, the museum garden, and all the nearby side streets were filled with people. Ferenc Erkel&#x27;s composition &quot;Gyászhangok&quot; (Funeral Sounds) was played, and after that the priest and some politicians delivered eulogies. After that, his body was carried to Kerepesi Cemetery—escorted by the chorus of the Hungarian Opera, Lutheran priests, and tens of thousands of Hungarians—to a crypt designated for him by the government and Budapest&#x27;s mayor&#x27;s office. After the farewell speech, made by Zsolt Beöthy, Artúr Görgei was interred, but only temporarily, because his family wanted to bury him in Visegrád. As a result of these disagreements, and discussions, Görgei&#x27;s final resting place is neither in the crypt offered by the government, nor Visegrád, but a simple tomb in Kerepesi Cemetery.

==Command style and ethos==
Görgei once discussed the causes of his military successes:

These modest words are not completely true, but he pointed out one of his most important principles in war: maintaining discipline. But for Görgei to achieve his military successes, he had to possess more specific qualities, which were required for a general of his time. To analyse and evaluate Görgei&#x27;s military qualities and strategical ability, we should determine which were regarded as the best qualities for a successful commander of his period. We cannot take him out from his time, and compare with military commanders of our times, the medieval era, or antiquity. One of the greatest military theorists of the 19th century, Carl von Clausewitz, pointed out that a good commander must have the following qualities:

During the winter campaign, when he was the commander of the Army of the Upper Danube, Görgei was remarkably firm. His consistent, harsh, peremptory, leadership style was accepted by his subordinates and soldiers. They respected, loved him, and feared him at the same time. One of his artillerymen wrote: &quot;I was afraid of him more than of the Austrian army, when he rode towards me, looking at me through his glasses.&quot; In his youth, when he was a simple soldier, Görgei wrote that he wanted to be an officer, whose &quot;simple glance will be enough to force even the most unruly [soldiers] to obedience and respect.&quot; Once, when a major of the hussars started to curse and insult Damjanich and the supply service of the army in front of Kossuth, Görgei appeared, looked severely at his officer, who instantly became quiet and peaceful, than a guard came and took him under arrest. This rigorousness and consistency made it possible for him to organize newly conscripted, inexperienced soldiers with low quality, outdated weapons into, after the defeat of Schwechat, a disciplined, combat-worthy army. He was against any improvisations made hastily in the heat the battle, being in favor of carefully preparing every step of it long before it happened. He organised an army in which the spheres of action of every officer and soldier were exactly determined; where the training, the leading, and the armies supplies were well organized, as in every professional army of Europe of that period. Leiningen, one of his most talented generals, wrote: &quot;the revolutionary army needed a Görgey too, in order to dominate over the passions.&quot;

Görgei regarded discipline as one of the most important requirements for a successful army. He demanded order in the army and unconditioned obedience from his soldiers and officers, and he tried to set an example for them. Very often he wore his old major&#x27;s uniform coat, sojourned among his officers and soldiers, even in harsh cold, heat, rain, or snow. For this he had prepared himself from his time spent in the sapper school. When, after the capture of Buda castle, the Hungarian government wanted to award him the First Class Military Order of Merit and the rank of lieutenant general, he refused both, saying that he did not deserve these and he did not agree with the rank and order hunger of many of the soldiers and officers. Görgei refused also the Royal Palace of Gödöllő, when Kossuth offered it to him as gratitude for his victories. He punished very severely those who were not following his orders: he punished those who forgot to fulfill their least duty, or were undisciplined, with degradation, but many times also with execution. He required heroism in battle from his soldiers, and himself showed examples of this, being often quite reckless, if the situation of the moment required this act to encourage his troops, or to force, at a critical moment, a positive outcome. Unlike the majority of the commanders of his time, he showed himself in the first line giving orders to his troops, or even—for example, in the Second Battle of Komárom, personally leading the charge of the hussar regiments against enemy cavalry and artillery, and being badly wounded.

When, in the 1890s, Görgei was asked by the Hungarian writer and journalist Kálmán Mikszáth about the secret of his successes, he replied: it is certain that I never knew what fear is. Nature forgot to bless me with that feeling, unlike other people.&quot;

Besides of his fearlessness he had the capacity of fulfilling his toughest military challenges even when he was suffering from one of the most severe medical situations which a badly wounded soldier could have. Two weeks after his head injury in the second battle of Komárom from 2 July 1849, he was leading the Hungarian army in the second battle of Vác against the Russians outnumbering his troops two to one. On the morning 16 July, the second day of the battle, his medic Lajos Markusovszky noticed that his headwound became festered, so he had to operate Görgei. Görgei during this surgery on his skull, was on his feet, leaning over a bowl full of water, the surgery being made with the medical possibilities of the mid 19 century, when the analgesia and Anaesthesia were in a very early stage of their development. Artúr Görgei&#x27;s younger brother, István Görgey (also an officer in the Hungarian army), describes how this surgery happened:

Shortly after this surgery, at 11 a.m. of the same day, Görgei was leading his troops on horseback, scoring one of his greatest military successes.

Because of his fearlessness, as well as unusual physical and mental resilience, he required his officers and soldiers the same heroism and recklessness in fulfilling his orders. He often brutally punished those who showed cowardice, as in the Second Battle of Komárom, when Görgei, after he tried first unsuccessfully to stop them verbally, stopped those units who were fleeing in disorder from the enemy by ordering the artillery to unleash a cannonade of grapeshot on them, which stopped the fleeing soldiers, who regrouped and successfully counterattacked. He required courage not only from frontline units but also from support troops. For example, he obliged the war medics to be on the battlefield during the fighting, in order to more quickly help the wounded.

From his officers, Görgei required creativity and independent initiative. He wrote to Major Kálmán Ordódy, who had the duty of defending a mountain pass:

Görgei expected his officers to take the initiative in making strategic decisions, as well as tactical ones. On 3 April 1849, Kossuth wrote about him: &quot;He don&#x27;t envy the glory of others, but offers occasions for others to achieve glory – [despite this] he enforces fully his authority; he is not power-mad and readily accepts ideas from others.&quot; Görgei applied this principle to himself, too. If he considered that an order from a superior was wrong, and prevents his army achieving success, he was the first to object to it, and if not heard, he would not follow that order but would act at his own discretion. After the Battle of Kápolna, lost because of the disastrous decisions of Henrik Dembinski, Görgei wrote to Dembinski that he was obliged to make his own decisions, instead of following those given by the Polish commander, because he saw the commander&#x27;s orders as uncertain and unclear. At the end of his letter he wrote that he was ready to defend the decisions he took independently at a Hungarian court-martial.

The majority of Görgei&#x27;s strategic plans were not drawn up personally by him, but by his general staff, although in the war councils he was the one who chose from the plans presented. Despite, this on the battlefield, on every occasion, even facing unexpected situations, Görgei was able to quickly make correct decision, and stick to those decisions without hesitation. When it was necessary he himself could elaborate strategic plans, and the majority of those (except that of the offensive in the Vág region) had successful outcomes.

Görgei sensibly chose his most important colleagues. An example was the chief of his general staff, József Bayer, who drew up in detail the strategic plans that Görgei and his general staff made. In March 1849, he wrote to Antal Vetter, then the interim supreme commander, that he was aware of not being very skilled and having not the patience to elaborate, with a table full of maps and papers, campaign strategies. So he relied on József Bayer and the general staff, who were better at it, for determining the routes that each army corps took each day. Because in his youth he served both in the infantry and cavalry, he was well experienced and qualified to position them in the most effective way possible, and to give them tactical orders; but because he had less knowledge of artillery, he relied on his artillery chief, Mór Psotta. His engineering corps was led by Szodtfried Ferdinánd.

During battles Görgei wrote his discretionary orders on slips of paper and gave them to the orderly officers, to take to the deputy commanders on the field. When his presence was necessary, Görgei went personally to a critical place. He would go from one military unit to another, encouraging the officers and the soldiers to attack. For example, in the second battle of Komárom, after some trenches before the fortress had been overrun by the enemy, he went to his infantry, which stood under a rain of bullets and cannonballs shot from those trenches, and spoke loudly to their commander, Major Samu Rakovszky: &quot;Major! Do you trust in your battalion to chase the enemy from our trenches? Because they have completely occupied them.&quot; Rakovszky then addressed to the soldiers: &quot;Did you hear what the general said?&quot; The soldiers shouted: &quot;We will [re]occupy them! We will chase out the enemy! Long live our land! Long live freedom! Long live Görgei!&quot; Or, in the same battle, during the famous hussar charge led by him and Ernő Poeltenberg, Görgei, who was wearing a red coat—seeing that the left wing of his attacking 3000 hussars, because of the heavy enemy artillery firing that was causing them heavy losses, was slowing and turning in the wrong direction—quickly rode to them, shouting: &quot;Boys, do you not [want to] follow the red coat in attack?&quot; (&quot;Fiúk hát nem gyüttök a vörös hacuka után atakba?&quot;) Hearing this, the hussars quickly reorganised, and followed him toward the enemy lines.

In conclusion, Görgei was an erudite soldier, a man of logical thinking, who was able to recognize in the moment the importance of a situation or opportunity, capable of making quick decisions, and direct their application, while being willing to make changes in the course of the events, as the changing situation on the battlefield required. His personality was characterized by autonomy, eccentric behaviour, but also by a disciplined, emotionless attitude, and a lot of cynicism. Cynicism, lack of sympathy, sincerity, decisiveness, were not always ingratiating personal qualities and he made many enemies among officers and politicians, who later played the major role in stigmatizing him as traitor to Hungary. But, despite this, his soldiers worshiped him. He was characterized by the Russian military historian Ivan Ivanovitch Oreus (1830–1909) in his book &quot;Описание Венгерской войны 1849 года&quot; (&quot;Description of the Hungarian War of 1849&quot;): &quot;Görgei was by nature hot tempered, but still he was not an enthusiast: he hated the swaggerers and he scourged them with relentless mercilessness.&quot;

Róbert Hermann summarized Görgei&#x27;s qualities and methods as a military commander as follows:
* Görgei&#x27;s strategic decisions, except during the Vág offensive in June 1849, were correct and ended with success.
* His reactions to unexpected events were quick and correct in almost every situation.
* His personal interventions often turned the tide of battle in the favour of the Hungarians, or merely halted the retreat of his troops. The only occasion in which he was unable to do this, was the Battle of Hodrusbánya, when he was nearly killed.
* Of all the Hungarian generals, Görgei managed to create the most organised army, which was the most compatible with the rules of the regular warfare, ruling out any participation by irregular units, such units being common to other Hungarian armies of that war. This arose from the fact that he had a clear organizational conception, and he was able to carry it through, against all attempts at resistance from within the army or intervention from without (for example, from the political leadership).
* He tended to choose his deputy commanders well (for example, the chief of the general staff, József Bayer; his chief intendant, János Danielisz). Regarding the corps and division commanders, the situation is more complicated, because he had to take into consideration seniority and politics. Sometimes he made poor decisions in this regard; for example, according to Hermann, before the second day of the Battle of Pered, it was a mistake to replace Lajos Asbóth, the commander of the II. corps, who was the most successful of all the corps leaders, with the weak József Kászonyi;
* Among Görgei&#x27;s qualities were also the ability to avoid traps, take reasonable risks, be tactically creative (as when he used a closed mine tunnel to escape with his encircled troops in January 1849), see the advantage of constructing a base bridge over the Danube on 23–26 April 1849, or organise a siege (such as that at Buda).

Hermann sets forth five errors Görgei is often accused of, often providing exculpatory reasoning:
# In December 1848, when the Austrian invasion began, Görgei is accused of dividing his forces and placing half his troops on the northern bank of the Danube. Hermann&#x27;s opinion is that even if Görgei would have concentrated all his troops on the southern bank, the outcome of the campaign would have been the same.
# In February 1849, when Görgei arrived near Kassa he lost one day before he attacked the troops of Franz Schlik, which cost him an opportunity of totally destroying the latter&#x27;s forces. Hermann argues that even if he had been prompt, General Klapka&#x27;s failure to block the retreat of the Austrian troops would have allowed their escape.
# During the battle of Isaszeg, Görgei neglected to order General András Gáspár to attack with the VIIth corps the troops of Franz Schlik, which, in many people&#x27;s opinion, would have brought about the encirclement and destruction of Windisch-Grätz&#x27;s army. Hermann argues against this, writing that during the battle Görgei did not see the necessity of ordering an attack as he had received information that Gáspár&#x27;s troops were already advancing against Schlik. Hermann also points out that even if the VIIth corps would have attacked, the imperial troops could not be encircled, although their losses would have definitely been heavier.
# Görgei is accused of being absent from the battle of Zsigárd, during the Vág river campaign, where his presence would have been decisive in winning that battle. Görgei, by way of excuse, wrote that he wanted to try out his new corps commanders. But this excuse is weak, because during the spring campaign he always was near the battlefield, and helped his corps commanders of that time (Klapka, Damjanich, Aulich, Gáspár), who were much more experienced than the new ones (Knézich, Nagysándor, Asbóth) in June 1849. Furthermore, the plan of the campaign at the Vág river was more complicated, thus harder to accomplish than the spring campaign. So the presence of Görgei was more needed.
# After Görgei successfully resisted the Russian attack at the Sajó river, he did not rush to the Tisza river, but sojourned at the Hernád river to join with Dembinski&#x27;s main army, losing precious time. Hermann excuses Görgei for this, writing that, as with his sojourn at Hernád, he tried to win time for the main army. Then, by forced march Görgei reached Arad, where they were to meet, but instead, Dembinski moved south, to Temesvár, where his troops, led then by Bem, suffered the final defeat, at Haynau&#x27;s hand.

==Summary of battles==
The following table shows those battles in which Görgei himself, or those troops and units of which he was their chief commander, took part. Even if he was not always personally present at every battle, he designated their positions, commanded their movements, and sent troops to reinforce critical points.

==Works==
During the Revolution and Freedom War of 1848–1849 he wrote several proclamations to the army and the nation:
* &quot;Katonák és nemzetőrök!&quot; (Soldiers and National Guards!) – Pozsony 3 November 1848 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Szózat.&quot; (Appeal) – Pozsony 3 November 1848 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;A felállítandó magyar honvéd építész-kar érdekében.&quot; (On Behalf of the Faculty of Architecture, which Will be Founded) – Pozsony 5 November 1848 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Szózat. Önkéntes nemzetőrök!&quot; (Appeal. Voluntary National Guards!) – Pozsony 23 November 1848 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Szózat a magyar hadsereghez!&quot; (Appeal to the Hungarian Army) – No location and date (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Aufruf an die Herren Ober- und Unteroffiziere und Kadetten der Armee&quot; (Appeal to the High- and the Non Commissioned Officers of the Army) – No location and date (in German),
* &quot;A feldunai magyar királyi hadsereg nyilatkozata.&quot; (The Declaration of the Royal Hungarian Army) – Pozsony 10 December 1848 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Vitézek!&quot; (Brave Warriors!) – No location January 1849 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;A magyar hadsereghez.&quot; (To the Hungarian Army) – Vác 10 April 1849 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;A magyar hadsereghez.&quot; (To the Hungarian Army) – Komárom 29 April 1849 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;A magyar hadsereg főparancsnoka a néphez.&quot; (The Supreme Commander of the Hungarian Army to the Nation) – Budapest end of April 1849 (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Fölszóllítás! Henczihez&quot; (Warning! To Henczi) – Buda 4 May 1849 (in Hungarian),
* Görgei to György Klapka – Buda 6 May 1849 (in German),
* &quot;Görgei a miniszteri tanácshoz.&quot; (Görgei to the Ministry Council) – Komárom 2 July 1849 (in Hungarian),
* Görgei to Rüdiger – No location Jul 1849 (in German),
* Görgei to Paskevich – Rimaszombat 21 July 1849 (in German),
* Görgei to the Following Generals: Nagysándor, Leiningen and Pöltemberg – No location 21 July 1849 (in German),
* &quot;Görgei Rüdigerhez&quot; (Görgei to Rüdiger) – Óarad 11 August 1849 (in Hungarian and German),
* &quot;Polgárok!&quot; (Citizens!) – Castle of Arad 11 August 1849 (in Hungarian and German),
* &quot;Görgei Klapkához&quot; (Görgei to Klapka) – Nagyvárad 16 August 1849 (in Hungarian),
* Görgei to Baron Stein, the High Commander of the Armies of Transylvania – Nagyvárad 16 August 1849 (in German),

During his life Artúr Görgei wrote several articles and books.

Articles:
* Without title. Márczius Tizenötödike. 1848 (70) 5 June (signed &quot;Egy quietált huszár főhadnagy&quot; = A resigned Hussar lieutenant) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Görgei Artúr levele a szerkesztőhöz&quot; (Artúr Görgei&#x27;s Letter to the Editor). Pesti Napló. 1861 február 1 (31/XII) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Görgei Artúr nyílt kérelme Kossuth Lajoshoz&quot; (Artúr Görgei&#x27;s Open Demand to Lajos Kossuth). Pesti Napló. 1867 május 29 (126/XVIII) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Történészeti megjegyzések, Jókai válaszával&quot; (Remarks of a Historian, with the response of Mór Jókai). Hon. 1867 (231/V) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Dembinszki emlékiratairól&quot; (About Dembinski&#x27;s Memoirs). Budapesti Szemle. 1875 (XIV) (with János Demár&#x27;s pseudonym) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Kossuth és Görgei. Nyílt levél a szerkesztőhöz és észrevételek Kossuth Irataira.&quot; (Kossuth and Görgei. Open Letter to the Editors, and Observations to Kossuth&#x27;s Writings). Budapesti Szemle. 1881. (XXV) (in Hungarian),
* &quot;Még egyszer Kossuth és Görgei. Nyílt levél a szerkesztőhöz és észrevételek Kossuth Irataira.&quot; (Again about Kossuth and Görgei. Open Letter to the Editors, and Observations to Kossuth&#x27;s Writings). Budapesti Szemle. 1881. (XXVI) (in Hungarian),

Books:
* &quot;Über die festen, flüchtigen, fetten Säueren des Cocusnussöles&quot; (About the Solid, Volatile, Fat Acids of the Coconut Oil) Offprint from Sitzungsberichte der kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften (1848) (in German),
* &quot;Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849&quot; (My Life and Works in Hungary in the Years 1848 and 1849). – II. Leipzig, 1852. (in German, released later also in Hungarian and English) (full text)
* &quot;Gazdátlan levelek&quot; Kiadja Ráth Mór, Pest 1867 (in Hungarian) (full text)
* &quot;Mit köszönünk a forradalomnak?&quot; Franklin Társulat, Budapest 1875 (Anonymously) (in Hungarian) (full text)

==Notes==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Nobili, Johann. &quot;Hungary 1848: The Winter Campaign&quot;. Edited and translated Christopher Pringle. Warwick, UK: Helion &amp; Company Ltd., 2021.
* 
* 

==External links==
* Full public-domain text of Görgey&#x27;s , in English translation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q716001" start="0" end="31" title="Artúr Görgei" label="Artúr Görgei de Görgő et Toporc"/>
<link wikidata="Q716001" start="38" end="51" title="Artúr Görgei" label="Arthur Görgey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161970" start="172" end="200" title="Hungarian Revolutionary Army" label="Hungarian Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="412" end="469" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution and War of Independence of 1848–1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161970" start="538" end="566" title="Hungarian Revolutionary Army" label="Hungarian Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="873" end="881" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="891" end="898" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414361" start="1030" end="1041" title="Surrender at Világos" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q12712948" start="1072" end="1079" title="Șiria" label="Világos"/>
<link wikidata="Q157040" start="1152" end="1165" title="Lajos Kossuth" label="Lajos Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="1980" end="1989" title="Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q830844" start="3814" end="3832" title="Hungarian names" label="Hungarian surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522423" start="3958" end="3973" title="locative adverb" label="locative adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q379621" start="4712" end="4721" title="Mór Jókai" label="Mór Jókai"/>
<link wikidata="Q999030" start="5396" end="5409" title="Upper Hungary" label="Upper Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q742141" start="5417" end="5424" title="Toporec" label="Toporec"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="5426" end="5434" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205534" start="5500" end="5513" title="Zipser Germans" label="Zipser German"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="5558" end="5562" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q86940" start="5596" end="5614" title="Géza II of Hungary" label="Géza II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="5639" end="5650" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375815" start="5780" end="5793" title="Spišský Hrhov" label="Spišský Hrhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="5797" end="5805" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="5840" end="5846" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q489810" start="5857" end="5862" title="Tulln an der Donau" label="Tulln"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="6892" end="6900" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6965" end="6986" title="Hungarian Noble Guard" label="Hungarian Noble Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="6990" end="6996" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="7273" end="7293" title="Charles University in Prague" label="University of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q89508" start="7397" end="7415" title="Josef Redtenbacher" label="Josef Redtenbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q422613" start="7591" end="7604" title="decanoic acid" label="decanoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422627" start="7609" end="7620" title="lauric acid" label="lauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="7843" end="7853" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q840492" start="7901" end="7924" title="fractional distillation" label="fractional distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422627" start="8049" end="8060" title="lauric acid" label="lauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422613" start="8071" end="8084" title="decanoic acid" label="decanoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="8128" end="8139" title="ethyl ether" label="ethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q425988" start="8269" end="8283" title="undecylic acid" label="undecylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="9233" end="9250" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="9254" end="9264" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q662963" start="9266" end="9298" title="Liebigs Annalen" label="Annalen der Chemie und Pharmazie"/>
<link wikidata="Q634543" start="9535" end="9550" title="Vojtěch Šafařík" label="Vojtěch Šafařík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318973" start="9555" end="9566" title="Carl von Than" label="Károly Than"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="9638" end="9645" title="Lvov" label="Lemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207669" start="9885" end="9900" title="Hungarian pengő" label="Hungarian pengő"/>
<link wikidata="Q265058" start="9930" end="9959" title="Hungarian Academy of Sciences" label="Hungarian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="10242" end="10250" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718236" start="10638" end="10644" title="Royal Hungarian Honvéd" label="honvéd"/>
<link wikidata="Q702016" start="10836" end="10851" title="Lajos Batthyány" label="Lajos Batthyány"/>
<link wikidata="Q181276" start="11077" end="11084" title="Szolnok" label="Szolnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="11121" end="11129" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="11148" end="11153" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="11331" end="11346" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="11354" end="11368" title="percussion cap" label="percussion cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243398" start="11391" end="11397" title="Primer (firearm)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448650" start="11408" end="11428" title="Sellier &amp;amp; Bellot" label="Sellier &amp;amp; Bellot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="11933" end="11955" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702016" start="11971" end="11991" title="Batthyány Government" label="Batthyány Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="12011" end="12025" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="12027" end="12040" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q539391" start="12200" end="12213" title="Csepel Island" label="Csepel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q572319" start="12502" end="12512" title="Ödön Zichy" label="Ödön Zichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="12714" end="12718" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="12723" end="12727" title="Pest, Hungary" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="12828" end="12841" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241936" start="13335" end="13351" title="Battle of Pákozd" label="Battle of Pákozd"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="13542" end="13549" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786813" start="13555" end="13567" title="Tolna County (former)" label="Tolna county"/>
<link wikidata="Q680723" start="13752" end="13763" title="Mór Perczel" label="Mór Perczel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222100" start="14406" end="14411" title="Ozora" label="Ozora"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="14553" end="14568" title="Pincer movement" label="pincer maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19021" start="14660" end="14685" title="Vienna Uprising" label="people of Vienna revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="14718" end="14724" title="Olmütz" label="Olmütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q455008" start="15297" end="15311" title="Alfred I, Prince of Windisch-Grätz" label="Windisch-Grätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q919739" start="16593" end="16612" title="Battle of Schwechat" label="Battle of Schwechat"/>
<link wikidata="Q659817" start="18158" end="18163" title="Lajta" label="Lajta"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="18713" end="18726" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q508298" start="18734" end="18747" title="Battle of Mór" label="Battle of Mór"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="19694" end="19705" title="Trnava" label="Nagyszombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q852547" start="19729" end="19736" title="Bábolna" label="Bábolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q207408" start="20358" end="20361" title="Vác" label="Vác"/>
<link wikidata="Q79880" start="20651" end="20659" title="Debrecen" label="Debrecen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898702" start="21284" end="21294" title="April laws" label="April laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q521267" start="21632" end="21648" title="Slovak Ore Mountains" label="Gömör-Szepes Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q194263" start="21653" end="21658" title="Tatra Mountains" label="Tátra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="22050" end="22055" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q754776" start="22140" end="22151" title="Kremnica" label="Körmöcbánya"/>
<link wikidata="Q208110" start="22153" end="22164" title="Banská Štiavnica" label="Selmecbánya"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="22170" end="22184" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Besztercebánya"/>
<link wikidata="Q690807" start="22268" end="22276" title="Leopoldov" label="Lipótvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q430022" start="22951" end="22961" title="Branisko (mountain range)" label="Branyiszkó"/>
<link wikidata="Q849020" start="22992" end="23012" title="Battle of Branyiszkó" label="Battle of Branyiszkó"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712" start="23058" end="23071" title="György Klapka" label="György Klapka"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="23548" end="23553" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q767378" start="23574" end="23587" title="Szepes county" label="Szepes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="23661" end="23667" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="23676" end="23691" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galician border"/>
<link wikidata="Q462840" start="23961" end="23965" title="Spišská Nová Ves" label="Igló"/>
<link wikidata="Q970945" start="24115" end="24131" title="Henryk Dembiński" label="Henryk Dembiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q353661" start="24192" end="24204" title="György Kmety" label="György Kmety"/>
<link wikidata="Q506929" start="24206" end="24218" title="Lajos Aulich" label="Lajos Aulich"/>
<link wikidata="Q79085" start="24503" end="24515" title="Franz Schlik" label="Franz Schlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q769356" start="24631" end="24648" title="Battle of Kápolna" label="Battle of Kápolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q903177" start="25112" end="25122" title="Tiszafüred" label="Tiszafüred"/>
<link wikidata="Q687135" start="25182" end="25198" title="Bertalan Szemere" label="Bertalan Szemere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425872" start="25881" end="25893" title="Antal Vetter" label="Antal Vetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q582209" start="26455" end="26460" title="Tokaj" label="Tokaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q209983" start="26462" end="26470" title="Gyöngyös" label="Gyöngyös"/>
<link wikidata="Q102397" start="26472" end="26479" title="Miskolc" label="Miskolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q933638" start="26485" end="26495" title="Mezőkövesd" label="Mezőkövesd"/>
<link wikidata="Q867175" start="26614" end="26623" title="Cibakháza" label="Cibakháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712" start="27035" end="27048" title="György Klapka" label="György Klapka"/>
<link wikidata="Q695383" start="27064" end="27079" title="János Damjanich" label="János Damjanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251106" start="27406" end="27427" title="Defeat in detail" label="defeat them in detail"/>
<link wikidata="Q911538" start="27906" end="27929" title="Danube–Tisza Interfluve" label="Danube–Tisza Interfluve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345040" start="28035" end="28048" title="András Gáspár (general)" label="András Gáspár"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628492" start="28194" end="28200" title="Battle of Hatvan" label="Hatvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958189" start="28212" end="28223" title="Battle of Tápióbicske" label="Tápióbicske"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098103" start="28239" end="28246" title="Battle of Isaszeg (1849)" label="Isaszeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461361" start="28699" end="28702" title="First Battle of Vác (1849)" label="Vác"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628533" start="28715" end="28724" title="Battle of Nagysalló" label="Nagysalló"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958332" start="28741" end="28748" title="First Battle of Komárom (1849)" label="Komárom"/>
<link wikidata="Q353661" start="28888" end="28900" title="György Kmety" label="György Kmety"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28905" end="28917" title="Lajos Asbóth" label="Lajos Asbóth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256317" start="28918" end="28930" title="Demonstration (military)" label="demonstrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="29016" end="29031" title="pincer maneuver" label="pincer maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q625154" start="29097" end="29104" title="Komárom" label="Komárom"/>
<link wikidata="Q78789" start="29506" end="29523" title="Ludwig von Welden" label="Ludwig von Welden"/>
<link wikidata="Q85383" start="29571" end="29592" title="Ludwig von Wohlgemuth" label="Ludwig von Wohlgemuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q932005" start="29602" end="29631" title="Erblande" label="Austrian hereditary provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345040" start="30256" end="30269" title="András Gáspár (general)" label="András Gáspár"/>
<link wikidata="Q266339" start="30598" end="30607" title="Józef Bem" label="Józef Bem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113481" start="30623" end="30635" title="Principality of Transylvania (1711–1867)" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q623573" start="30705" end="30712" title="Kingdom of Croatia (Habsburg)" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="31323" end="31329" title="Hussar" label="Hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427705" start="31454" end="31463" title="chasseurs" label="chasseurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q313303" start="31465" end="31475" title="grenadiers" label="grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045848" start="31477" end="31483" title="lancer" label="lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="31493" end="31500" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44865" start="31503" end="31513" title="cuirassier" label="cuirassier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="31703" end="31717" title="bayonet charge" label="bayonet charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q850778" start="33524" end="33528" title="Siege of Buda (1849)" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="34017" end="34024" title="Pozsony" label="Pozsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q465534" start="34697" end="34709" title="Chain Bridge (Budapest)" label="Chain Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q850778" start="35706" end="35721" title="Siege of Buda (1849)" label="capture of Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79880" start="36542" end="36550" title="Debrecen" label="Debrecen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="36602" end="36618" title="Habsburg dynasty" label="Habsburg dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006312" start="36665" end="36694" title="Hungarian Declaration of Independence" label="total independence of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q209988" start="36777" end="36784" title="Gödöllő" label="Gödöllő"/>
<link wikidata="Q898702" start="37216" end="37226" title="April Laws" label="April Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q695383" start="38895" end="38910" title="János Damjanich" label="János Damjanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q506929" start="38931" end="38943" title="Lajos Aulich" label="Lajos Aulich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345040" start="38957" end="38970" title="András Gáspár (general)" label="András Gáspár"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="39431" end="39444" title="Staff (military)" label="general staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q329768" start="39457" end="39461" title="Tata, Hungary" label="Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136722" start="39679" end="39695" title="Battle of Csorna" label="Battle of Csorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q394028" start="39784" end="39791" title="Žihárec" label="Zsigárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114623" start="40009" end="40014" title="Battle of Pered" label="Pered"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524403" start="41625" end="41639" title="Battle of Győr" label="defeat at Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q126656" start="41705" end="41719" title="Ivan Paskevich" label="Ivan Paskevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207493" start="42026" end="42031" title="Mureș (river)" label="Maros"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="42232" end="42240" title="Timișoara" label="Temesvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958334" start="42832" end="42839" title="Second Battle of Komárom (1849)" label="Komárom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213084" start="43603" end="43617" title="Lázár Mészáros" label="Lázár Mészáros"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958335" start="46624" end="46647" title="Third Battle of Komárom (1849)" label="Third Battle of Komárom"/>
<link wikidata="Q126656" start="47369" end="47383" title="Ivan Paskevich" label="Ivan Paskevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12816746" start="47391" end="47411" title="Second Battle of Vác (1849)" label="second battle of Vác"/>
<link wikidata="Q576032" start="48314" end="48318" title="Sajó" label="Sajó"/>
<link wikidata="Q846744" start="48323" end="48329" title="Hernád" label="Hernád"/>
<link wikidata="Q102397" start="48707" end="48714" title="Miskolc" label="Miskolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q432888" start="48728" end="48738" title="Alsózsolca" label="Alsózsolca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007962" start="48749" end="48757" title="Gesztely" label="Gesztely"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="49075" end="49095" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="49172" end="49180" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="49513" end="49534" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Holy Crown of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q597618" start="50681" end="50697" title="Battle of Szőreg" label="Battle of Szőreg"/>
<link wikidata="Q781695" start="51010" end="51028" title="Battle of Temesvár" label="Battle of Temesvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="51812" end="51818" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q614753" start="55300" end="55319" title="Theodor von Rüdiger" label="Theodor von Rüdiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12712948" start="55678" end="55685" title="Világos" label="Világos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414361" start="56730" end="56741" title="Surrender at Világos" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="57416" end="57425" title="Nagyvárad" label="Nagyvárad"/>
<link wikidata="Q697077" start="58009" end="58038" title="List of ministers-president of Austria" label="minister-president of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41753" start="58337" end="58347" title="Klagenfurt" label="Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q699121" start="58377" end="58385" title="The 13 Martyrs of Arad" label="generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446818" start="60137" end="60155" title="F. A. Brockhaus AG" label="F. A. Brockhaus AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="61233" end="61245" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q508823" start="62117" end="62128" title="Ferenc Deák (politician)" label="Ferenc Deák"/>
<link wikidata="Q947009" start="62263" end="62274" title="Pesti Napló" label="Pesti Napló"/>
<link wikidata="Q898702" start="62394" end="62404" title="April Laws" label="April Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q279397" start="62607" end="62623" title="István Széchenyi" label="István Széchenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770817" start="63618" end="63628" title="Miklós Vay" label="Miklós Vay"/>
<link wikidata="Q559099" start="63677" end="63692" title="Ágoston Trefort" label="Ágoston Trefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q371464" start="63728" end="63739" title="Béni Kállay" label="Béni Kállay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="64708" end="64716" title="internment" label="interned"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="64936" end="64955" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="65107" end="65118" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Garibaldist"/>
<link wikidata="Q154942" start="65272" end="65292" title="Battle of Königgrätz" label="Battle of Königgrätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168268" start="65302" end="65317" title="Peace of Prague (1866)" label="Peace of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="67395" end="67409" title="Breechloader" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="67410" end="67415" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944487" start="67458" end="67478" title="muzzle-loading rifle" label="muzzle-loading rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454940" start="69356" end="69366" title="Military volunteer" label="volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q451987" start="69368" end="69376" title="Military recruitment" label="recruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q702380" start="69390" end="69395" title="leave (military)" label="leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="69454" end="69472" title="Military academy" label="military academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="70528" end="70546" title="electoral district" label="electoral district"/>
<link wikidata="Q854253" start="73267" end="73281" title="Ferenc Pulszky" label="Ferenc Pulszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q387614" start="73774" end="73803" title="Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust" label="Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="74679" end="74686" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q178531" start="74814" end="74819" title="Vidin" label="Vidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573063" start="75291" end="75300" title="camarilla" label="camarilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q332484" start="75806" end="75823" title="Mihály Vörösmarty" label="Mihály Vörösmarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q699121" start="77023" end="77044" title="13 Martyrs of Arad" label="13 Hungarian generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="78373" end="78380" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q79045" start="79035" end="79047" title="Ferenc Toldy" label="Ferenc Toldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="79901" end="79912" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209809" start="81339" end="81344" title="Turda" label="Torda"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="81933" end="81948" title="literary criticism" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q265058" start="81980" end="82009" title="Hungarian Academy of Sciences" label="Hungarian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608685" start="82085" end="82092" title="Gallery (theatre)" label="gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12511" start="82098" end="82114" title="spiral staircase" label="spiral staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q459414" start="82308" end="82322" title="brass knuckles" label="brass knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q548097" start="83496" end="83504" title="Visegrád" label="Visegrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="85047" end="85054" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="85252" end="85260" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="85295" end="85306" title="Klausenburg" label="Klausenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q465534" start="85790" end="85802" title="Széchenyi Chain Bridge" label="Chain Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425386" start="86199" end="86205" title="Alvinc" label="Alvinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="86601" end="86614" title="notary public" label="notary public"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="87509" end="87521" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="87526" end="87537" title="viticulture" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="87690" end="87698" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q336493" start="88480" end="88486" title="István Tisza" label="István"/>
<link wikidata="Q254737" start="88491" end="88503" title="Kálmán Tisza" label="Kálmán Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q704208" start="88693" end="88709" title="Philip de László" label="Philip de László"/>
<link wikidata="Q728712" start="88714" end="88722" title="Mór Than" label="Mór Than"/>
<link wikidata="Q220488" start="88863" end="88874" title="Mari Jászai" label="Mari Jászai"/>
<link wikidata="Q932088" start="88904" end="88918" title="Sándor Korányi" label="Sándor Korányi"/>
<link wikidata="Q934870" start="88923" end="88941" title="Lajos Markusovszky" label="Lajos Markusovszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q227312" start="89339" end="89354" title="Zsigmond Móricz" label="Zsigmond Móricz"/>
<link wikidata="Q373512" start="89508" end="89517" title="Leányfalu" label="Leányfalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="90852" end="90867" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q665353" start="91194" end="91212" title="Die Wacht am Rhein" label="Die Wacht am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="91602" end="91608" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q991960" start="92411" end="92417" title="Etelka" label="Etelka"/>
<link wikidata="Q242478" start="92941" end="92946" title="Lőcse" label="Lőcse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="93685" end="93699" title="Gyula Andrássy" label="Gyula Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q227312" start="94159" end="94174" title="Zsigmond Móricz" label="Zsigmond Móricz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="95405" end="95414" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="95451" end="95460" title="Pneumonia" label="Pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365316" start="96023" end="96029" title="shroud" label="shroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q714577" start="96237" end="96250" title="Alajos Stróbl" label="Alajos Stróbl"/>
<link wikidata="Q220488" start="96463" end="96474" title="Mari Jászai" label="Mari Jászai"/>
<link wikidata="Q336493" start="96522" end="96534" title="István Tisza" label="István Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q794461" start="96555" end="96567" title="Zsolt Beöthy" label="Zsolt Beöthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q914141" start="96765" end="96790" title="Hungarian National Museum" label="Hungarian National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q689493" start="96975" end="96989" title="Ferenc Kossuth" label="Ferenc Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q832633" start="96995" end="97008" title="László Teleki" label="László Teleki"/>
<link wikidata="Q153389" start="97125" end="97130" title="shako" label="shako"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="97306" end="97314" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q674735" start="97478" end="97491" title="István Bárczy" label="István Bárczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316820" start="97658" end="97670" title="Ferenc Erkel" label="Ferenc Erkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q288130" start="97846" end="97863" title="Kerepesi Cemetery" label="Kerepesi Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36833" start="97894" end="97909" title="Hungarian Opera" label="Hungarian Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680550" start="99084" end="99102" title="Military theory" label="military theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76430" start="99124" end="99143" title="Carl von Clausewitz" label="Carl von Clausewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q673695" start="101637" end="101660" title="Royal Palace of Gödöllő" label="Royal Palace of Gödöllő"/>
<link wikidata="Q350552" start="102533" end="102548" title="Kálmán Mikszáth" label="Kálmán Mikszáth"/>
<link wikidata="Q934870" start="103191" end="103209" title="Lajos Markusovszky" label="Lajos Markusovszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="103462" end="103471" title="Pain management" label="analgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="103476" end="103487" title="Anaesthesia" label="Anaesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237919" start="108277" end="108293" title="Ernő Poeltenberg" label="Ernő Poeltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="112339" end="112344" title="Košice" label="Kassa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383603" wikidata="Q1596045" url="?curid=383603" title="2003–04 Heineken Cup">
<text>The 2003–04 Heineken Cup was the ninth season for which European teams competed for the Heineken Cup. Competing teams, from England, France, Ireland, Italy, Scotland and Wales, were divided into six pools of four, in which teams played home and away matches against each other. The winners of the pools, together with the two best runners-up, qualified for the knock-out stage.

This was the first competition in the series to employ the bonus point system for classifying teams. In prior competitions, teams earned two points for a win and one for a draw. Starting with the 2003–04 competition, teams earned points in the pool matches under the following scenarios: 
* Four points for a win
* Two points for a draw
* One bonus point for scoring four or more tries, regardless of the final score
* One bonus point for losing by seven points or less
&#x27;

==Teams==
==Pool stage==
===Pool 1===
===Pool 2===
===Pool 3===
===Pool 4===
===Pool 5===
===Pool 6===
==Seeding and runners-up==
==Knockout stage==

===Quarter-finals===




===Semi-finals===


===Final===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1596045" start="4" end="24" title="2003–04 Heineken Cup" label="2003–04 Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="88" end="100" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="124" end="131" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="133" end="139" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="141" end="148" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="150" end="155" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="157" end="165" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="170" end="175" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378354" start="438" end="456" title="rugby union bonus points system" label="bonus point system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383607" wikidata="Q3129057" url="?curid=383607" title="Hearts of Oak (album)">
<text>Hearts of Oak is the third studio album by American indie rock band Ted Leo and the Pharmacists, released on February 11, 2003 by Lookout! Records. A music video was filmed for the single &quot;Where Have All the Rude Boys Gone?&quot;.

It was ranked 59th by the online magazine &quot;Pitchfork&quot; on the list of the 200 albums of the decade.

==Critical reception==

&quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; garnered universal acclaim from music critics highlighting Leo&#x27;s musicianship in terms of lyrical content, instrumentation and vocal performance. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 84, based on 17 reviews.

Tim Sendra of AllMusic found the album a great follow-up to &quot;The Tyranny of Distance&quot;, praising the controlled stew of different rock genres used throughout and Leo for having an ear for tight musicianship and vocal range, concluding that &quot;&quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; is a powerful and emotional record that you simply must own. Between this and &quot;The Tyranny of Distance&quot;, you are looking at a legend in the making.&quot; Jason Jackowiak of Splendid also praised Leo for having a vast musical landscape throughout the album to craft tracks with quality songwriting and instrumentation reminiscent of Thin Lizzy, Elvis Costello and early-Nick Lowe, concluding that &quot;With a dynamic vengeance and a Celtic tune in his heart, Ted Leo might not be the answer to all the music world&#x27;s problems. Still, it&#x27;s certainly a pleasure to wind up &quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; and watch him go-go-go.&quot; Chris Ryan of &quot;Spin&quot; praised Leo for constructing a consistently sounding band that can conjure elements of Thin Lizzy and Dexy&#x27;s Midnight Runners combined and put focus on his vocal abilities, saying that &quot;Whether or not Leo remains contextually confined to the so-called indie slums, his horizon reaches far beyond the basement.&quot; Jon Caramanica of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; praised Leo&#x27;s storytelling ability for being able to create political tales with a pop sensibility to them, saying that &quot;It’s been some time since punk was a viable storytelling genre, but Jersey’s Ted Leo turns gasping, insistent vocals into narratives that are political and pop, never compromising one for the other.&quot; Matt Gonzales of &quot;PopMatters&quot; said that despite some lyrical content feeling too idiosyncratic and obscure with its references, he praised Leo for going head-first against himself and worldwide topical problems with his musically symmetrical band, saying that &quot;&quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; is an informal message that couldn’t have come at a more fitting time. Leo furiously delineates the dilemma of being a well-educated, well-intentioned American in a time when intelligent skepticism is regarded as sedition. In so passionately revealing his fears and doubts about the world and himself, he reminds us of rock’s power to make everything alright, or as close to alright as it’s gonna get.&quot;

In 2004, &quot;Spin&quot; placed &quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; at number 14 on its list of the 40 best albums of the year 2003. &quot;Spin&quot; writer Andrew Beaujon said, &quot;The David Mamet of indie rock, Ted Leo packs his taut punk songs with words, words, words. Words that, strictly speaking don&#x27;t belong in rock, like &quot;abjure&quot; or &quot;ossify&quot; […] And despite all these words, he rocks—a skill that Mamet has never mastered. In 2009, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; ranked the album number 59 on its list of the Top 200 Albums of the 2000s. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; writer Joshua Love said that &quot;&quot;Hearts of Oak&quot; is Ted&#x27;s finest hour, packed to the gills not only with fierce, hyper-intelligent agitprop (&quot;The Ballad of the Sin Eater&quot; shaming Ugly Americans for all eternity), but also combustibly catchy pop-punk hooks.&quot;

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
* Ted Leo – guitar, organ, melodica, percussion, whistle, clapping, lead vocals
* Dorien Garry – electric piano, organ, background vocals
* David Lerner – bass
* Chris Wilson – drums
* Danny Leo – drums (1)
* Ida Pearle – violin, whistle, clapping
* Jodi Buonanno – clapping, whistle, background vocals
* Chris Leo – clapping, whistle, background vocals
* Tiffany Anders – backing vocals
* Kim Thompson - backing vocals
* Amy Leo - whistling, clapping
* Chris Leo - backing vocals, whistling, clapping, lead guitar (12)
* Eric Brunulf - whistling, clapping
* Pat Graham - whistling, clapping, photography
* Nicolas Vernhes - producer, recording engineer
* Samara Lubelski - recording assistant
* John Gordon - mastering engineer
* Tim Wright - whistling, clapping
* Pete Kerlin - photography

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="52" end="62" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754107" start="68" end="95" title="Ted Leo and the Pharmacists" label="Ted Leo and the Pharmacists"/>
<link wikidata="Q430070" start="130" end="146" title="Lookout! Records" label="Lookout! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993258" start="194" end="228" title="Where Have All the Rude Boys Gone?" label="Where Have All the Rude Boys Gone?"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="285" end="294" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="429" end="441" title="Music journalism" label="music critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="551" end="561" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050272" start="579" end="589" title="Standard score" label="normalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="666" end="673" title="Weighted mean" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="723" end="731" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523134" start="775" end="798" title="The Tyranny of Distance (album)" label="The Tyranny of Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="1332" end="1342" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="1344" end="1358" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q962095" start="1369" end="1378" title="Nick Lowe (musician)" label="Nick Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="1656" end="1660" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q247259" start="1769" end="1797" title="Dexys Midnight Runners" label="Dexy&amp;#x27;s Midnight Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q37891778" start="1993" end="2007" title="Jon Caramanica" label="Jon Caramanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="2017" end="2037" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="2403" end="2413" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="3270" end="3281" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779120" start="3994" end="4001" title="Ted Leo" label="Ted Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="4004" end="4010" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="4012" end="4017" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q512191" start="4019" end="4027" title="melodica" label="melodica"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="4029" end="4039" title="percussion" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q864184" start="4041" end="4048" title="Whistling" label="whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="4050" end="4058" title="clapping" label="clapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="4060" end="4071" title="lead vocals" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="4089" end="4103" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4147" end="4151" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="4169" end="4174" title="drums" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="4214" end="4220" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279406" start="4599" end="4614" title="Nicolas Vernhes" label="Nicolas Vernhes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383609" wikidata="Q2740509" url="?curid=383609" title="Stéphane Lupasco">
<text>Stéphane Lupasco (born Ștefan Lupașcu; 11 August 1900 – 7 October 1988) was a Romanian philosopher who developed non-Aristotelian logic.

==Early years==
Stéphane Lupasco was born in Bucharest on 11 August 1900. His family belonged to the old Moldavian aristocracy. His father was a lawyer and politician, but it was his mother, a pianist and student of César Franck, who established the family in Paris in 1916. After high school at the Lycée Buffon, he studied philosophy, biology and physics at the Sorbonne and, briefly, law. He participated fully in the artistic and intellectual life of Paris in the 20s and 30s and defended his State Doctoral Thesis in 1935.

==Academic career==
In 1946, he was named research assistant at the French National Science Research Centre, a post he was obliged to leave ten years later because of the inability of the Centre to decide in which Scientific Section his work belonged! The next ten or fifteen years were those of greatest acceptance of his work by the public and other thinkers, but unfortunately not by mainstream logicians and philosophers. His &quot;Trois Matières&quot;, published in 1960 was a bestseller, and people began calling Lupasco the Descartes, the Leibniz, the Hegel of the 20th Century, a new Claude Bernard, a new Bergson, etc. He continued to publish books in the 70s and 80s, the last being &quot;L’Homme et ses Trois Éthiques&quot; in 1986, two years before his death on October 7, 1988 in Paris. An Award of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1984 was among the few honors that came to Lupasco during his lifetime. Lupasco was one of the founding members of the International Center for Transdisciplinary Research (Centre International de Recherches et Etudes Transdisciplinaires (CIRET)), founded in Paris in 1987 by Basarab Nicolescu, Edgar Morin, René Berger, Michel Random and other key figures of the French intelligentsia. As Nicolescu has recalled, Lupasco was deeply affected by the stubborn resistance of the academic community to honest debate and discussion of his new principles and postulates, and it is with an understandable bitterness that Lupasco saw in this resistance another example of the operation of his principles.

==Summary of work==

Lupasco’s style as an author is not an easy one, and requires the uninterrupted attention of the reader. It is not infrequent to find sentences of almost a page in length, containing multiple nested clauses. His writing is extremely dense in terms of the ideas and meaning of each successive phrase, with only occasional illustrative examples. Lupasco makes many references to his prior publications, unfortunately, often without adequate indexation. As Nicolescu has remarked, Lupasco’s exclusion from French academic life had both advantages and disadvantages: Lupasco was freed from the constraints of teaching and publication of research papers in a rigid format, and he obviously did not find it necessary to apply the discipline of providing references to his sources. In the &quot;Psychic Universe&quot;, published when Lupasco was seventy-nine, one sees nothing about current work in psychiatry. (Lupasco unfortunately did not read English well, and hence no references to the “anti”-psychiatry of R. D. Laing and Gregory Bateson, close in spirit to his work, are to be found.) A recent study by Brenner (2008) up-dates Lupasco’s work and shows its relevance to current issues in science and philosophy, as well as logic.

==Influence==
Lupasco was not well served by the (few) exegetes that had looked closely at his work. Only one book, by the sociologist Marc Beigbeder, presents both a substantial description of Lupasco’s theory and development of it as a “logic of society”. A brief monograph by the philosopher Benjamin Fondane, dating from 1944 (just prior to his deportation and death) and published in 1998, discusses the limitations of Lupasco’s view of affectivity and ontology. A book by an obscure English artist, George Melhuish, uses Lupasco’s ideas to develop his own concept of the structure of the universe, a sympathetic but not very rigorous reading of his work. Aside from Nicolescu&#x27;s personal library it has been claimed that access to these and several other texts are otherwise unavailable. A complete understanding of, for example, Lupasco’s analysis of those precursors that André Glucksmann has called “Les Maîtres Penseurs” – Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer and Marx – must be sought in several different books. The attention of the reader is rewarded, however, by Lupasco’s regular restatements of his basic theses, often in a way that is more economic, meaningful and coherent.

In his introduction to Lupasco’s &quot;The Principle of Antagonism and the Logic of Energy&quot;, Nicolescu points out that once the reader gets beyond the (relatively few) mathematical formulas in this book, Lupasco’s language is perfectly accessible. “It exemplifies, in a self-referential manner, the ternary aspects of actualization, potentialization and included middle which give it the charm and the privilege of incantations that are at the same time scientific, philosophical and poetic.”

Summarizing briefly, stimulated by Albert Einstein&#x27;s works and quantum theory, Lupasco founded a new logic, questioning the &quot;tertium non datur&quot; principle of classical logic. He introduced a third state, going beyond the duality principle, the T-state. The T-state is neither &#x27;actual&#x27;, nor &#x27;potential&#x27; (categories replacing in Lupasco&#x27;s system the &#x27;true&#x27; or &#x27;false&#x27; values of standard bivalent logic), but a resolution of the two contradictory elements at a higher level of reality or complexity. Lupasco generalised his logic to physics and epistemology and above all to a new theory of consciousness.

==Recent studies==
A key reference in French is the compendium of 1999, &quot;Stéphane Lupasco -The Man and the Work&quot; by H. Badescu and B. Nicolescu. The first comprehensive update and comparison of Lupasco&#x27;s thought in English is the 2008 book by J. E. Brenner, &quot;Logic in Reality&quot;. Other useful new references are the combined papers of a Symposium on Lupasco in 2009 &quot;At the Confluence of Two Cultures: Lupasco Today,&quot; in French and a biographical paper by Brenner, &quot;The Philosophical Logic of Stéphane Lupasco (1900 - 1988)&quot; in English.

== Works ==
#&quot;Logique et contradiction&quot;, P. U. F., Paris, 1947.
#&quot;Le principe d&#x27;antagonisme et la logique de l&#x27;énergie. Prolégomènes à une science de la contradiction&quot;, Hermann &amp; Co., Paris, 1951.
#&quot;Du devenir logique et de l’affectivité ; Vol. 1 : Le dualisme antagoniste ; Vol. 2 : Essai d’une nouvelle théorie de la connaissance.&quot; Paris : Vrin, 1935 ; 2nd edition 1973.
#&quot;Les trois matières.&quot; Paris : Julliard, 1960 (LTM)
#&quot;Qu’est-ce qu’une structure?&quot; Paris: Christian Bourgois, 1967
#&quot;La tragédie de l&#x27;énergie.&quot; Paris: Casterman, 1970
#&quot;L’univers psychique&quot;. Paris: Editions Denoël/Gonthier, 1979.
#&quot;L’énergie et la matière vivante&quot;. Monaco: Éditions du Rocher. (Originally published in Paris: Julliard, 1962.), 1986
#&quot;La topologie énergétique.&quot; In Pensées hors du Rond, La Liberté de l’esprit. 12: 13-30. Paris: Hachette, 1986
#&quot;L’Homme et ses trois éthiques&quot;. Paris: Editions du Rocher, 1986
#&quot;L’énergie et la matière psychique&quot;. Monaco: Éditions du Rocher. (Originally published in Paris: Julliard, 1974.), 1987.

==See also==
Many-valued logic

Non-Aristotelian logic

==References==
*Badescu, Horia and Nicolescu, Basarab (eds.), &quot;Stéphane Lupasco - L&#x27;homme et l&#x27;oeuvre&quot;. Monaco: Editions Rocher, 1999.
*Brenner, Joseph E., &quot;Logic in Reality&quot;. Dordrecht: Springer, 2008.
*Beigbeder, Marc, &quot;Contradiction et Nouvel Entendement&quot;. Paris : Bordas, 1972.
*Fondane, Benjamin, &quot;L’être et la connaissance ; Essai sur Lupasco&quot;. Paris : Éditions Paris-Méditerranée, 1998.
*Melhuish, George, &quot;The Paradoxical Universe&quot;. Bristol: Rankin Bros., 1959.
*Basarab Nicolescu in Stéphane Lupasco, &quot;Le principe d’antagonisme et la logique de l’énergie.&quot; Paris : Éditions Hermann, 1951. Re-edited by Éditions le Rocher, 1987.
*Nicolescu, Basarab (ed.). &quot;A la confluence de deux cultures - Lupasco aujourd&#x27;hui. Paris: Oxus, 2010.
*Brenner, Joseph E., The Philosophical Logic of Stéphane Lupasco (1900–1988), In &quot;Logic and Logical Philosophy, 19, 2010, pp. 243–284.

== External links ==
*French articles
* Stéphane Lupasco meeting Salvador Dali, 1978, on Ina.fr, in French.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2740509" start="0" end="16" title="Stéphane Lupasco" label="Stéphane Lupasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740509" start="23" end="37" title="Stéphane Lupasco" label="Ștefan Lupașcu"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="78" end="85" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="87" end="98" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q239179" start="113" end="135" title="non-Aristotelian logic" label="non-Aristotelian logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="183" end="192" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="243" end="251" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="253" end="264" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="354" end="366" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="398" end="403" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268602" start="438" end="450" title="Lycée Buffon" label="Lycée Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="463" end="473" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="475" end="482" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="487" end="494" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="502" end="510" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="525" end="528" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q280413" start="735" end="774" title="French National Science Research Centre" label="French National Science Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="1198" end="1207" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="1213" end="1220" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1226" end="1231" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="1259" end="1273" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="1281" end="1288" title="Bergson" label="Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1483" end="1520" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837761" start="1799" end="1816" title="Basarab Nicolescu" label="Basarab Nicolescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q317880" start="1818" end="1829" title="Edgar Morin" label="Edgar Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598471" start="1831" end="1842" title="René Berger" label="René Berger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1844" end="1857" title="Michel Random" label="Michel Random"/>
<link wikidata="Q238584" start="3248" end="3259" title="R. D. Laing" label="R. D. Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="3264" end="3279" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3608" end="3622" title="Marc Beigbeder" label="Marc Beigbeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q817484" start="3768" end="3784" title="Benjamin Fondane" label="Benjamin Fondane"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="3915" end="3926" title="affectivity" label="affectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="3931" end="3939" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3978" end="3993" title="George Melhuish" label="George Melhuish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362349" start="4357" end="4373" title="André Glucksmann" label="André Glucksmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="4410" end="4414" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="4416" end="4421" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="4423" end="4435" title="Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="4440" end="4444" title="Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="5193" end="5208" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q46344" start="5226" end="5233" title="quantum" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="5264" end="5269" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="5293" end="5310" title="tertium non datur" label="tertium non datur"/>
<link wikidata="Q780099" start="5393" end="5400" title="String duality" label="duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="5747" end="5754" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="5759" end="5771" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="5805" end="5818" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q185502" start="7566" end="7583" title="Many-valued logic" label="Many-valued logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q239179" start="7585" end="7607" title="Non-Aristotelian logic" label="Non-Aristotelian logic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383611" wikidata="Q421095" url="?curid=383611" title="Metoclopramide">
<text>Metoclopramide is a medication used to treat nausea, vomiting, gastroparesis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. It is also used to treat migraine headaches.
Common side effects include feeling tired, diarrhea, akathisia, and tardive dyskinesia. More serious side effects include neuroleptic malignant syndrome and depression. It is thus rarely recommended that people take the medication for longer than twelve weeks. No evidence of harm has been found after being taken by many pregnant women. It belongs to the group of medications known as dopamine-receptor antagonists and works as a prokinetic.
In 2012, metoclopramide was one of the top 100 most prescribed medications in the United States. It is available as a generic medication. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. In 2022, it was the 245th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 1million prescriptions.
==Medical uses==
===Nausea===
Metoclopramide is commonly used to treat nausea and vomiting associated with conditions such as uremia, radiation sickness, cancer and the effects of chemotherapy, labor, infection, and emetogenic drugs. As a perioperative anti-emetic, the effective dose is usually 25 to 50 mg (compared to the usual 10 mg dose).

It is also used in pregnancy as a second choice for treatment of hyperemesis gravidarum (severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy).

It is also used preventatively by some EMS providers when transporting people who are conscious and spinally immobilized.

===Migraine===
In migraine headaches, metoclopramide may be used in combination with paracetamol (acetaminophen) or in combination with aspirin.

===Gastroparesis===
Evidence also supports its use for gastroparesis, a condition that causes the stomach to empty poorly, and as of 2010 it was the only drug approved by the FDA for that condition.

It is also used in gastroesophageal reflux disease.

===Lactation===
While metoclopramide is used to increase breast milk production, evidence for its effectiveness for this indication is poor. Its safety for this use is also unclear.

===Procedures===
Intravenous metoclopramide is used in small-bowel follow-through, small-bowel enema, and radionuclide gastric-emptying studies to reduce the time taken for the barium to go through the intestines, thus reducing the total time needed for the procedures. Metoclopramide also prevents vomiting after oral ingestion of barium.

==Contraindications==
Metoclopramide is contraindicated in pheochromocytoma. It should be used with caution in Parkinson&#x27;s disease since, as a dopamine antagonist, it may worsen symptoms. Long-term use should be avoided in people with clinical depression, as it may worsen one&#x27;s mental state. It is contraindicated for people with a suspected bowel obstruction, in epilepsy, if a stomach operation has been performed in the previous three or four days, perforation or blockage of the stomach, and in newborn babies.

The European Medicines Agency reviewed the drug&#x27;s safety in 2011, which determined that it should not be prescribed in high doses, for periods of more than five days, or given to children below 1 year of age. They suggested its use in older children should be restricted to treating post-chemotherapy or post-surgery nausea and vomiting, and even then only for patients where other treatments have failed. For adults, they recommended its use be restricted to treating migraines and post-chemotherapy or post-surgery patients.

===Pregnancy===
Metoclopramide has long been used in all stages of pregnancy with no evidence of harm to the mother or foetus. A large cohort study of babies born to Israeli women exposed to metoclopramide during pregnancy found no evidence that the drug increases the risk of congenital malformations, low birth weight, preterm birth, or perinatal mortality. A large cohort study in Denmark found, in addition, no association between metoclopramide exposure and miscarriage. Metoclopramide is excreted into milk.

===Infants===
A systematic review found a wide range of reported outcomes for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in infants rating the evidence as &quot;poor&quot; and &quot;inconclusive&quot; for safety and efficacy for the treatment of GERD in infants.

==Side effects==
Common adverse drug reactions (ADRs) associated with metoclopramide therapy include restlessness (akathisia), and focal dystonia. Infrequent ADRs include hypertension, hypotension, hyperprolactinaemia leading to galactorrhea, headache, and extrapyramidal effects such as oculogyric crisis.

Metoclopramide may be the most common cause of drug-induced movement disorders. The risk of extrapyramidal effects is increased in people under 20 years of age, and with high-dose or prolonged therapy. Tardive dyskinesia may be persistent and irreversible in some people. The majority of reports of tardive dyskinesia occur in people who have used metoclopramide for more than three months. Consequently, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends that metoclopramide be used for short-term treatment, preferably less than 12 weeks. In 2009, the FDA required all manufacturers of metoclopramide to issue a black box warning regarding the risk of tardive dyskinesia with chronic or high-dose use of the drug.

Dystonic reactions may be treated with benzatropine, diphenhydramine, trihexyphenidyl, or procyclidine. Symptoms usually subside with intramuscularly injected diphenhydramine. Agents in the benzodiazepine class of drugs may be helpful, but benefits are usually modest, and the side effects of sedation and weakness can be problematic.

In some cases, the akathisia effects of metoclopramide are directly related to the infusion rate when the drug is administered intravenously. Side effects were usually seen in the first 15 minutes after administering the dose of metoclopramide.

Withdrawal effects were reported for a female taking metoclopramide for about six months. The adverse symptoms oscillated between akinesian and akathisian, including amenorrhea, and appeared like secondary parkinsonism. Adverse effects remained a year after the metoclopramide had been gradually withdrawn.

===Rare side effects===
Diabetes, age, and female gender are risk factors that increase the likelihood of experiencing a neuropsychiatric side effect of metoclopramide.
* Panic disorder
* Major depressive disorder
* Agoraphobia
* Agranulocytosis, supraventricular tachycardia, hyperaldosteronism, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, akathisia and tardive dyskinesia.
* Methaemoglobinaemia*

==Pharmacology==
Metoclopramide appears to bind to dopamine D2 receptors with nanomolar affinity (Ki = 28.8 nM), where it is a receptor antagonist, and is also a mixed 5-HT3 receptor antagonist/5-HT4 receptor agonist.

=== Mechanism of action ===
The antiemetic action of metoclopramide is due to its antagonist activity at D2 receptors in the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the brain — this action prevents nausea and vomiting triggered by most stimuli. At higher doses, 5-HT3 antagonist activity may also contribute to the antiemetic effect.

The gastroprokinetic activity of metoclopramide is mediated by muscarinic activity, D2 receptor antagonist activity, and 5-HT4 receptor agonist activity. The gastroprokinetic effect itself may also contribute to the antiemetic effect. Metoclopramide also increases the tone of the lower esophageal sphincter.

Metoclopramide might influence mood because of its antagonistic blockade on 5-HT3 and agonistic (activating) action on 5-HT4.

While muscarinic receptors affect gastrointestinal motility, metoclopramide’s prokinetic effects are not primarily due to direct muscarinic receptor activity. Instead, they result from its actions on 5-HT4 and D2 receptors.

=== Pharmacokinetics ===
CYP2D6 metabolizes metoclopramide, a reversible inhibitor, but not inactivator, of CYP2D6. The major metabolites of metoclopramide are N-hydroxylation and N-deethylation by all common CYP enzymes.

==Chemistry==
Metoclopramide is a substituted benzamide; cisapride and mosapride are structurally related.

==History==
Metoclopramide was first described by Louis Justin-Besançon and Charles Laville in 1964, while working to improve the anti-dysrhythmic properties of procainamide. That research project also produced the product sulpiride. The first clinical trials were published by Tourneu et al. in 1964 and by Boisson and Albot in 1966. Justin-Besançon and Laville worked for Laboratoires Delagrange and that company introduced the drug Primperan in 1964. Laboratoires Delagrange was acquired by Synthelabo in 1991 which eventually became part of Sanofi.

A.H. Robins introduced the drug in the US under the brand name Reglan in 1979 as an injectable and an oral form was approved in 1980. in 1989 A.H. Robins was acquired by American Home Products, which changed its name to Wyeth in 2002.

The drugs were initially used to control nausea for people with severe headaches or migraines, and later used for nausea caused by radiation therapy and chemotherapy, and later yet for treating nausea caused by anesthesia. In the US the injectable form was labelled for chemotherapy-induced nausea and the oral form was eventually labelled for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

It became widely used in the 1980s, becoming the most commonly used drug to treat anesthesia-induced nausea and for treating gastritis in emergency rooms.

The first generics were introduced in 1985.

In the early 1980s signs began to emerge in pharmacovigilance studies from Sweden that the drug was causing tardive dyskinesia in some patients. The FDA required a warning about tardive dyskinesia to be added to the drug label in 1985 stating that: &quot;tardive dyskinesia . . . may develop in patients treated with metoclopramide,” and warned against use longer than 12 weeks, as that was how long the drug has been tested. In 2009 the FDA required that a black box warning be added to the label.

The emergence of this severe side effect led to a wave of product liability litigation against generic manufacturers as well as Wyeth. The litigation was complicated since there was a lack of clarity in jurisdiction between state laws, where product liability is determined, and federal law, which determines how drugs are labelled, as well as between generics companies, which had no control over labelling, and the originator company, which did. The litigation yielded at least two important cases. In Conte v. Wyeth in the California state courts, the claims of the plaintiff against the generic companies Pliva, Teva, and Purepac that had sold the drugs that the plaintiff actually took, and the claims against Wyeth, whose product the plaintiff never took, were all dismissed by the trial court, but the case was appealed, and in 2008 the appellate court upheld the dismissal of the cases against the generic companies, but reversed on Wyeth, allowing the case against Wyeth to proceed. This established an &quot;innovator liability&quot; or &quot;pioneer liability&quot; for pharmaceutical companies. The precedent was not widely followed in California nor in other states. Litigation over the same issues related to metoclopramide also reached the US Supreme Court in Pliva, Inc. v. Mensing, in which the court held in 2011 that generic companies cannot be held liable for information, or the lack of information, on the originator&#x27;s label. As of August 2015 there were about 5000 suits pending across the US and efforts to consolidate them into a class action had failed.

Shortly following the Pliva decision, the FDA proposed a rule change that would allow generics manufacturers to update the label if the originating drug had been withdrawn from the market for reasons other than safety. As of May 2016 the rule, which turned out to be controversial since it would open generic companies to product liability suits, was still not finalized, and the FDA had stated the final rule would be issued in April 2017. The FDA issued a draft guidance for generic companies to update labels in July 2016.

==Society and culture==
===Brand names===
==Veterinary use==
Metoclopramide is commonly used to prevent vomiting in cats and dogs. It is also used as a gut stimulant in rabbits.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421095" start="0" end="14" title="Metoclopramide" label="Metoclopramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="20" end="30" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q943897" start="63" end="76" title="gastroparesis" label="gastroparesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="82" end="113" title="gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="gastroesophageal reflux disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="140" end="148" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="203" end="211" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="282" end="312" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271533" start="546" end="574" title="dopamine-receptor antagonist" label="dopamine-receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429522" start="591" end="601" title="prokinetic" label="prokinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="721" end="739" title="generic medication" label="generic medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="754" end="814" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="1065" end="1071" title="uremia" label="uremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="1073" end="1091" title="Acute radiation syndrome" label="radiation sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="1093" end="1099" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="1119" end="1131" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="1133" end="1138" title="Childbirth" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="1140" end="1149" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="1155" end="1165" title="vomiting" label="emetogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q391556" start="1349" end="1371" title="hyperemesis gravidarum" label="hyperemesis gravidarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068134" start="1380" end="1412" title="nausea and vomiting of pregnancy" label="nausea and vomiting of pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133847" start="1604" end="1651" title="paracetamol/metoclopramide" label="in combination with paracetamol (acetaminophen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="1675" end="1682" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q943897" start="1740" end="1753" title="gastroparesis" label="gastroparesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="1904" end="1935" title="gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="gastroesophageal reflux disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="1995" end="2017" title="lactation" label="breast milk production"/>
<link wikidata="Q536269" start="2521" end="2537" title="pheochromocytoma" label="pheochromocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="2573" end="2597" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="2702" end="2721" title="clinical depression" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="2993" end="3018" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778788" start="3657" end="3669" title="cohort study" label="cohort study"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="3799" end="3822" title="congenital disorder" label="congenital malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128476" start="3825" end="3841" title="birth mass" label="low birth weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="3843" end="3856" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781245" start="3861" end="3880" title="perinatal mortality" label="perinatal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="3985" end="3996" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="4132" end="4163" title="gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="gastroesophageal reflux disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="4338" end="4359" title="adverse drug reaction" label="adverse drug reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="4429" end="4438" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428695" start="4445" end="4459" title="focal dystonia" label="focal dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4485" end="4497" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="4499" end="4510" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433936" start="4512" end="4531" title="hyperprolactinaemia" label="hyperprolactinaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278515" start="4543" end="4555" title="galactorrhea" label="galactorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385411" start="4571" end="4593" title="Extrapyramidal symptoms" label="extrapyramidal effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333327" start="4602" end="4619" title="oculogyric crisis" label="oculogyric crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608695" start="4682" end="4699" title="movement disorder" label="movement disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q879952" start="5238" end="5255" title="black box warning" label="black box warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q415026" start="5380" end="5392" title="benzatropine" label="benzatropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413486" start="5394" end="5409" title="diphenhydramine" label="diphenhydramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991856" start="5411" end="5426" title="trihexyphenidyl" label="trihexyphenidyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q268997" start="5431" end="5443" title="procyclidine" label="procyclidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413486" start="5500" end="5515" title="diphenhydramine" label="diphenhydramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="5531" end="5545" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="5696" end="5705" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q396013" start="6461" end="6476" title="Agranulocytosis" label="Agranulocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598909" start="6478" end="6506" title="supraventricular tachycardia" label="supraventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640860" start="6508" end="6526" title="hyperaldosteronism" label="hyperaldosteronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="6528" end="6558" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="6560" end="6569" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="6574" end="6592" title="tardive dyskinesia" label="tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q415496" start="6669" end="6690" title="dopamine receptor" label="dopamine D2 receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="6745" end="6764" title="receptor antagonist" label="receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454515" start="6786" end="6800" title="5-HT3 receptor" label="5-HT3 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027442" start="6812" end="6826" title="5-HT4 receptor" label="5-HT4 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q604896" start="6962" end="6988" title="chemoreceptor trigger zone" label="chemoreceptor trigger zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q238521" start="7089" end="7105" title="5-HT3 antagonist" label="5-HT3 antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940221" start="7225" end="7235" title="muscarinic" label="muscarinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="7849" end="7855" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q417731" start="8093" end="8102" title="benzamide" label="benzamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425295" start="8104" end="8113" title="cisapride" label="cisapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q68566" start="8118" end="8127" title="mosapride" label="mosapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417597" start="8316" end="8328" title="procainamide" label="procainamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422418" start="8378" end="8387" title="sulpiride" label="sulpiride"/>
<link wikidata="Q158205" start="8700" end="8706" title="Sanofi" label="Sanofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q901932" start="8929" end="8934" title="Wyeth" label="Wyeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="9289" end="9320" title="gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="gastroesophageal reflux disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q183130" start="9448" end="9457" title="gastritis" label="gastritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="9632" end="9650" title="tardive dyskinesia" label="tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q879952" start="9982" end="9999" title="black box warning" label="black box warning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11299" end="11321" title="Pliva, Inc. v. Mensing" label="Pliva, Inc. v. Mensing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383615" wikidata="Q939105" url="?curid=383615" title="Pete Yorn">
<text>Peter Joseph Yorn (born July 27, 1974) is an American singer, songwriter, and musician. He first gained international recognition after his debut record, &quot;Musicforthemorningafter&quot;, was released to critical and commercial acclaim in 2001. He is known for playing the bulk of the instruments on his records. &quot;Spin&quot; magazine, in a career retrospective article dated March 26, 2021, recognized Yorn as one of his generation&#x27;s best songwriters. Yorn’s 11th full length album, The Hard Way, was released on August 23, 2024.

==Early life==
Yorn was born in Pompton Plains, New Jersey, and raised Jewish in Montville, New Jersey, the son of Joan, a former school teacher and real estate agent, and Lawrence K. Yorn, a retired dentist and former Captain in the United States Army. Yorn attended Montville Township High School. Yorn graduated from Syracuse University in 1996. His brother Rick is a major talent manager in Hollywood and was responsible for teaching nine-year-old Pete to play the drums. His eldest brother Kevin Yorn is an entertainment lawyer.

Yorn mentions the Nova Scotia-based band Sloan as one with great influence on him, even admitting after seeing them live in 1999, he was so blown away by their talent that he wondered whether it would be worth continuing to even pursue his debut album. Sloan would later tour with Yorn in the US in 2002.

Yorn composed the score for &quot;Me, Myself &amp; Irene&quot; in 2000. His songs &quot;Strange Condition&quot; and &quot;Just Another&quot; appeared in the film.

== Breakthrough ==

=== &quot;musicforthemorningafter&quot; ===
Yorn released his debut LP, entitled &quot;musicforthemorningafter&quot;, on March 27, 2001. It went gold on the strength of the album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;Life on a Chain.&quot; Rolling Stone Magazine named Yorn one of &quot;Ten Bands to Watch in 2001&quot; and gave the album a favorable four-star rating. Yorn and his band Dirty Bird toured for 18 months straight in support of his debut record.

Yorn went on to release the 2003 album &quot;Day I Forgot&quot; which had sold over 275,000 copies in the United States as of 2005 and scored a third radio hit with the song &quot;Come Back Home.&quot; Q Magazine, in its 4 star review, described the record as simply &quot;wonderful&quot;. The record also featured &quot;Crystal Village&quot;, and &quot;Turn of The Century&quot;. The latter was featured in the 2004 film &quot;The Girl Next Door&quot;. On the heels of the extensive &#x27;Day I Forgot&#x27; tour, Yorn released a double live album, &quot;LIVE From New Jersey&quot;, which was recorded at the Community Theater in Morristown, New Jersey.

In 2006, Yorn released his third album, &quot;Nightcrawler&quot; and toured extensively in support of it. He preceded every show with an instore acoustic appearance at an indie record shop in the town he was passing through. All of these instore performances were recorded, thus creating an extensive series of Live EP&#x27;s. (complete list of instore EP&#x27;s below). Nightcrawler was named one of the top 20 records of 2006 by Paste magazine.

=== The Trilogy ===
Pete Yorn&#x27;s third studio release, &quot;Nightcrawler&quot;, completes a conceptual trilogy of sorts, which spans his first three albums (EPs not included); beginning in the morning with the &quot;musicforthemorningafter&quot; LP, continuing through the day with the &quot;Day I Forgot&quot; LP, and arriving at nightfall with the &quot;Nightcrawler&quot; LP.

In September 2006, in an interview with silentuproar.com, Yorn elaborated on his true intentions behind the trilogy, remarking that it was at least partially a conscious trilogy but wasn&#x27;t meant to be taken too seriously: &quot;I didn&#x27;t mean like a &quot;Star Wars&quot; trilogy where it&#x27;s one story at all.&quot; Yorn expressed that the &quot;trilogy&quot; was more of a diary of sorts; a person gaining new life experiences and simply commenting on them in linear order. &quot;So it&#x27;s a sort of continuing analysis of those topics, and the &quot;Nightcrawler&quot; LP would represent a later phase,&quot; Yorn said.

===Subsequent releases===

In 2008, Pete Yorn recorded with Frank Black and released a new song, entitled &quot;American Blues Vol. 1.&quot; A music video was shot for the single, and the song itself was released for free on Yorn&#x27;s official website for a short period of time. Concerning the song, Yorn has said &quot;I wrote American Blues Vol. 1. on the 4th of July after reading the morning paper. It&#x27;s unlike any song I&#x27;ve ever written. I was moved by how much negativity I was reading about and how even groups were boycotting Independence Day because they were so disgusted with the state of our Nation. I was hoping things would improve...they obviously haven&#x27;t yet...but I know they will in time.&quot;

Yorn appears on Canadian artist Matthew Good&#x27;s 2009 album &quot;Vancouver&quot; performing backing vocals.

&quot;Can&#x27;t Hear Anyone,&quot; a song that Yorn wrote during the &quot;Nightcrawler&quot; sessions, was used for a Mercedes-Benz commercial and was released as a digital single on March 31, 2009.

Columbia Records released his Mike Mogis-produced album, entitled &quot;Back and Fourth&quot; on June 23, 2009.

Yorn toured with Coldplay as an opening act through summer 2009 and collaborated with actress/musician Scarlett Johansson to record a project entitled &quot;Break Up&quot;. The album was released on September 15, 2009, and its first single—&quot;Relator&quot;—was released digitally on May 26, 2009. The record has since gone platinum in France.

Yorn released a self-titled album on September 28, 2010. This record was released by Vagrant Records, and produced by Frank Black of The Pixies. It received a favorable 8/10 stars in &quot;Spin&quot; magazine and 4/5 stars in Mojo. He toured North America and Europe in support of this record February 14 − June 12, 2011.

In November 2012, Santa Monica-based radio station KCRW began spinning songs from a new record by a band called The Olms. DJ Jason Bentley has reported that Yorn is indeed a founding member of this group. On January 8, 2013, NPR&#x27;s flagship station KCRW released a track by The Olms titled, &quot;Wanna Feel It.&quot; The Olms&#x27; self-titled debut album was released on June 4, 2013 by the newly relaunched Harvest Records.
On September 15, 2013, Yorn and The Olms performed along with Vampire Weekend at the iTunes Festival in London. An EP was released of the performance in conjunction with a documentary centered around their first tour which premiered on November 12, 2013. Allmusic.com in its 4 star review of The Olms had this to say: &quot;...an excellent album by two guys who have discovered the transformative power that can be derived from collaboration&quot;.

On November 6, 2015 in a statement to fans, Yorn announced that he had signed to Capitol Records and would be releasing his sixth studio album, &quot;ArrangingTime&quot; in early 2016.

In 2018, Yorn once again collaborated with Johansson on a new EP, &quot;Apart&quot;, their first such project since working together on 2009&#x27;s Break Up. In an interview with Forbes, Yorn remarked on how much the album, contrasted with the previous collaboration, provides perspective on how his life changed in the past decade, while Johansson teased a third album presumably to be released in the late 2020s.

On August 9, 2019 Yorn released his seventh solo full-length album &quot;Caretakers&quot; via his new label Shelly Music. It was produced by Pete Yorn and Jackson Phillips of Day Wave. Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave &quot;Caretakers&quot; four stars in his All Music Guide review, calling it &quot;...an appealing blend that sets it apart from most other albums in 2019&quot;. The first single from &quot;Caretakers&quot;, &quot;Calm Down&quot;, reached #2 on the Mediabase AAA radio chart, almost 19 years after his debut single &quot;Life on a Chain&quot; went all the way to #1 and stayed there for 6 weeks back in 2001.

=== &quot;Pete Yorn Live at the Troubadour&quot; ===
&quot;Pete Yorn Live at the Troubadour&quot; was released digitally and on CD via Bandcamp on May 14, 2020.

=== &quot;Pete Yorn: Live at the Fonda&quot; ===
Released on August 29, 2020 &quot;Pete Yorn: Live at the Fonda&quot; is a digital and CD double live release on Bandcamp. The package comes with a concert film shot by director and longtime collaborator Jim Wright (at the same show as the album on August 28, 2009). Covers during the set include Bruce Springsteen&#x27;s &quot;Hungry Heart&quot; and New Order&#x27;s &quot;Bizarre Love Triangle&quot;.

=== &quot;Pete Yorn Sings the Classics&quot; ===
On January 15, 2021, Shelly Records released &quot;Pete Yorn Sings the Classics&quot;, a full-length record of cover songs. It starts with his version of the Pixies &quot;Here Comes Your Man&quot; and ends with the classic &quot;Moon River&quot; (originally recorded in 1961). Liz Phair, Rami Jaffee (Foo Fighters, Wallflowers) and Tim Walker (Minibar) are some of the guest musicians on the 10 song studio album. Yorn made the record with longtime friend and fellow musician/producer Marc &quot;Doc&quot; Dauer. The record was initially released on CD and digital formats through Pete&#x27;s Bandcamp store. Vinyl release is expected for Record Store Day in the spring of 2021. Writer Jim Beviglia at American Songwriter called it an &quot;outstanding new covers album&quot; and added &quot;The affection and care that Yorn holds for the chosen material show up early and often in &quot;Pete Yorn Sings the Classics&quot;.&quot; On January 19, 2021 Pete performed the song &quot;They Don&#x27;t Know&quot; which was written by Kirsty MacColl on The Ellen DeGeneres Show.

Yorn followed this with &quot;Hawaii&quot; in 2022.

== Collaborations ==
Guitarist Peter Buck of the band R.E.M. has made appearances on several Pete Yorn recordings, including instrumentation on the single version of &quot;Strange Condition&quot; and a number of songs from the &quot;Day I Forgot&quot; LP. Yorn has worked with producers R. Walt Vincent, Brad Wood, and Ken Andrews of Failure and Year of the Rabbit, in addition to several other producers including Scott Litt, Butch Walker and Sonic Youth producer Don Fleming.

Yorn has shared bills with the Dave Matthews Band, R.E.M., Crowded House, Foo Fighters, Weezer, Coldplay, The Dixie Chicks, Semisonic, and Sunny Day Real Estate, among others.

Yorn has played at Carnegie Hall on two occasions as part of tributes to Neil Young and Bruce Springsteen. Yorn gave the 2011 commencement address to the Visual and Performing Arts class at his alma mater, Syracuse University.

Yorn can be heard on Guided by Voices&#x27; 2007 Live From Austin Texas album, singing back up and sporadic leads on &quot;Cut Out Witch.&quot; Robert Pollard says after the song that he hopes it &quot;doesn&#x27;t ruin [Yorn&#x27;s] career.&quot;

Yorn&#x27;s song, &quot;Lose You&quot; can be heard just before the ending credits of the episode &quot;Simple Explanation&quot; during Kutner&#x27;s funeral on the Fox show &quot;House&quot;.

Yorn has collaborated twice with actress/singer Scarlett Johansson: first in 2009&#x27;s Break Up and again with 2018&#x27;s Apart. The pair have suggested a third album can be expected after another 10 years.

== Discography ==
===Albums===
===Live albums===
*&quot;Live at the Roxy&quot; (2001) #131 US
*&quot;Live from New Jersey&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Pete Yorn Live at the Troubadour&quot; (2020)
*&quot;Pete Yorn: Live at the Fonda&quot; (2020)
*&quot;Pete Yorn: Live from Philadelphia 11.24.01&quot; (2023)

===EPs===

*&quot;Sunset&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Westerns&quot; (2006)
*&quot;You &amp; Me Acoustic: Live from...&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Live from SoHo&quot; (iTunes-exclusive) (2007)
*&quot;The Demos: Garage Sessions Vol. 1&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Paradise Cove&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Apart&quot; (with Scarlett Johansson) (2018)
*&quot;Ever Fallen in Love&quot; (2021)

===Singles===
===Non-album tracks===
*&quot;Hunter Green&quot; – &quot;Trampoline Records Greatest Hits Vol. 1&quot;
*&quot;Suspicious Minds&quot; (Dusk Version) – &quot;Suspicious Minds&quot; CD Single
*&quot;Suspicious Minds&quot; (Dawn Version) – &quot;Suspicious Minds&quot; CD Single
*&quot;I Feel Good Again&quot; – &quot;Trampoline Records Greatest Hits Vol. 2&quot; and &quot;Concert Series Volume 1&quot;
*&quot;Do They Know It&#x27;s Christmas?&quot; – &quot;The Year They Recalled Santa Claus&quot;
*&quot;I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend&quot; – &quot;We&#x27;re a Happy Family: A Tribute to the Ramones&quot;
*&quot;Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn&#x27;t&#x27;ve)&quot; (Buzzcocks cover) – &quot;Shrek 2&quot; soundtrack 
*&quot;Red Right Hand&quot; – &quot;Hellboy&quot; soundtrack
*&quot;Just My Imagination (Running Away with Me)&quot; – &quot;Just like Heaven&quot; soundtrack
*&quot;Skinny, Mean Man&quot; – Say Anything&#x27;s &quot;In Defense of the Genre&quot;
*&quot;It Never Rains in Southern California&quot; &quot;Stuck on You&quot; soundtrack
*&quot;Undercover&quot; – &quot;Spider-Man&quot; soundtrack
*&quot;I Belong&quot; – &quot;Open Season&quot; soundtrack
*&quot;Where the Streets Have No Name,&quot; &quot;Alice in My Fantasies,&quot; &quot;I Feel Good Again,&quot; and &quot;Chimes of Freedom&quot; – &quot;Axis of Justice: Concert Series Volume 1&quot;
*&quot;Splendid Isolation&quot; – &quot;Enjoy Every Sandwich: Songs of Warren Zevon&quot;

==Videography==
*&quot;June&quot; (2001), directed by Steven Orrit
*&quot;For Nancy (&#x27;Cos It Already Is),&quot; directed by Malik Sayeed
*&quot;Life on a Chain&quot; (2001), directed by Samuel Bayer
*&quot;Strange Condition&quot; (2002), directed by Marcos Siega
*&quot;Come Back Home&quot; (2004), directed by AV Club
*&quot;Crystal Village&quot; (2004), directed by AV Club
*&quot;For Us&quot; (2006), directed by Robert Hales
*&quot;American Blues Vol. 1 (2009)
*&quot;Sans Fear&quot; (2010), directed by Eric Ernest Johnson
*&quot;Lost Weekend&quot; (2016)

==Backing band==
Yorn&#x27;s most recent touring band was composed of members of the indie dream-pop band Day Wave. *Jackson Phillips (synth and guitar) &amp; Henry Moser (bass) + previous bandmates, Joe Kennedy (guitar and keyboards) and Malcolm Cross (drums)
Previous bands have included…
*Joe Kennedy – piano, keyboards, and harmonica
*Scott Seiver – drums
*John Spiker – bass guitar

Yorn&#x27;s Back &amp; Fourth touring band was:
*Max Goldblatt – tambourine
*Joe Kennedy – piano, keyboards, and harmonica
*Mark Noseworthy – guitar
*Jonny Polonsky – guitar and mandolin
*Scott Seiver – drums
*Zak Schaffer – bass guitar

Pete Yorn&#x27;s Nightcrawler era touring band was Minibar, hailing from Britain and including the following members:
*Malcolm Cross – drums
*Sid Jordan – bass guitar and backing vocals
*Joe Kennedy – piano, guitar, and backing vocals (not part of Minibar)
*Simon Petty – backing vocals and guitar
*Tim Walker – guitars

Pete Yorn&#x27;s former backing band went by the name Dirty Bird and includes the following members:
*Luke Adams – drums
*Terry Borden – bass guitar and backing vocals
*Jason Johnson – guitar
*Joe Kennedy – piano, guitar, backing vocals
*R. Walt Vincent – bass guitar
*Scot Coogan – drums

Pete Yorn&#x27;s &quot;eternal bandmates&quot;:
*Joe Kennedy – piano, guitar, and backing vocals
*WAZ – bass guitar, guitar, and back vocals
*Rick Yorn – drums

==Acting==
Yorn appeared in a supporting role as “Acie Kirby” in &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; in 2023.

==References==
==External links==
*
*
* Pete Yorn Interview on Silent Uproar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q939105" start="0" end="17" title="Pete Yorn" label="Peter Joseph Yorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942587" start="160" end="183" title="Musicforthemorningafter" label="Musicforthemorningafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="316" end="341" title="Spin (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49604502" start="576" end="602" title="Pompton Plains, New Jersey" label="Pompton Plains, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483031" start="625" end="646" title="Montville, New Jersey" label="Montville, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705761" start="812" end="842" title="Montville Township High School" label="Montville Township High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="864" end="883" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751414" start="1039" end="1049" title="Kevin Yorn" label="Kevin Yorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858034" start="1120" end="1125" title="Sloan (band)" label="Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="1403" end="1408" title="Film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q844506" start="1419" end="1441" title="Me, Myself &amp;amp; Irene" label="Me, Myself &amp;amp; Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621360" start="1473" end="1490" title="Strange Condition" label="Strange Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942587" start="1656" end="1679" title="musicforthemorningafter" label="musicforthemorningafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942587" start="1774" end="1789" title="Life on a Chain" label="Life on a Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1797" end="1810" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242835" start="2063" end="2075" title="Day I Forgot" label="Day I Forgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242835" start="2198" end="2212" title="Come Back Home (Pete Yorn song)" label="Come Back Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q740020" start="2446" end="2464" title="The Girl Next Door (2004 film)" label="The Girl Next Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957929" start="2720" end="2732" title="Nightcrawler (album)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957929" start="3187" end="3199" title="Nightcrawler (album)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942587" start="3343" end="3366" title="musicforthemorningafter" label="musicforthemorningafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242835" start="3419" end="3431" title="Day I Forgot" label="Day I Forgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957929" start="3477" end="3501" title="Nightcrawler (album)" label="&amp;quot;Nightcrawler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q359521" start="4910" end="4922" title="Matthew Good" label="Matthew Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957929" start="5067" end="5079" title="Nightcrawler (album)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839209" start="5265" end="5280" title="Back and Fourth (Pete Yorn album)" label="Back and Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="5409" end="5427" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617928" start="5463" end="5471" title="Break Up (Scarlett Johansson &amp;amp; Pete Yorn album)" label="Break Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424287" start="5552" end="5559" title="Relator (Pete Yorn and Scarlett Johansson song)" label="Relator"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059576" start="6088" end="6096" title="The Olms" label="The Olms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324712" start="6390" end="6405" title="Harvest Records" label="Harvest Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372388" start="7007" end="7020" title="ArrangingTime" label="ArrangingTime"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="7086" end="7095" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7109" end="7126" title="Apart (album by Peter Yorn and Scarlett Johansson)" label="&amp;quot;Apart&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617928" start="7191" end="7199" title="Break Up (album)" label="Break Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374456" start="7532" end="7542" title="Caretakers (album)" label="Caretakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857900" start="7634" end="7642" title="Day Wave" label="Day Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="7644" end="7667" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="7714" end="7729" title="All Music Guide" label="All Music Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="8217" end="8225" title="Bandcamp" label="Bandcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="8405" end="8413" title="Bandcamp" label="Bandcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="8589" end="8606" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59504" start="8620" end="8632" title="Hungry Heart" label="Hungry Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="8643" end="8652" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567279" start="8666" end="8687" title="Bizarre Love Triangle" label="Bizarre Love Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q119040785" start="8796" end="8824" title="Pete Yorn Sings the Classics" label="Pete Yorn Sings the Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="8903" end="8909" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324940" start="8916" end="8935" title="Here Comes Your Man" label="Here Comes Your Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q832948" start="8974" end="8984" title="Moon River" label="Moon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q258761" start="9022" end="9031" title="Liz Phair" label="Liz Phair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073165" start="9033" end="9044" title="Rami Jaffee" label="Rami Jaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="9046" end="9058" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q643005" start="9060" end="9071" title="The Wallflowers" label="Wallflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122853" start="9077" end="9087" title="Tom Walker (singer)" label="Tim Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783694" start="9725" end="9751" title="They Don&amp;#x27;t Know (Kirsty MacColl song)" label="They Don&amp;#x27;t Know&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q444671" start="9773" end="9787" title="Kirsty MacColl" label="Kirsty MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q839150" start="9791" end="9815" title="The Ellen DeGeneres Show" label="The Ellen DeGeneres Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q119041064" start="9848" end="9854" title="Hawaii (Pete Yorn album)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q346801" start="9902" end="9912" title="Peter Buck" label="Peter Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="9925" end="9931" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q7621360" start="10043" end="10060" title="Strange Condition" label="Strange Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242835" start="10104" end="10116" title="Day I Forgot" label="Day I Forgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274114" start="10158" end="10173" title="R. Walt Vincent" label="R. Walt Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954369" start="10175" end="10184" title="Brad Wood" label="Brad Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387238" start="10190" end="10201" title="Ken Andrews" label="Ken Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701586" start="10205" end="10212" title="Failure (band)" label="Failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q844723" start="10217" end="10235" title="Rabbit (zodiac)" label="Year of the Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="10286" end="10296" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q589781" start="10298" end="10310" title="Butch Walker" label="Butch Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="10315" end="10326" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292615" start="10336" end="10347" title="Don Fleming (musician)" label="Don Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="10381" end="10399" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="10401" end="10407" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1128045" start="10409" end="10422" title="Crowded House" label="Crowded House"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="10424" end="10436" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="10438" end="10444" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="10446" end="10454" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="10456" end="10472" title="The Dixie Chicks" label="The Dixie Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572584" start="10474" end="10483" title="Semisonic" label="Semisonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361543" start="10489" end="10510" title="Sunny Day Real Estate" label="Sunny Day Real Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472033" start="10776" end="10792" title="Guided by Voices" label="Guided by Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379531" start="10899" end="10913" title="Robert Pollard" label="Robert Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239744" start="11108" end="11126" title="Simple Explanation" label="Simple Explanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258231" start="11140" end="11161" title="Lawrence Kutner (House)" label="Kutner&amp;#x27;s funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="11169" end="11172" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="11184" end="11189" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656985" start="11465" end="11481" title="Live at the Roxy (Pete Yorn album)" label="Live at the Roxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657292" start="11510" end="11530" title="Live from New Jersey" label="Live from New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="12000" end="12018" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449842" start="12192" end="12208" title="Suspicious Minds" label="Suspicious Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830621" start="12452" end="12475" title="Concert Series Volume 1" label="Concert Series Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188494" start="12489" end="12522" title="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?" label="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="12560" end="12571" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24610" start="12585" end="12610" title="I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend" label="I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756096" start="12625" end="12650" title="We&amp;#x27;re a Happy Family" label="We&amp;#x27;re a Happy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="12669" end="12676" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416858" start="12690" end="12751" title="Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn&amp;#x27;t&amp;#x27;ve)" label="Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn&amp;#x27;t&amp;#x27;ve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="12759" end="12768" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="12784" end="12791" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048118" start="12817" end="12831" title="Red Right Hand" label="Red Right Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q461540" start="12846" end="12853" title="Hellboy (2004 film)" label="Hellboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198962" start="12878" end="12920" title="Just My Imagination (Running Away with Me)" label="Just My Imagination (Running Away with Me)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75539" start="12935" end="12951" title="Just like Heaven (2005 film)" label="Just like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299211" start="13001" end="13013" title="Say Anything (band)" label="Say Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149613" start="13027" end="13050" title="In Defense of the Genre" label="In Defense of the Genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267183" start="13064" end="13101" title="It Never Rains in Southern California" label="It Never Rains in Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q301077" start="13114" end="13126" title="Stuck on You (film)" label="Stuck on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q484442" start="13176" end="13186" title="Spider-Man (2002 film)" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q213012" start="13234" end="13245" title="Open Season (2006 film)" label="Open Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290594" start="13270" end="13300" title="Where the Streets Have No Name" label="Where the Streets Have No Name"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13416" end="13456" title="Axis of Justice: Concert Series Volume 1" label="Axis of Justice: Concert Series Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13503" end="13546" title="Enjoy Every Sandwich: Songs of Warren Zevon" label="Enjoy Every Sandwich: Songs of Warren Zevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q512419" start="13745" end="13757" title="Samuel Bayer" label="Samuel Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="14427" end="14432" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="14434" end="14443" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="14449" end="14458" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="14475" end="14480" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="14496" end="14507" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="14574" end="14584" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="14600" end="14605" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="14607" end="14616" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="14622" end="14631" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="14651" end="14657" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="14687" end="14695" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="14712" end="14717" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="14734" end="14745" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="14918" end="14932" title="Backing vocalist" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="15590" end="15616" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383619" wikidata="Q3709624" url="?curid=383619" title="Webert Sicot">
<text>Webert Sicot (1930 – February 1985) was a Haitian saxophone player, composer and band leader. He is recognized as one of the creators of &quot;compas&quot; also known as &quot;compas direct&quot;, a style of Haitian music born in the 1950s that he named cadence rampa after he left Nemours&#x27; band to differentiate himself in 1962 in the spirit of competition.

== Career ==
Sicot was born in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, in 1930. He took his first musical lessons from Augustin Bruno. He made his debut as professional with Claudin Toussaint&#x27;s Jazz Capois. He also worked with the groups Jazz des Jeunes and the Saieh Orchestra, in the second half or the 1950s.

He founded with Nemours Jean-Baptiste the Conjunto Internacional and took part in the Citadelle orchestra and Casino Internacional Band. With Jean-Baptiste, he created the compas direct, a variation of the Haitian méringue. In 1961 he commenced a solo career and became one of the pioneers of cadence rampa. He played several instruments as trumpet, bass, piano and drums. Because of his frequent Caribbean tours with his brother Raymond in the Caribbean, cadence became very popular in Dominica and the French Antilles of Guadeloupe and Martinique.

Sicot died in February 1985 and is considered as one of the most influentials band leaders in Haitian popular music.

== References ==
==See also==
*Music of Haiti
*Coronto International</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3709624" start="0" end="12" title="Webert Sicot" label="Webert Sicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="42" end="47" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726026" start="143" end="149" title="compas" label="compas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191747" start="254" end="267" title="cadence rampa" label="cadence rampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="396" end="410" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709714" start="682" end="703" title="Nemours Jean-Baptiste" label="Nemours Jean-Baptiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333303" start="880" end="888" title="méringue" label="méringue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191747" start="959" end="972" title="cadence rampa" label="cadence rampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="1153" end="1161" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022" start="1170" end="1185" title="French Antilles" label="French Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="1189" end="1199" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="1204" end="1214" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710513" start="1366" end="1380" title="Music of Haiti" label="Music of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172326" start="1382" end="1403" title="Coronto International" label="Coronto International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383625" wikidata="Q4934683" url="?curid=383625" title="Bobbio Jerome">
<text>The Bobbio Jerome (Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana MS S. 45. sup.) is an early seventh-century manuscript copy of the &quot;Commentary on Isaiah&quot; attributed to St. Jerome. The manuscript has 156 pages and measures 235 by 215 mm. It is a palimpsest that previously contained a sixth-century copy of the Gothic translation of the Bible by Ulfilas written in Gothic uncial, with Rustic capitals as a display script.

The illumination of the manuscript consists of a large initial N on page two of the manuscript and several other minor initials. The N is as large as nine lines of the main text. It is written in black ink and decorated by whorl and cross patterns and pelta motifs. There are touches of green and orange. The cross bar is formed, in part, by two fish bent to form an S curve. The form of the N is comparable to the initial INI monogram of the opening illumination of the Gospel of Mark found in a fragmentary Gospel Book from Durham Cathedral.

On page two there is an inscription connecting the manuscript to Atalanus, who was St. Columbanus&#x27;s successor as abbot of the monastery at Bobbio. Atalanus died in 622. If this inscription is accepted as authentic, then this manuscript was produced before 622, making its initial N one of the earliest Insular style initials, preceding even the Cathach of St. Columba.

This initial can be compared with the few decorated ones in Gregory the Great, Pastoral Care (Troyes, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS 504), from Rome, and about twenty years older.

==References==
* Alexander, J. J. G. &quot;Insular manuscripts, 6th to the 9th century&quot;. Survey of manuscripts illuminated in the British Isles; v. 1. London : H. Miller, 1978.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4934683" start="4" end="17" title="Bobbio Jerome" label="Bobbio Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q815611" start="26" end="47" title="Biblioteca Ambrosiana" label="Biblioteca Ambrosiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="92" end="102" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121" end="141" title="Commentary on Isaiah" label="Commentary on Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="166" end="172" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q274076" start="239" end="249" title="palimpsest" label="palimpsest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="304" end="310" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="330" end="335" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q107317" start="339" end="346" title="Ulfilas" label="Ulfilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="365" end="371" title="uncial" label="uncial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034681" start="378" end="393" title="Rustic capitals" label="Rustic capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="887" end="901" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320615" start="913" end="958" title="Durham Cathedral Library A. II. 10. Gospel Book Fragment" label="fragmentary Gospel Book from Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q593475" start="1026" end="1034" title="Saint Attala" label="Atalanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319653" start="1048" end="1058" title="Columbanus" label="Columbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333844" start="1092" end="1111" title="Bobbio Abbey" label="monastery at Bobbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="1268" end="1275" title="insular art" label="Insular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249203" start="1311" end="1333" title="Cathach of St. Columba" label="Cathach of St. Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143043" start="1396" end="1470" title="Gregory the Great, Pastoral Care (Troyes, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS 504)" label="Gregory the Great, Pastoral Care (Troyes, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS 504)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383626" wikidata="Q983452" url="?curid=383626" title="Guy Sebastian">
<text>Guy Theodore Sebastian (born 26 October 1981) is an Australian singer who rose to fame after winning the first season of &quot;Australian Idol&quot;, in 2003. Born in Malaysia and raised in Adelaide, Australia, Sebastian has since released ten top ten albums, including three number ones. The first seven all gained either platinum or multi-platinum certification. He has also achieved twenty three top twenty singles, with fourteen of them, reaching the top ten, including six number ones. He is the only Australian male artist in Australian chart history to achieve six number one singles, and places third overall for all Australian acts. Ten of his singles have been certified multi-platinum, including the 13× platinum &quot;Battle Scars&quot;. His debut single &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot; was the highest selling song in Australia in the decade 2000 to 2009. With 69 platinum and seven gold certifications and combined album and single sales of over five million in Australia, he has the highest certifications and sales of any &quot;Australian Idol&quot; contestant.

Sebastian has worked with a number of notable American musicians, including Brian McKnight, Robin Thicke, Steve Cropper, John Mayer, Jordin Sparks, Eve and Lupe Fiasco. &quot;Battle Scars&quot;, a collaboration with Fiasco, spent 20 weeks on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart, peaking at number 71 and achieved platinum certification. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; also reached number two in Norway and New Zealand. Sebastian has reached the top ten in New Zealand with an album and six singles, including two number ones, and gained six platinum and three gold certifications there.&lt;ref name=&quot;Latest Gold/Platinum Singles&quot;&gt;Latest Gold/Platinum Singles. RadioScope New Zealand. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2012.&lt;/ref&gt; In 2015, he represented Australia in its debut in the Eurovision Song Contest with the song &quot;Tonight Again&quot;, finishing in fifth place.

Throughout his career, Sebastian has received 34 ARIA Award nominations, winning seven including Best Pop Release and Best Live Act. Other awards include the APRA Urban Work of the Year, the [V] Oz Artist of the Year, Urban Music Awards for Best Male Artist and Best R&amp;B Album, and an International Songwriting Competition award for &quot;Battle Scars&quot;. Sebastian has sung at many notable events, including performing for Pope Benedict XVI, Oprah Winfrey and Queen Elizabeth II. Sebastian was previously an ambassador for World Vision Australia and the Australian Red Cross. Together with his spouse Jules, Sebastian created &quot;The Sebastian Foundation.&quot; Sebastian was made a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in the 2019 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours in recognition of his significant service to music and charity. He was a judge on Australia&#x27;s &quot;The X Factor&quot; from 2010 to 2012 and again from 2015 to 2016, and coach on &quot;The Voice Australia&quot; from 2019 to 2024. In 2021, Sebastian became &quot;The Voice&quot;&#x27;s senior coach after Delta Goodrem&#x27;s departure.

==Early life==
Guy Theodore Sebastian was born in Klang, Selangor, on 26 October 1981. His father, Ivan Sebastian, was born in Malaysia and is of Sri Lankan Tamil descent with colonial Portuguese roots, while his mother Nellie is an ethnic Eurasian with English and Portuguese ancestry and was raised in Kanpur, India. They met while Ivan was studying geology in India, and married a year later.

Sebastian is the second of four sons, his older brother Ollie was born in India, and his younger brothers Chris and Jeremy were born in Australia. His family originally migrated to Melbourne when Sebastian was six. Four years later at the age of ten, his family migrated to Adelaide, presumably due to Ivan&#x27;s work as a geologist at the time. This was where Sebastian spent his teenage years and began expanding his musical career.

As a child, Sebastian took violin lessons; he would later learn to play guitar, drums and piano, although he has had no formal training in these other musical instruments. After attending St Paul&#x27;s College, Gilles Plains in 1991, Sebastian attended King&#x27;s Baptist Grammar School after his family moved to Golden Grove. He then began studies in medical radiation at the University of South Australia, but left to pursue a career in music. He taught vocals at Temple Christian College and other high schools while also working as a recording engineer and studying music technology at the University of Adelaide&#x27;s Elder Conservatorium.

Sebastian, former member of the Planetshakers band from 2002 to 2005, was a worship leader, sang background vocals, recording albums for Planetshakers Church at Paradise Community Church conferences, and went on to win the first &quot;Australian Idol&quot; and become a massive star in the country. He attended &quot;Paradise Community Church&quot;, an Assemblies of God church and one of the largest churches in Australia, and he became one of their main worship singers, after winning &quot;Australian Idol&quot; he recorded two albums, &quot;Adore&quot; in 2004 and &quot;Set Me Free&quot; in 2008.

==Recording career==

===2003–2004: &quot;Australian Idol&quot; and &quot;Just as I Am&quot;===
In May 2003, Sebastian successfully auditioned for &quot;Australian Idol&quot;, singing Stevie Wonder&#x27;s &quot;Ribbon in the Sky&quot;. He progressed through the &quot;Idol&quot; series, establishing a strong fanbase and praise from the judges, who often made reference to his afro hairstyle which became a focal point of his image. He was declared the winner on 19 November 2003, and gained a recording contract with BMG, which later merged with Sony. Following his &quot;Idol&quot; win Sebastian was required to record his debut album in six days, but despite this time restriction the album included three songs co-written by him. He then travelled to the UK to compete in &quot;World Idol&quot;. Although he impressed the judges, with several suggesting he could win the competition, he finished seventh.

Sebastian&#x27;s winner&#x27;s single &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot; debuted at number one and was the highest selling single in Australia in 2003, reaching 5× platinum certification. In 2010 it was named the highest selling song of the decade 2000 to 2009, ahead of Anthony Callea&#x27;s &quot;The Prayer&quot;. &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot; held the record for being the highest selling single ever released by an Australian act until 2011. Sebastian&#x27;s debut album &quot;Just as I Am&quot; was released in December 2003 and also achieved number one. Its first week sales of 163,711 units are the second highest one week sales in Australian chart history, the highest for an Australian act. It eventually reached sales just short of 7× platinum, and is the highest selling album ever released by an Australian &quot;Idol&quot; contestant. &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot; also reached number one in Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, Indonesia and New Zealand. &quot;Just as I Am&quot; reached number three and double platinum certification in New Zealand, with &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot; achieving platinum certification there. The second single &quot;All I Need Is You&quot; reached number one and platinum in Australia, and peaked at number five in New Zealand. In early 2004 Sebastian appeared at the Asian MTV Awards, was a guest judge on &quot;New Zealand Idol&quot; and performed on &quot;Indonesian Idol&quot;. After a promotional trip to Malaysia in April he travelled to Europe and the US to write for his next album, performing on &quot;American Idol&quot; while in the US.

===2004–2007: &quot;Beautiful Life&quot; and &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot;===
&quot;Beautiful Life&quot;, Sebastian&#x27;s second album, had a more R&amp;B edge to it and included songs he co-wrote with Robin Thicke and Brian McKnight and &quot;Forever with You&quot;, a duet with American R&amp;B singer Mýa. The lead single &quot;Out with My Baby&quot; debuted at number one in October 2004, and gained platinum certification. Sebastian performed at the 2004 ARIA Music Awards where he received the award for the Highest Selling Single for &quot;Angels Brought Me Here&quot;, and the Channel V Oz Artist of the Year Award. He was also nominated for Highest Selling Album for &quot;Just as I Am&quot;. &quot;Beautiful Life&quot; peaked at number two and was also certified platinum. Sebastian embarked on a national tour in November, with a second stage from March to June 2005. Sebastian performed at the 20th Anniversary SAFM Sky Show in Adelaide in front of approximately 150,000 people along with Slinkee Minx, one of the largest open-air concerts held in Australia in 2005. Two further singles were released from the album, &quot;Kryptonite&quot; which peaked at number fifteen, and &quot;Oh Oh&quot; at number eleven. In 2005 Sebastian received awards for Favourite Video, Favourite Music Artist, and Favourite Aussie at the Nickelodeon Kid&#x27;s Choice Awards, and a MTV Video Music Award for &quot;Out with my Baby&quot;. He also received a Highest Selling Album ARIA Award nomination for &quot;Beautiful Life&quot;, and was named as a state finalist in the Young Australian of the Year Awards.

Between May and August 2006, Sebastian appeared as a mentor on the inaugural &quot;It Takes Two&quot;, in which performers from non-musical fields are teamed with professional singers to perform a duet each week. Sebastian&#x27;s partner was three-time Australian Olympic swimmer Sarah Ryan and they finished second. During this period Sebastian also recorded his third album &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot; which was a mix of genres including pop, R&amp;B, soul, pop rock and jazz and mainly co-written with Australian musicians. The lead single &quot;Taller, Stronger, Better&quot; debuted at number three in August 2006, and achieved gold certification. The album peaked at number four and was certified platinum. The second single &quot;Elevator Love&quot; reached number 11 and gold certification. The video featured Jennifer Hawkins as his love interest. Sebastian received an award for most played Urban work for &quot;Oh Oh&quot; at the 2006 APRA Music Awards. &quot;Oh Oh&quot; was also awarded Best Video and Sebastian named Best Male Artist at the Urban Music Awards, and for the second year in succession he received the Fav Aussie award at the Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards. &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot;&#x27;s third single &quot;Cover on My Heart&quot; was released in August 2007, peaking at number thirty two on the ARIA Singles Chart. &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot; was named Best Album at the 2007 Urban Music Awards and Most Popular Album at the Dolly Teen Choice Awards.

===2007–2008: &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; and &quot;Tour&quot;===
In early 2007 it had been announced Sebastian would be recording a tribute album of soul classics in Memphis, Tennessee, with Stax musicians who played on and wrote some of the original songs. The album was recorded at Ardent Studios, Memphis in August 2007, with Steve Cropper, Donald &#x27;Duck&#x27; Dunn, and Steve Potts (a.k.a. The MGs), with Lester Snell on keyboards. Cropper also co-produced the album with Sebastian, which was recorded on analogue tape live in the studio. Sebastian wrote about his time in Memphis in a series of blogs for Australian newspapers, &quot;I started recording four days ago with the band members from Booker T and the MGs. And in the four days, we cut 15 tracks. It&#x27;s been such a great experience to watch these guys work. I mean, they are mostly in their late 60s and have such a wealth of experience.&quot; Cropper later spoke on AllMemphisMusic, an online Memphis radio station, &quot;This kid came into Memphis, and just blew everybody&#x27;s socks off. [...] he just took us by storm.&quot; Shortly after Sebastian&#x27;s return to Australia it was announced that The MGs would tour Australia with him in early 2008. &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; debuted at number three in November 2007, and was the seventh highest selling Australian artist album of the year. The critically acclaimed album reached double platinum certification in 2008. &quot;Memphis Flyer&quot;, a weekly alternative newspaper serving the Memphis area wrote a series of articles about Sebastian recording with The MGs. AllMemphisMusic, which specialises in playing music originating from Memphis, began playing &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; songs in late December 2007. They also had two special programs featuring songs from the album and interviews with some of the people involved in recording it.

The MGs came to Australia in February 2008 to be Sebastian&#x27;s backing band for his national tour. He spoke on radio about what it felt like fronting the MGs, &quot;There were so many moments when I just had to take a step back and think &#x27;This is unbelievable&#x27;. Like the history that is behind me, and I&#x27;m singing these songs. You know they start playing Dock of the Bay, and the guys that played it are on the stage. You know the guy who wrote the song with Otis Redding is playing guitar.&quot; Cropper later spoke on AllMemphisMusic, &quot;hearing him singing our music, which was born and raised and produced and recorded in Memphis, Tennessee. [...] It just filled our hearts.&quot; One of the Melbourne concerts was filmed for a live DVD/CD titled &quot;The Memphis Tour&quot;. Sebastian was nominated for a Helpmann Award for Best Performance in an Australian Contemporary Concert for &quot;The Memphis Tour&quot;, and was awarded two Australian Club Entertainment Awards, best Original Music Performer and Outstanding Club Performer of the Year. &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; received a nomination for Highest Selling Album at the 2008 ARIA Awards, his third album to be nominated in this ARIA Awards category. He travelled to the US several times after &quot;The Memphis Tour&quot; to write for his fifth album, spending time with Cropper in Nashville on these trips.

===2008–2010: &quot;Like It Like That&quot;===
In 2008 Sebastian was signed to release an album in the US, and in November he returned to America to work on it. He recorded songs with John Mayer&#x27;s band, and John Mayer himself played guitar and sang backing vocals on three of the tracks. He moved to New York in early 2009 to prepare for the release of the US album which was a mix of Memphis soul covers and original songs. He performed showcases at the SXSW Music Festival in Austin Texas, and a residency at the Drom in New York. His song &quot;Like It Like That&quot; was chosen as the theme song for the NBC network&#x27;s summer promotional campaign. The US release was then delayed due to restructuring of Victor Records, but it was later reaffirmed the album would be released in 2010. &quot;Like It Like That&quot;, the title track of Sebastian&#x27;s fifth album, was released in Australia in August 2009 and reached number one. It was the highest selling Australian artist song in 2009, and achieved 4× platinum certification. &quot;Like It Like That&quot;, an original soul album with all songs written or co-written by Sebastian, was released in October 2009. It reached number six and was certified platinum.

&quot;Art of Love&quot;, a duet with Jordin Sparks was released as the second single. It peaked at number eight and reached double platinum certification. It also charted at number seven in New Zealand, gaining gold certification there. Two further singles, &quot;All to Myself&quot; and &quot;Never Hold You Down&quot;, did not chart in the ARIA top 50. Sebastian toured in Australia during February 2010 and again in June and July. The US album, now identical to the Australian album, was given limited release on the Red Ink label in June 2010, with distribution via iTunes and Barnes &amp; Noble stores. He was chosen as a judge on the 2010 series of Australia&#x27;s The X-Factor, and to fulfil commitments to X-Factor and also the release of his album in America Sebastian divided his time between Australia and the US during the show. He toured the US West Coast between July and September, including guest performances singing &quot;Art of Love&quot; with Sparks at three of her &quot;Battlefield Tour&quot; concerts, and also played support for Chicago at a concert in Oregon. Sebastian was nominated for six ARIA Music Awards for &quot;Like It Like That&quot;. He received nominations for Best Pop Release, Best Male Artist, Most Popular Australian Album and Most Popular Australian Artist, with &quot;Like It Like That&quot; and &quot;Art of Love&quot; receiving nominations for Most Popular Single.

===2010–2011: &quot;The X Factor&quot; and &quot;Twenty Ten&quot;===

In 2010 Sebastian was selected as a judge on the Australian series of &quot;The X Factor&quot;. It is a talent competition where the judges also mentor the contestants. The contestants are selected by all the judges at the auditions, and the chosen acts are divided into four categories, Boys, Girls, Over 25s and Groups. Each judge is given a category and has to reduce their acts to three. The three acts from each category then compete in the live shows with continuing help from their mentors. Sebastian was given Groups in 2010, and was assisted in choosing his final three acts by Rai Thistlethwayte, lead singer of Thirsty Merc, Snoop Dogg and Usher. Sebastian released a retrospective album titled &quot;Twenty Ten&quot; in November 2010. The album reached number four on the ARIA Album Chart. It spent twelve weeks in the top ten and was the fifth highest selling Australian artist album of 2010. It was certified double platinum in 2014. It also reached number twenty four on the New Zealand Albums Chart. The album was a two disc release. The first disc had 18 songs from his previous albums and two new tracks, with the second disc containing acoustic versions of ten of the songs. &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot; featuring US rapper Eve, was released as the only single. The dance-driven electro R&amp;B song was a departure from Sebastian&#x27;s previous pop, R&amp;B and soul releases. Eve performed the song with Sebastian on &quot;The X Factor&quot; Grand Final. &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot; reached number one and 5× platinum certification in Australia, and number one and platinum in New Zealand.

With the release of &quot;Twenty Ten&quot; Sebastian had completed the terms of his original contract with Sony, but re-signed with them for another long-term contract. He supported Boyzone on their 2011 UK tour, and Lionel Richie on his Australian and New Zealand tour. They re-recorded Richie&#x27;s 1983 single &quot;All Night Long&quot; to raise money for Australian and New Zealand flood and earthquake relief. The track was produced by RedOne. Richie and Sebastian performed the song together at most of the concerts on the Australian leg of the tour. It peaked at number twelve in New Zealand and number twenty six in Australia. Sebastian received the 2011 Australian Club Entertainment Award for best Original Music Performer, and a Mo Award for Rock Performer of the Year. He also won the Highest Selling Single ARIA Award for &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot;, and received nominations for Single of the Year, Best Pop Release and Most Popular Australian Artist. Sebastian continued as a judge on the 2011 &quot;The X Factor&quot;. He mentored the Boys and was assisted in choosing his final three by Wynter Gordon and Beyoncé. Reece Mastin who was in his group was the winner.

===2011–2013: &quot;Armageddon&quot;===

In November 2011 &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry Be Happy&quot;, a pop song Sebastian wrote after encountering an angry motorist in Los Angeles, was released as the lead single of his seventh album &quot;Armageddon&quot;. It peaked at number five and reached 5× platinum certification.
 Sebastian spent time in the US in early 2012 working on the album, and &quot;Gold&quot;, an uptempo soul track, was released as the second single in May. It peaked at number ten, gaining platinum certification. Sebastian toured nationally during June and July to showcase new songs. In 2012, Sebastian appeared as a judge on &quot;The X Factor&quot; for a third and final year (until 2015). He was given the Over 25s, and was assisted in selecting his final three by Alicia Keys. His contestant Samantha Jade was the winner. &quot;Armageddon&quot;&#x27;s third single &quot;Battle Scars&quot;, an R&amp;B ballad featuring a hip hop rap by Lupe Fiasco, was released in August. It debuted at number one, Sebastian&#x27;s sixth number one single in Australia. He has the most number one singles for an Australian male artist in Australian music history, and is third overall for all Australian acts. Only Kylie Minogue and Delta Goodrem have achieved more. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; was the third-highest selling single in Australia in 2012 and the highest-selling single by an Australian act. It reached 12× platinum in 2020. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; also reached number two and double platinum certification in New Zealand.

Fiasco added &quot;Battle Scars&quot; to his fourth album, &quot;Food &amp; Liquor II: The Great American Rap Album Pt. 1&quot; in countries other than Australia, and it was released as the fourth single on 28 August 2012. He came to Australia in mid September to promote the single and the release of his album, and he and Sebastian performed &quot;Battle Scars&quot; live for the first time on &quot;The X Factor&quot;. They also performed the song in America on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;. It was used in the US in the TV promotion for the movie &quot;Red Dawn&quot;. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; spent 20 weeks on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart, peaking at number 71. It also reached number 23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Digital Song Chart and number one on the R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Chart. It has been certified platinum in the US for sales of one million. The song also spent 13 weeks in the top ten in Norway, including six weeks at number two, and reached 46 and gold certification in Sweden.

&quot;Armageddon&quot; was released on 12 October 2012. It reached number one in its seventh week and achieved double platinum certification. After only 12 weeks of sales the album was the ninth highest selling album in Australia in 2012, the second highest selling album by an Australian act. Sebastian was nominated for three 2012 ARIA Awards. He received nominations for Best Pop Release and Best Male Artist for &quot;Battle Scars&quot;, and &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry Be Happy&quot; was nominated for Song of the Year. Sebastian and Fiasco performed &quot;Battle Scars&quot; at the Awards. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; was also nominated for an American NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Duo, Group or Collaboration. The fourth single &quot;Get Along&quot;, a song about the harm caused by religious, cultural and racial intolerance reached number five and triple platinum certification. The song also reached number nine and gold certification in New Zealand. In early 2013 Fiasco and Sebastian continued the US promotion of &quot;Battle Scars&quot;, performing on &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot; and &quot;Conan&quot;. From March to June 2013 he toured Australia with the 47-date Get Along Tour. Sebastian won two 2013 ARIA Awards, Best Pop Release for &quot;Armageddon&quot;, and Best Live Act for the Get Along Tour. He was also nominated for Album of the Year and Best Male Act for Armageddon and Song of the Year for &quot;Get Along&quot;.

===2013–2016: &quot;Madness&quot; and Eurovision Song Contest===
In October 2013 Sebastian released &quot;Like a Drum&quot;, the lead single from his eighth studio album. Debuting at number four, it became his 12th top ten single in Australia, and his tenth to reach the top five. It was certified 4× platinum in Australia. Sebastian opened for Taylor Swift on the Australian leg of her Red Tour. &quot;Like a Drum&quot; was released in the United States, Canada, and Europe in January 2014 through The Cherry Party and RCA Records. The song reached number 20 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Dance Club Chart and 49 and platinum certification in Sweden. The second single, &quot;Come Home With Me&quot;, reached number 13 on the Aria Singles Chart and platinum certification. The third single, &quot;Mama Ain&#x27;t Proud&quot; featuring 2 Chainz, peaked at number 17 and reached gold certification. Sebastian received two 2014 ARIA nominations, Best Male Artist for &quot;Come Home With Me&quot; and Song of the Year for &quot;Like a Drum&quot;. Sebastian&#x27;s eighth album, &quot;Madness&quot;, was released on 21 November 2014 and debuted at number six and was certified gold. The album also reached number 34 in Sweden in 2015.

The fourth single &quot;Linger&quot; reached number 17 and platinum certification. Sebastian held an arena tour in Australia in February 2015 to support the album release. &quot;Like a Drum&quot; received 2015 APRA nominations for Pop Work of the Year and Most Played Australian Work. Sebastian was chosen as the Australian entrant in the Eurovision Song Contest 2015, making him the first artist to represent Australia in the competition. He performed the song &quot;Tonight Again&quot;, and placed fifth in the competition overall. &quot;Tonight Again&quot; debuted at number 12 in Australia. It also charted at number five in Iceland, 16 in Austria, 22 in Sweden and reached the top 50 of the German and Swiss charts. It achieved gold certification in Sweden. Sebastian toured in Europe in August and September, performing in Sweden, Germany, Norway and The Netherlands. He was nominated for 2015 ARIA Award for Best Male Artist for &quot;Tonight Again&quot;. He returned to the judging panel of the Australian version of &quot;The X Factor&quot; after a two-year absence. In November 2015 he released &quot;Black &amp; Blue&quot;. The song reached number 17, and achieved platinum certification. In January and February 2016 he held a 35 date Australian regional tour. Sebastian received 2016 ARIA Award nominations for Best Male Artist and Best Video for &quot;Black &amp; Blue&quot;.

===2016–2017: &quot;Part 1&quot; EP and &quot;Conscious&quot;===

In late 2016 Sebastian released two singles, &quot;Candle&quot; which peaked at 59, and &quot;Set in Stone&quot; which reached number 11, and has been certified double platinum. Sebastian released &quot;Part 1&quot; EP in December 2016. It was released digitally on 2 December, and peaked at number 31 on the ARIA Album Chart. The physical cd was released on 16 December. A third single, &quot;Mind On You&quot;, did not chart. In March and April 2017 Sebastian toured the Australian eastern states to preview songs from his next album. In September 2017, Sebastian released the single &quot;High On Me&quot; and announced his album &quot;Conscious&quot; would be released on 3 November 2017. He also announced a November tour of the mainland capital cities and Newcastle. &quot;Keep Me Coming Back&quot; and &quot;Vesuvius&quot; were released as promotional singles from &quot;Conscious&quot;, ahead of the album release. It was also confirmed &quot;Set in Stone&quot; was also included in the album. &quot;Set in Stone&quot; was nominated for an ARIA Award for Song of the Year. &quot;Bloodstone&quot;, the second official single peaked at number 59 and was certified platinum, with &quot;Conscious&quot; debuting at number four.

===2018–2022: &quot;T.R.U.T.H.&quot;===

On 4 October 2018, Sebastian released &quot;Before I Go&quot;, the lead single from his ninth studio album, &quot;T.R.U.T.H.&quot; It peaked at number 43 and was certified platinum. He was featured as a coach on &quot;The Voice Australia&quot; from the 2019 season to the 2024 season. Sebastian was made a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in the 2019 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours in recognition of his &quot;significant service to the music industry and charitable initiatives&quot;. In June 2019 he released the single &quot;Choir&quot;, reached number seven, and has been certified 4× platinum. Sebastian toured Australia in September and October with his Ridin&#x27; With You Tour. On 1 October 2019, it was announced that Sebastian would host the ARIA Music Awards of 2019. He received 2019 ARIA Award nominations for Best Male Artist and Best Pop Release, and won for Best Video and Song of the Year for &quot;Choir&quot;. The single &quot;Standing with You&quot; was released in June 2020 and peaked at number ten, Sebastian&#x27;s 14th top ten single in Australia. It has reached gold certification.

In October 2020, Sebastian released his ninth studio album, &quot;T.R.U.T.H.&quot;, which debuted at number 1 on the ARIA charts, becoming Sebastian&#x27;s third career ARIA number 1 album. The album has been certified gold. Sebastian won ARIA Award for Best Video for &quot;Standing With You&quot; at the 2020 ARIA Music Awards.

===2023: &quot;I Choose Good&quot;===
In August 2023, Sebastian announced the release of &quot;I Choose Good&quot;; the first new music in three years.

==Artistry==

===Musical style and influences===
Sebastian cites a number of musicians as his musical influences, including Sam Cooke, Otis Redding, Donny Hathaway, Stevie Wonder, Chicago, and Boyz II Men. His music has crossed many genres, including pop, R&amp;B, funk, smokey soul, gospel, jazz, pop rock, Memphis soul covers, &#x27;60s soul/pop and electro R&amp;B. While Sebastian&#x27;s first three albums showed elements of soul, it was &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; which consolidated his reputation as a soul musician. Reviewers almost unanimously agreed he had captured the spirit and essence of the Memphis soul classics. It was the critical and public reception for &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; which gave Sebastian the confidence to stay with the soul genre for his fifth album, &quot;Like It Like That&quot;. In an interview with &quot;The Age&quot; he said he was told early in his career, &quot;If you self-indulge and just do what you&#x27;re into, you&#x27;re going to corner your market. Soul music isn&#x27;t big here.&quot; but &quot;the most comfortable I&#x27;ve ever felt in the studio was during &quot;The Memphis Album&quot;. And the success of that prompted me to make a record like this one. Because I realised that this isn&#x27;t obscure music.&quot;

&quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; music editor Kathy McCabe said: &quot;Sometimes it takes four records, with a detour into &#x27;concepts&#x27; covers territory to find where you fit. Sebastian has found his niche with &quot;Like It Like That&quot;, which expertly balances the line between radio friendly pop and classic soul.&quot; Paul Cashmere from Undercover wrote: &quot;By covering the classics on &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; Guy Sebastian discovered Guy Sebastian. [...] If &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; was Guy&#x27;s initiation into becoming a Soul Man then &quot;Like It Like That&quot; is the graduation.&quot; In an interview for the release of his seventh album &quot;Armageddon&quot;, Sebastian spoke of how much &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; still influences his music: &quot;I got to work with some people who were instrumental in shaping the careers of artists who heavily influence me. Artists like Otis Redding, Sam &amp; Dave and Sam Cooke. Being entrenched in that sort of environment really caused me to go &#x27;You know what dude. Do what you want to do. Do what comes natural to you&#x27;. [...] From that Memphis thing a few years ago it&#x27;s always going to start with me being true to who I want to be and what I enjoy singing.&quot;

===Songwriting and production===
Sebastian began writing songs before entering &quot;Australian Idol&quot;. &quot;All I Need Is You&quot;, the second single from his debut album &quot;Just as I Am&quot; was written when he was a teenager, and fine-tuned during his time on &quot;Idol&quot;. He also wrote gospel songs for his church during his teenage years. One of them, &quot;Adore&quot;, was included in their 2004 album &quot;Paradise Live: Adore&quot;. Sebastian wrote or co-wrote most of the songs on his albums &quot;Beautiful Life&quot; and &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot;, and all the tracks on his albums &quot;Like It Like That&quot; and &quot;Armageddon&quot;. In an article in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, Kathy McCabe said of his songwriting skills, &quot;Sebastian has matured into a genuine hitmaker, his gift with melody so finely-honed he can pretty much punch out a catchy number in his sleep.&quot; Jamie Horne wrote in &quot;The Border Mail&quot;, &quot;The inaugural winner&#x27;s longevity [...] can be attributed to the fact that he&#x27;s an accomplished musician and songwriter&quot; and AllMusic reviewer Jon O&#x27;Brien said, &quot;it&#x27;s a testament to his vocal abilities and songwriting skills that, unlike many of his fellow winners, he&#x27;s remained popular enough to see out his rather ambitious Sony contract [...] a subtle and natural progression with each album, explains why he&#x27;s managed to survive once the show&#x27;s publicity machine died down.&quot;

In 2008 &quot;Receive the Power&quot;, a gospel song written by Sebastian and Gary Pinto, was chosen as the official anthem for the Roman Catholic Church&#x27;s XXIII World Youth Day. &quot;Art of Love&quot;, co-written by Adam Reilly, was shortlisted for the APRA Song of the Year in 2010. &quot;All to Myself&quot;, written with Carl Dimataga, and &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot; were shortlisted for the 2011 APRA Song of the Year, with &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot; winning the APRA Award for Urban Work of the Year. &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry Be Happy&quot; was shortlisted for the 2012 APRA Song of the Year. &quot;Battle Scars&quot; won the R&amp;B/Hip category in the 2013 International Songwriting Competition. &quot;Get Along&quot; was a finalist in the Pop/Top 40 category, and was awarded an honourable mention. &quot;Get Along&quot; was also one of the final five nominees for the 2013 APRA Song of the Year. &quot;Set in Stone&quot; was shortlisted for the 2017 APRA Song of the Year, and &quot;Black &amp; Blue&quot; was nominated for Pop Work of the Year.

Sebastian has a worldwide, long-term publishing agreement with Universal Music Publishing. He has written songs for other artists, including co-writing &quot;Dot Com&quot;, a song performed by Usher on &quot;Rhythm City Volume One: Caught Up&quot;. He also has an interest in production and co-produced &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; with Steve Cropper. He has his own recording studio, &quot;Cooper Lane Studio&quot;, where he produces and engineers some of his music, and which is also used by other musicians. He produced a song called &quot;Think of Me&quot; for 2009 &quot;Australian Idol&quot; Stan Walker&#x27;s debut album, as well as playing most of the musical instruments on the track.

==Notable performances==
World Youth Day, July 2008: &quot;Receive the Power&quot; a song written by Sebastian and Gary Pinto was chosen as the official anthem for the Roman Catholic Church&#x27;s XXIII World Youth Day (WYD08) held in Sydney in 2008. The song also features the vocals of Paulini Curuenavuli, who competed with Sebastian on the first season of &quot;Australian Idol&quot;. &quot;Receive the Power&quot; was released in English and also an international version with the chorus in English and verses in Italian, Spanish and French. It was used extensively throughout the six days of World Youth Day in July 2008, and also in the television coverage which went around the world. Sebastian and Curuenavuli performed both the English and International versions at the final Mass at Randwick Race Course on 20 July which was attended by 400,000 people. They also performed &quot;Receive the Power&quot; at the Pope&#x27;s Farewell.

Olivia Newton-John &amp; Friends Concert, September 2008: This concert was held at the State Theatre in Sydney to raise funds for Newton-John&#x27;s Cancer and Wellness Centre Appeal. Sebastian was chosen to sing a duet with Newton-John. They sang her iconic hit from &quot;Grease&quot;, &quot;Summer Nights&quot;.

Oscar Haven – Los Angeles, February 2009: Sebastian was a headline act at an Oscar Haven party hosted by Stardust Pictures and Jamie Kennedy. Haven is held during Oscar week and invitees include Film Academy nominees as well as actors and insiders from film, television and music industries.

9th Annual NON-COMMvention – Philadelphia, May 2009: Sebastian performed with Steve Cropper and David Ryan Harris at the 9th Annual NON-COMMvention. The event is the premier annual conference for North America&#x27;s non-commercial Triple A radio.

Australian launch of &quot;Michael Jackson&#x27;s This Is It&quot; DVD, March 2010: Sebastian and Delta Goodrem were chosen by the Jackson estate to perform at the Australian launch of &quot;This Is It&quot;. They performed &quot;Earth Song&quot;. The invitation only event was attended by the film&#x27;s director Kenny Ortega and Jackson&#x27;s brother Jackie Jackson

Oprah Winfrey&#x27;s official welcome to Sydney and wrap up party, December 2010: Sebastian was the guest performer at an event at Sydney&#x27;s Botanical Gardens to officially welcome Oprah Winfrey and her American audience members to Australia. Winfrey was in Australia to record two of her shows at the Sydney Opera House. Sebastian sang for Winfrey a second time when she requested he perform at her private crew wrap-up party.

G&#x27;Day USA, January 2011 and 2012: G&#x27;Day USA is an annual two-week program designed to showcase Australian business capabilities, and is the largest foreign country promotion held in the US. Sebastian and the Qantas Choir were the entertainers at the 2011 Black Tie Gala in Los Angeles. Sebastian performed his own songs and also a medley of Bee Gees songs prior to Barry Gibb being honoured for excellence in Music at the event. During G&#x27;Day USA 2012 he performed at the American Australian Association Black Tie Gala in New York and the Australian American Chamber of Commerce Gala in Houston Texas.

Grammy week – Los Angeles, February 2011: During Grammy week each year there are many events leading up to the Grammy Awards night. Sebastian was invited to perform at two of these events in 2011. He performed at The Black Eyed Peas Peapod Benefit Concert which was attended by musicians, DJ&#x27;s, philanthropists, Hollywood celebrities and industry executives. He also performed at the Roots Pre Grammy Jam Session. The Roots are a Grammy Award winning hip hop and neo soul American band. During Grammy week they hold a jam session and invite other musicians to perform with them. Their 2011 jam session was hosted by Jimmy Fallon and other performers included Sara Bareilles, Lalah Hathaway, Booker T. Jones and Chaka Khan.

CHOGM 2011 Opening Ceremony – Perth, Western Australia October 2011: Sebastian performed &quot;Agents of Change&quot;, a song written by him especially for the event, at the opening ceremony of the biannual Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). In attendance at the ceremony were Queen Elizabeth II, Prime Minister Julia Gillard, the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth and heads of government from all 53 Commonwealth nations.

The GRAMMY Foundation&#x27;s 15th Annual Music Preservation Project – Los Angeles, February 2013: Held each year during Grammy Week, in 2013 the event was &quot;Play It Forward: A Celebration Of Music&#x27;s Evolution And Influencers&quot;. It explored the history of legendary influencers in music, the music they inspired and their impact on the American cultural landscape. Lupe Fiasco and Sebastian were chosen to perform &quot;Battle Scars&quot; as the finale of the concert. Other performers included Dionne Warwick, LeAnn Rimes and Ed Sheeran.

==Court==
In May 2022, Sebastian started a court case against his former manager, Titus Day, accused of embezzling $900,000. Several days into the trial, District Court of New South Wales Judge Peter Zahra died after suffering a stroke before the court session on Friday 6 May. On Monday 9 May, Judge James Bennett addressed the court and announced his colleague&#x27;s death and that the case would resume before another judge a week later. In June, Day was found guilty of having embezzled Sebastian of $620,000.

==Personal life==

In late 2007, after eight years of courtship, Sebastian and girlfriend Jules Egan became engaged. They were married in Manly, New South Wales, on 17 May 2008. They have two sons born on 3 March 2012 and 17 April 2014.

He has a net worth of $11 million.

==Charitable work==
Throughout his career Sebastian has had a strong commitment to charity. He has been an ambassador for the Ronald McDonald House charities, and is currently an ambassador for the Australian Red Cross and Golden Stave, which is the Australian music and entertainment industry&#x27;s charity fund raising organisation. He is also an ambassador for World Vision Australia, and in 2005 he travelled to Uganda to film a World Vision documentary &quot;An Idol in Africa&quot; for a Network Ten television special. Sebastian has continued his work with World Vision, supporting the Child Rescue program and the 40 Hour Famine. He has also been involved in the Make Poverty History coalition of which World Vision is a part. In 2008 he was presented with the Extreme Inspiration Award at the Dolly Teen Choice Awards for his continuing support of World Vision. Sebastian is also strongly committed to the Sony Foundation, which raises funds to help young Australians facing homelessness, severe illness, disability and isolation. In 2009 the Sony CEO Denis Handlin said: &quot;Every time I&#x27;ve asked Guy to get involved with the Sony Foundation through charity he&#x27;s been completely proactive. Guy&#x27;s been such a great ambassador for that, and a lot of it is under the radar but it just tells you so much about what a decent human being he is.&quot;

Sebastian contributes to many other charitable projects. In 2005 he was the guest performer on the annual Indian Pacific Outback Christmas Journey which raises money for the Royal Flying Doctor&#x27;s Service. In 2008 he performed a series of 11 concerts with the Australian Army Band to raise funds for Legacy. Legacy is a voluntary organisation which supports the families of deceased veterans. The concerts were held in theatre venues around Australia and the funds raised went to the local Legacy branch in the area each concert was held. Sebastian regularly performs at other fundraising events including Brisbane radio station B105&#x27;s Christmas appeal for the Royal Children&#x27;s Hospital, and Perth&#x27;s annual Telethon. He also donates his time to annual Christmas carol events such as Carols in the Domain, Vision Australia&#x27;s Carols by Candlelight, and Brisbane&#x27;s Carols in the City. His songs are frequently featured on charity CDs including the Salvation Army Christmas fundraising CDs, &quot;The Spirit of Christmas&quot; albums. Sebastian also makes unofficial appearances at hospitals several times a year. Sebastian was an ambassador for the 2020 MEN-tality project for Beyond Blue shot by Peter Brew-Bevan, alongside Osher Gunsberg, Rodger Corser and Andrew Tierney.

In 2013, Sebastian and his wife Jules formed The Sebastian Foundation.

==Discography==

;Studio albums
* &quot;Just as I Am&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Beautiful Life&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Closer to the Sun&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Memphis Album&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Like it Like That&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Armageddon&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Madness&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Conscious&quot; (2017)
* &quot;T.R.U.T.H.&quot; (2020)

==Awards and nominations==
Sebastian has been nominated for numerous awards during his career, winning many of them. These awards and nominations include ARIA Awards, ARIA No. 1 Chart Awards, APRA Awards, Australian Club Entertainment Awards, Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards, Urban Music Awards, and a Channel V Artist of the Year Award.

==Tours==
* 2004–05: Beautiful Life Tour
* 2007: Closer to the Sun Tour
* 2007: Acoustic Tour
* 2008: The Memphis Tour
* 2009: Live &amp; By Request Tour
* 2010: Like It Like That Tour
* 2010: Bring Yourself Tour
* 2010: Like It Like That Tour 
* 2012: Armageddon tour
* 2013: Get Along Tour
* 2015: Madness Tour
* 2015: Madness European Tour
*2016: You...Me...Us Tour
*2017: Sub-Conscious Tour
*2017: Conscious Tour
*2018: Then and Now Tour
*2019: Ridin&#x27; With You Tour.
*2022: T.R.U.T.H. Tour
*2022: T.R.U.T.H. on the East Side Tour

Joint tours
* 2004: Australian Idol in Concert
* 2007: Guy &amp; the Australian Philharmonic Orchestra
* 2008: Army in Concert with Guy Sebastian

Support tours
* 2011: Boyzone Tour 
* 2011: Lionel Richie Tour 
* 2013: Red Tour 
* 2017: Love Always Tour 

==See also==
* List of best-selling singles in Australia
* List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart

==References==
==External links==
* The Sebastian Foundation website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q983452" start="0" end="22" title="Guy Sebastian" label="Guy Theodore Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824261" start="105" end="117" title="Australian Idol (season 1)" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="127" end="142" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="167" end="175" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="190" end="209" title="Adelaide, Australia" label="Adelaide, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870110" start="730" end="742" title="Battle Scars" label="Battle Scars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763050" start="773" end="795" title="Angels Brought Me Here" label="Angels Brought Me Here"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1001" end="1079" title="Australian Idol discography#Album and single certification totals" label="highest certifications and sales of any &amp;quot;Australian Idol&amp;quot; contestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153370" start="1158" end="1172" title="Brian McKnight" label="Brian McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q467423" start="1174" end="1186" title="Robin Thicke" label="Robin Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q471811" start="1188" end="1201" title="Steve Cropper" label="Steve Cropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="1203" end="1213" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215300" start="1215" end="1228" title="Jordin Sparks" label="Jordin Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="1230" end="1233" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="1238" end="1249" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1331" end="1360" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215081" start="1917" end="1940" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2015" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600317" start="1961" end="1974" title="Tonight Again" label="Tonight Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="2058" end="2068" title="ARIA Award" label="ARIA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="2167" end="2171" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072466" start="2200" end="2225" title="Channel V Australia" label="[V] Oz Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899971" start="2227" end="2245" title="Urban Music Awards Australia and New Zealand" label="Urban Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="2440" end="2457" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="2459" end="2472" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2477" end="2495" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655994" start="2540" end="2562" title="World Vision Australia" label="World Vision Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824610" start="2571" end="2591" title="Australian Red Cross" label="Australian Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="2702" end="2734" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64413797" start="2747" end="2781" title="2019 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours (Australia)" label="2019 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="2887" end="2899" title="The X Factor (Australian TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282955" start="2972" end="2991" title="The Voice (Australian TV series)" label="The Voice Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228818" start="3091" end="3104" title="Delta Goodrem" label="Delta Goodrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q856003" start="3174" end="3179" title="Klang (city)" label="Klang"/>
<link wikidata="Q189710" start="3181" end="3189" title="Selangor" label="Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="3309" end="3319" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="3378" end="3385" title="Anglo-Indian people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705204" start="3390" end="3400" title="Luso-Indian" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q66568" start="3428" end="3434" title="Kanpur" label="Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3476" end="3483" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q97670633" start="3627" end="3632" title="Chris Sebastian" label="Chris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3702" end="3711" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="3795" end="3803" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595155" start="4146" end="4168" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s College, Adelaide" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562080" start="4170" end="4183" title="Gilles Plains, South Australia" label="Gilles Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410847" start="4212" end="4246" title="King&amp;#x27;s Baptist Grammar School" label="King&amp;#x27;s Baptist Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579520" start="4273" end="4285" title="Golden Grove, South Australia" label="Golden Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q15576" start="4337" end="4366" title="University of South Australia" label="University of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27333678" start="4530" end="4546" title="music technology" label="music technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15574" start="4554" end="4576" title="University of Adelaide" label="University of Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353931" start="4584" end="4604" title="Elder Conservatorium" label="Elder Conservatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q914012" start="4639" end="4652" title="Planetshakers" label="Planetshakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613441" start="4683" end="4697" title="worship leader" label="worship leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q55976407" start="4744" end="4764" title="Planetshakers Church" label="Planetshakers Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134261" start="4768" end="4793" title="Paradise Community Church" label="Paradise Community Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="4842" end="4857" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="4960" end="4977" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="5363" end="5378" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="5394" end="5407" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934237" start="5421" end="5438" title="Ribbon in the Sky" label="Ribbon in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562499" start="5728" end="5731" title="BMG Australia" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562499" start="5757" end="5761" title="Sony Music Australia" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341976" start="5992" end="6002" title="World Idol" label="World Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763050" start="6164" end="6186" title="Angels Brought Me Here" label="Angels Brought Me Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852832" start="6391" end="6405" title="Anthony Callea" label="Anthony Callea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450954" start="6419" end="6429" title="The Prayer (Celine Dion and Andrea Bocelli song)" label="The Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956738" start="6607" end="6619" title="Just as I Am (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Just as I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728860" start="7301" end="7318" title="All I Need Is You" label="All I Need Is You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186798" start="7498" end="7514" title="New Zealand Idol" label="New Zealand Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471894" start="7544" end="7559" title="Indonesian Idol" label="Indonesian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="7696" end="7709" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877751" start="7818" end="7832" title="Beautiful Life (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Beautiful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="7882" end="7889" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q467423" start="7937" end="7949" title="Robin Thicke" label="Robin Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153370" start="7954" end="7968" title="Brian McKnight" label="Brian McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q233736" start="8039" end="8042" title="Mýa" label="Mýa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111848" start="8066" end="8082" title="Out with My Baby" label="Out with My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072466" start="8320" end="8329" title="Channel V Australia" label="Channel V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559610" start="8736" end="8748" title="Slinkee Minx" label="Slinkee Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877751" start="8870" end="8880" title="Kryptonite (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Kryptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501225" start="8929" end="8934" title="Oh Oh" label="Oh Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163569" start="9066" end="9102" title="Nickelodeon Kid&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="Nickelodeon Kid&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="9110" end="9131" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="9302" end="9337" title="Young Australian Of The Year" label="Young Australian of the Year Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092070" start="9423" end="9435" title="It Takes Two (Australian TV series)" label="It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950349" start="9620" end="9630" title="Sarah Ryan" label="Sarah Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135412" start="9722" end="9739" title="Closer to the Sun (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Closer to the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="9782" end="9785" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="9787" end="9794" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="9796" end="9800" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="9802" end="9810" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="9815" end="9819" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680104" start="9891" end="9915" title="Taller, Stronger, Better" label="Taller, Stronger, Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359715" start="10079" end="10092" title="Elevator Love" label="Elevator Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q270679" start="10160" end="10176" title="Jennifer Hawkins" label="Jennifer Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q64399020" start="10288" end="10305" title="Australasian Performing Right Association" label="APRA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899971" start="10397" end="10415" title="Urban Music Awards Australia and New Zealand" label="Urban Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289360" start="10804" end="10828" title="Dolly Teen Choice Awards" label="Dolly Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="11000" end="11018" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546001" start="11025" end="11029" title="Stax Records" label="Stax"/>
<link wikidata="Q639027" start="11118" end="11132" title="Ardent Studios" label="Ardent Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q471811" start="11163" end="11176" title="Steve Cropper" label="Steve Cropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q379341" start="11178" end="11206" title="Duck Dunn" label="Donald &amp;#x27;Duck&amp;#x27; Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="11212" end="11223" title="Steve Potts (drummer)" label="Steve Potts"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="11232" end="11239" title="Booker T &amp;amp; The MGs" label="The MGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750980" start="12070" end="12087" title="The Memphis Album" label="The Memphis Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815826" start="12293" end="12306" title="Memphis Flyer" label="Memphis Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="12724" end="12727" title="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s" label="MGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="13197" end="13209" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750983" start="13498" end="13514" title="The Memphis Tour" label="The Memphis Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842899" start="13552" end="13566" title="Helpmann Award" label="Helpmann Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="14328" end="14338" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="14576" end="14580" title="SXSW" label="SXSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547095" start="14669" end="14686" title="Like It Like That (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Like It Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14730" end="14733" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976317" start="15165" end="15182" title="Like It Like That (album)" label="Like It Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797243" start="15351" end="15362" title="Art of Love (song)" label="Art of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q215300" start="15382" end="15395" title="Jordin Sparks" label="Jordin Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730234" start="15609" end="15622" title="All to Myself (Guy Sebastian song)" label="All to Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004078" start="15639" end="15658" title="Never Hold You Down" label="Never Hold You Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276307" start="15865" end="15872" title="RED Distribution" label="Red Ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="15926" end="15944" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776433" start="16017" end="16029" title="The X Factor (Australia season 2)" label="The X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="16204" end="16214" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873123" start="16338" end="16354" title="Battlefield Tour" label="Battlefield Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q371938" start="16399" end="16406" title="Chicago (band)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="16423" end="16429" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="16463" end="16480" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="16903" end="16915" title="The X Factor (Australian TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283680" start="17414" end="17432" title="Rai Thistlethwayte" label="Rai Thistlethwayte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785151" start="17449" end="17461" title="Thirsty Merc" label="Thirsty Merc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="17463" end="17473" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="17478" end="17483" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="17506" end="17525" title="Compilation album" label="retrospective album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857812" start="17539" end="17549" title="Twenty Ten (album)" label="Twenty Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="17611" end="17628" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Album Chart."/>
<link wikidata="Q14918641" start="17817" end="17841" title="Official New Zealand Music Chart" label="New Zealand Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480245" start="18027" end="18047" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="18074" end="18077" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="18129" end="18144" title="Electronic dance music" label="electro R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562499" start="18556" end="18560" title="Sony Music Australia" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="18631" end="18638" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="18666" end="18679" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q687924" start="18769" end="18783" title="All Night Long (All Night)" label="All Night Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="18836" end="18841" title="2010–2011 Queensland floods" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="18846" end="18856" title="February 2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q323470" start="18891" end="18897" title="RedOne" label="RedOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886164" start="19190" end="19198" title="Mo Award" label="Mo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q195777" start="19559" end="19572" title="Wynter Gordon" label="Wynter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="19577" end="19584" title="Beyoncé Knowles" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335423" start="19586" end="19598" title="Reece Mastin" label="Reece Mastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292068" start="19701" end="19726" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry Be Happy (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry Be Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578549" start="20033" end="20037" title="Gold (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="20423" end="20434" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036977" start="20451" end="20464" title="Samantha Jade" label="Samantha Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870110" start="20530" end="20542" title="Battle Scars" label="Battle Scars"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="20553" end="20560" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="20580" end="20591" title="rap" label="hip hop rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="20595" end="20606" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="20858" end="20871" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q228818" start="20876" end="20889" title="Delta Goodrem" label="Delta Goodrem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21244" end="21300" title="Lupe Fiasco&amp;#x27;s Food &amp;amp; Liquor II: The Great American Rap Album Pt. 1" label="Food &amp;amp; Liquor II: The Great American Rap Album Pt. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="21581" end="21593" title="The X Factor (Australian TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="21654" end="21684" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q553920" start="21754" end="21762" title="Red Dawn (2012 film)" label="Red Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="21817" end="21846" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q862769" start="21909" end="21949" title="Hot Digital Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Digital Song Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792553" start="22221" end="22231" title="Armageddon (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="22548" end="22559" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="22866" end="22883" title="NAACP Image Award" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006278" start="22953" end="22962" title="Get Along (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Get Along"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817561" start="23284" end="23312" title="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" label="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814593" start="23329" end="23334" title="Conan (talk show)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097246" start="23774" end="23785" title="Like a Drum" label="Like a Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="24013" end="24025" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q557837" start="24055" end="24063" title="Red Tour" label="Red Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276307" start="24167" end="24183" title="The Cherry Party" label="The Cherry Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="24188" end="24199" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="24235" end="24273" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Dance Club Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348423" start="24344" end="24361" title="Come Home With Me (song)" label="Come Home With Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351957" start="24465" end="24486" title="Mama Ain&amp;#x27;t Proud" label="Mama Ain&amp;#x27;t Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q129668" start="24503" end="24511" title="2 Chainz" label="2 Chainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162236" start="24749" end="24756" title="Madness (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786608" start="24924" end="24930" title="Linger (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="25110" end="25114" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215081" start="25239" end="25267" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2015" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600317" start="25368" end="25381" title="Tonight Again" label="Tonight Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="25931" end="25943" title="The X Factor (Australian TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075057" start="26011" end="26027" title="Black &amp;amp; Blue (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Black &amp;amp; Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452045" start="26408" end="26414" title="Candle (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452512" start="26451" end="26463" title="Set in Stone (song)" label="Set in Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429874" start="26560" end="26566" title="Part 1 (EP)" label="Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835270" start="26751" end="26762" title="Mind on You (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Mind On You"/>
<link wikidata="Q42529322" start="26949" end="26959" title="High On Me" label="High On Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780775" start="26996" end="27005" title="Conscious (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780775" start="27235" end="27244" title="Conscious (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452512" start="27308" end="27320" title="Set in Stone (song)" label="Set in Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048283" start="27675" end="27686" title="Before I Go" label="Before I Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282955" start="27849" end="27868" title="The Voice Australia" label="The Voice Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="27937" end="27969" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64413797" start="27982" end="28016" title="2019 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours (Australia)" label="2019 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044402" start="28163" end="28168" title="Choir (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q71701962" start="28388" end="28413" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2019" label="ARIA Music Awards of 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q97051714" start="28582" end="28599" title="Standing with You" label="Standing with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738988" start="28984" end="29009" title="ARIA Award for Best Video" label="ARIA Award for Best Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860470" start="29051" end="29073" title="2020 ARIA Music Awards" label="2020 ARIA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="29353" end="29362" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="29364" end="29376" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q507864" start="29378" end="29392" title="Donny Hathaway" label="Donny Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="29394" end="29407" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q371938" start="29409" end="29416" title="Chicago (band)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="29422" end="29433" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="29480" end="29483" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="29485" end="29492" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="29494" end="29498" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="29500" end="29511" title="Soul music" label="smokey soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="29513" end="29519" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="29521" end="29525" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="29527" end="29535" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510161" start="29537" end="29549" title="Memphis soul" label="Memphis soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="29550" end="29556" title="Cover version" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29558" end="29576" title="1960s in music#R&amp;amp;B and Soul" label="&amp;#x27;60s soul/pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="29581" end="29596" title="Electronic dance music" label="electro R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750980" start="29678" end="29695" title="The Memphis Album" label="The Memphis Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="30079" end="30086" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="30517" end="30536" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149755" start="30844" end="30857" title="Paul Cashmere" label="Paul Cashmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792553" start="31194" end="31204" title="Armageddon (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545232" start="31444" end="31458" title="Sam &amp;amp; Dave" label="Sam &amp;amp; Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728860" start="31892" end="31909" title="All I Need Is You" label="All I Need Is You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956738" start="31962" end="31974" title="Just as I Am (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Just as I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877751" start="32302" end="32316" title="Beautiful Life (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Beautiful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135412" start="32333" end="32350" title="Closer to the Sun (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Closer to the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976317" start="32397" end="32414" title="Like It Like That (album)" label="Like It Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792553" start="32431" end="32441" title="Armageddon (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="32472" end="32491" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302317" start="33299" end="33316" title="Receive the Power" label="Receive the Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q273039" start="33452" end="33467" title="World Youth Day" label="World Youth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797243" start="33475" end="33486" title="Art of Love (song)" label="Art of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="33545" end="33549" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730234" start="33582" end="33595" title="All to Myself (Guy Sebastian song)" label="All to Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480245" start="33641" end="33661" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292068" start="33816" end="33841" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry Be Happy (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry Be Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870110" start="33906" end="33918" title="Battle Scars" label="Battle Scars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006278" start="34011" end="34020" title="Get Along (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Get Along"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452512" start="34213" end="34225" title="Set in Stone (song)" label="Set in Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075057" start="34294" end="34310" title="Black &amp;amp; Blue (Guy Sebastian song)" label="Black &amp;amp; Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894021" start="34421" end="34447" title="Universal Music Publishing Group" label="Universal Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="34551" end="34556" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q471811" start="34696" end="34709" title="Steve Cropper" label="Steve Cropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330139" start="34957" end="34968" title="Stan Walker" label="Stan Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302317" start="35114" end="35131" title="Receive the Power" label="Receive the Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734559" start="35170" end="35180" title="Gary Pinto" label="Gary Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="35223" end="35244" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q273039" start="35258" end="35273" title="World Youth Day" label="World Youth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155121" start="35343" end="35362" title="Paulini Curuenavuli" label="Paulini Curuenavuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824261" start="35399" end="35411" title="Australian Idol (season 1)" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="35421" end="35436" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="35999" end="36017" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="36273" end="36279" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637383" start="36293" end="36306" title="Summer Nights (John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John song)" label="Summer Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q355133" start="36442" end="36455" title="Jamie Kennedy" label="Jamie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471811" start="36686" end="36699" title="Steve Cropper" label="Steve Cropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817999" start="36704" end="36721" title="David Ryan Harris" label="David Ryan Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q44447" start="36884" end="36917" title="Michael Jackson&amp;#x27;s This Is It" label="Michael Jackson&amp;#x27;s This Is It"/>
<link wikidata="Q228818" start="36955" end="36968" title="Delta Goodrem" label="Delta Goodrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q164599" start="37087" end="37097" title="Earth Song" label="Earth Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q380852" start="37172" end="37184" title="Kenny Ortega" label="Kenny Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q44855" start="37212" end="37226" title="Jackie Jackson" label="Jackie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="37228" end="37241" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="37534" end="37552" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823612" start="37661" end="37675" title="Australia Week" label="G&amp;#x27;Day USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37879" end="37891" title="Australian Girls Choir" label="Qantas Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="38012" end="38020" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q296872" start="38036" end="38046" title="Barry Gibb" label="Barry Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="38389" end="38401" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="38491" end="38510" title="The Black Eyed Peas" label="The Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="38667" end="38672" title="The Roots" label="Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="38713" end="38725" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="38734" end="38741" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="38746" end="38754" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="38801" end="38812" title="jam session" label="jam session"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="38899" end="38911" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q230445" start="38942" end="38956" title="Sara Bareilles" label="Sara Bareilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695159" start="38958" end="38972" title="Lalah Hathaway" label="Lalah Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q703767" start="38974" end="38989" title="Booker T. Jones" label="Booker T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="38994" end="39004" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="39037" end="39042" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="39044" end="39061" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="39299" end="39317" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41563" start="39319" end="39347" title="Julia Gillard" label="Prime Minister Julia Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="39378" end="39390" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="39827" end="39838" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870110" start="39882" end="39894" title="Battle Scars" label="Battle Scars"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="39957" end="39971" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q120533" start="39973" end="39984" title="LeAnn Rimes" label="LeAnn Rimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="39989" end="39999" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q115257658" start="40084" end="40093" title="Titus Day" label="Titus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283302" start="40156" end="40189" title="District Court of New South Wales" label="District Court of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="40231" end="40237" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q509716" start="40656" end="40661" title="Manly, New South Wales" label="Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="40663" end="40678" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824610" start="40990" end="41010" title="Australian Red Cross" label="Australian Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655994" start="41157" end="41179" title="World Vision Australia" label="World Vision Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="41287" end="41298" title="Network Ten" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8427801" start="41415" end="41429" title="40 Hour Famine" label="40 Hour Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183278" start="41464" end="41484" title="Make Poverty History" label="Make Poverty History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289360" start="41595" end="41619" title="Dolly Teen Choice Awards" label="Dolly Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q107306786" start="41854" end="41867" title="Denis Handlin" label="Denis Handlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193928" start="42272" end="42286" title="Indian Pacific" label="Indian Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="42340" end="42374" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia" label="Royal Flying Doctor&amp;#x27;s Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517233" start="42470" end="42476" title="Legacy Australia" label="Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834348" start="42799" end="42803" title="B105 FM" label="B105"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="42872" end="42877" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072448" start="42892" end="42900" title="Channel Seven Perth Telethon" label="Telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045290" start="42968" end="42988" title="Carols in the Domain" label="Carols in the Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045293" start="43014" end="43035" title="Carols by Candlelight" label="Carols by Candlelight"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="43041" end="43049" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045288" start="43057" end="43075" title="Carols in the City" label="Carols in the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="43140" end="43154" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900494" start="43369" end="43380" title="Beyond Blue" label="Beyond Blue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43389" end="43405" title="Peter Brew-Bevan" label="Peter Brew-Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757193" start="43417" end="43431" title="Osher Günsberg" label="Osher Gunsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q327870" start="43433" end="43446" title="Rodger Corser" label="Rodger Corser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758733" start="43451" end="43465" title="Andrew Tierney" label="Andrew Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956738" start="43580" end="43592" title="Just as I Am (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Just as I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877751" start="43614" end="43628" title="Beautiful Life (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Beautiful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135412" start="43650" end="43667" title="Closer to the Sun (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Closer to the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750980" start="43689" end="43706" title="The Memphis Album" label="The Memphis Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976317" start="43728" end="43745" title="Like It Like That (album)" label="Like it Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792553" start="43767" end="43777" title="Armageddon (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162236" start="43799" end="43806" title="Madness (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780775" start="43828" end="43837" title="Conscious (Guy Sebastian album)" label="Conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q101767131" start="43859" end="43869" title="T.R.U.T.H." label="T.R.U.T.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="44076" end="44087" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750983" start="44324" end="44340" title="The Memphis Tour" label="The Memphis Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961984" start="44475" end="44490" title="Armageddon tour" label="Armageddon tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150191" start="44499" end="44513" title="Get Along Tour" label="Get Along Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012245" start="44522" end="44534" title="Madness Tour" label="Madness Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="44931" end="44938" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="44953" end="44966" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q557837" start="44981" end="44989" title="Red Tour" label="Red Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607497" start="45033" end="45074" title="List of best-selling singles in Australia" label="List of best-selling singles in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606218" start="45077" end="45147" title="List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383628" wikidata="Q540516" url="?curid=383628" title="Cui Jian">
<text>Cui Jian or Choi Geon (; ; born 2 August 1961) is a Beijing-based Chinese singer-songwriter, trumpeter and guitarist. Affectionately called &quot;Old Cui&quot; (), he is credited with pioneering Chinese rock music. For this distinction he is often labeled the &quot;Father of Chinese Rock&quot;. He is also known in the Chinese rock music industry as a &quot;leader in promoting the true singing movement&quot; and the &quot;first person in Chinese rock&quot;.

Cui is an idealist who loathed money and commerce. He fantasized that rock &#x27;n roll could rebuild young people&#x27;s &quot;red idealism&quot;. A white baseball cap with a bright red star is his symbol.

Cui Jian&#x27;s melodies and songs are always full of reflections on the history of the motherland, insisting on introspection of the state of life, and full of infinite longing for a &quot;utopian&quot; beautiful future.

==Early career==
Cui Jian grew up in a musical family in Beijing. His father was ethnic Korean and a professional trumpet player, and his mother was a member of a Korean dance troupe. Cui Jian followed his father to start playing the trumpet at the age of fourteen. He joined the Beijing Symphony Orchestra in 1981, at the age of twenty. Became a professional trumpet player of the Beijing Aihe Orchestra. He was first introduced to rock during this period when friends smuggled in illicit recordings from Hong Kong. Inspired by the likes of Simon and Garfunkel and John Denver, Cui began learning to play the guitar.

In 1984 he formed his first band, Qi He Ban (七合板, literally &quot;Seven-Ply Board,&quot; a double entendre reference to the seven-member band) with six other classically trained musicians, including the saxophonist/suona player Liu Yuan. The seminal band was heavily influenced by The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, and Talking Heads. The band played Western pop music in small restaurants and bars in Beijing and was the first of its kind in China. They performed their own works—mostly soft rock and love songs—in local hotels and bars. With his band, Cui released his first cassette &quot;Return of the Prodigal&quot; that same year. The album contained mellow, pop-oriented love songs but also showcased songs with progressive and folk-rock influences, which were fresh and innovative in China at the time. In 1985, the band released another album titled &quot;Cui Jian with Seven-Player Band&quot;. At the end of the same year, Cui Jian wrote his first rock song &quot;It&#x27;s Not That I Don&#x27;t Understand&quot;. This album featured a combination of Western pop rock as well as new original songs. It also featured more prominent use of the electric guitar, which was seldom used in Chinese popular music. Cui&#x27;s departure from the band and subsequent solo career led him to become the most successful and influential musician in Chinese rock history.

Cui Jian first shot to stardom in 1986, when he performed his song &quot;Nothing to My Name&quot; on the 100-Singer Concert of Year of International Peace at Beijing&#x27;s Workers&#x27; Stadium. The birth of this song marks a new era in Cui Jian&#x27;s music career, as he uses this unique rock method to summon a new generation of young people. The following year, he left his permanent job with the orchestra. His band, now renamed ADO, included two foreign embassy employees: Hungarian bassist Kassai Balazs and Madagascan/French guitarist Eddie Randriamampionona. His first real album, &quot;Rock and Roll on the New Long March&quot;, was released in 1989.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Cui created a hybrid and experimental music mix that cut across divisions between pop, reggae, funk, hard rock and punk music genres. Cui&#x27;s songs drew on folk and traditional music types, such as the Northwest Wind (&quot;Xibeifeng&quot;) peasant songs of the Loess Plateau of Shaanxi. At times they knowingly parodied old Communist Party sayings and proverbs. In 1991, for example, he set the old revolutionary song &quot;Nanniwan&quot; to rock music. In 1988 he performed at a concert broadcast worldwide in conjunction with the Seoul Summer Olympic Games. Cui Jian was the first-ever winner of the MTV International Viewer&#x27;s Choice Award for his song/music video &quot;Wild in the Snow&quot; in 1991. 

His earliest works had influence from Western popular music styles, such as punk, dance and jazz; these songs also became his best-known works. With tensions rising among the students of China and the government, Cui&#x27;s work was very influential among the youth.

==Tiananmen and aftermath==
Cui Jian reached the apex of his popularity during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, when &quot;Nothing to My Name&quot; became an anthem to student protestors. Before the protests were violently broken up on 4–5 June, Cui frequently appeared with the students and was affirmed by Wu&#x27;er Kaixi, one of the prominent leaders of the movement, as highly influential among young Chinese of the time. The following government crackdown forced many rock musicians, Cui Jian included, into hiding in the other provinces. Sanctions proved relatively temporary, and Cui was able to return to Beijing shortly afterward. In early 1990, the Chinese government would permit him to embark his first rock tour entitled the &quot;New Long March&quot;, to raise money for the 1990 Asian Games. Ten concerts were scheduled in Zhengzhou, Wuhan, Xi&#x27;an, Chengdu and others. Midway through the tour, Cui Jian gained notoriety for appearing on stage wearing a red blindfold across his eyes before performing his well-known political anthem, &quot;A Piece of Red Cloth&quot;, prompting the government to terminate the performance and cancel the remainder of the tour. The tour was still able to raise 1 million &quot;yuan&quot; for the 1990 Asian Games.

==Later career==

Through the 1990s Cui Jian was banned from playing major venues in Beijing, although he was able to stage a number of one-set, word-of-mouth concerts at newly flourishing venues like The Sunflower Club. Elsewhere in China he was permitted to play to sell-out crowds in both large and small venues, only on occasion facing government interference. Soon, Cui&#x27;s music was banned from all state-controlled broadcasting stations.

Cui toured all over the world including the United States and Europe four times each and has played numerous shows in East and Southeast Asia. Cui&#x27;s ability to fuse western styles of music and introduce local influences on it, made him a very prominent figure internationally to this day. 
In 2000 Cui was awarded the prestigious Dutch Prince Claus Award for positive artistic and intellectual influences on the broader culture and society.

In 2002 Cui and his manager Paul Fry co-organized the Lijiang Snow Mountain Music Festival (China&#x27;s Woodstock) in Lijiang, China. Cui followed this with a 10-city tour in Germany and performances with Udo Lindenberg (Godfather of German Rock &amp; Roll), performances with Deep Purple in China and a 13-city sold-out tour of the United States.

Bai Qiang produced a 3D concert film and documentary on Cui. The film, &quot;Transcendence&quot;, which evokes memories of Tiananmen Square, was screened in Beijing in May 2012 to an enthusiastic fan audience, but its prospects for mainstream release in China are doubtful.

===Political rehabilitation===
On 8 September 2000, Cui and his band performed at the Ministry of Culture-sponsored &quot;Oppose Piracy, Support Copyright&quot; concert held at Workers&#x27; Stadium in Beijing. It was his first large-venue performance in the capital in 7 years.

In 2002, Cui initiated, produced, and played at a major rock festival in the mountains of Yunnan. The &quot;Snow Mountain Music Festival&quot; was a major media attraction and was reported by the international press as &quot;China&#x27;s Woodstock&quot;. This experience started a trend of outdoor music festivals in China.

In early 2003, Cui was authorized to open for the Rolling Stones&#x27; concert in Beijing. In a 2003 interview, Cui claimed that in the 1980s he had learned Rolling Stones and Beatles songs to improve his guitar skills. He was also quoted as having three dreams: to perform in his home city of Beijing again, to see the Rolling Stones perform live, and to perform together with the Rolling Stones. Due to the SARS outbreak, however, the concert was cancelled. Not until March 2004, when Cui opened for Deep Purple on their mainland tour, was he finally able to perform a full set at a major venue in Beijing.

On 24 September 2005, Cui was finally granted permission to headline his own show at the Beijing Capital Stadium, which signified the end of the unofficial ban on his performances in China&#x27;s capital. It also confirmed a major turn-around in government attitude towards rock music in general.
Cui did finally play with the Rolling Stones at the Shanghai Grand Stage on 8 April 2006, singing and playing &quot;Wild Horses&quot;. Following the performance, Cui was quoted as saying, &quot;This is the 20th anniversary of Chinese rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll... We have an appointment. In the near future, they will be back, and we&#x27;ll rock again in Beijing.&quot;

Cui performed in Taiwan on 8 July 2007 after numerous attempts in previous years to perform there had been derailed by governments on both sides of the Taiwan Strait. Cui&#x27;s entourage to the island comprised 18 people including his 75-year-old mother. Headlining on the last day of the Hohaiyan Rock Festival at Fulong Beach, Cui&#x27;s participation was promoted on the festival&#x27;s website with the slogan: &quot;He&#x27;s really coming!&quot;

In September 2007, he performed at the Beijing Pop Festival, including a guest appearance rapping with the American rap group Public Enemy.

On 4 December 2009, Cui returned to Taiwan for his second concert there in three years, for the grand opening of the Legacy Taipei.

Prior to the January 2014 Spring Festival gala, Cui was invited to perform on the China Central Television variety show after years of being excluded from state radio and television because of the political connotations of his work. Ultimately, Cui did not make it because he would not change the song lyrics.

In December 2018, Cui Jian brought the original band to the Blue Note Beijing stage for the first time and performed a double special performance for two consecutive nights.

==Discography==
*1984: &quot;Return of the Prodigal&quot; (浪子归; Làngzǐ guī)
*1989: &quot;Rock &#x27;N&#x27; Roll on the New Long March&quot; (新长征路上的摇滚; Xīn chángzhēng lùshàng de yáogǔn)
*1991: &quot;Solution&quot; (解决; Jiějué)
*1994: &quot;Balls Under the Red Flag&quot; (红旗下的蛋; Hóngqí xià de dàn)
*1998: &quot;The Power of the Powerless&quot; (无能的力量; Wúnéng de lìliàng) 
*2005: &quot;Show You Colour&quot; (给你一点颜色; Gěi nǐ yīdiǎn yánsè)
*2015: F&quot;rozen light&quot; (光冻; Guāng dòng)
*2021: &quot;A Flying Dog&quot; (飞狗; Féi gǒu)

==Filmography==
*1993 – &quot;Beijing Bastards&quot; (北京杂种; Beijing Zazhong), directed by Zhang Yuan, as himself
*2003 – &quot;Roots and Branches&quot; (我的兄弟姐妹; Wo de xiongdi jiemei), directed by Yu Chung, as the father/music teacher
*2007 – &quot;The Sun Also Rises&quot; (太阳照常升起; Taiyang zhaochang shengqi), directed by Jiang Wen, as Tang&#x27;s friend in Beijing
*2010 – &quot;Dooman River&quot; (두만강), directed by Zhang Lu, as Chang-ho
*2012 – &quot;Transcendence&quot; 3-D concert, directed by Bai Qiang
*2013 – &quot;Promise&quot;, directed and written by himself
*2013 – &quot;Blue Sky Bones&quot;

==See also==
*Chinese rock
*Tang Dynasty (band)
*Viktor Tsoi, Russian rock singer of Korean descent
*Music censorship in China

==References==

*Wei, S. Louisa (2006). &quot;&quot; (DV). Music documentary.

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Birth Of A Beijing Music Scene&quot; by Matthew Corbin Clark – companion article to PBS Frontline&#x27;s &quot;China in the Red&quot;.

===Interviews===
* from &quot;Global Rhythm&quot; magazine, August 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q540516" start="0" end="8" title="Cui Jian" label="Cui Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q540516" start="12" end="21" title="Cui Jian" label="Choi Geon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064810" start="195" end="207" title="Chinese rock" label="Chinese rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="472" end="480" title="Ideal (ethics)" label="idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171951" start="974" end="987" title="Koreans in China" label="ethnic Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660506" start="1173" end="1199" title="Beijing Symphony Orchestra" label="Beijing Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q484918" start="1435" end="1454" title="Simon and Garfunkel" label="Simon and Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="1459" end="1470" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096912" start="1727" end="1732" title="suona" label="suona"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582736" start="1740" end="1748" title="Liu Yuan (musician)" label="Liu Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1793" end="1804" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="1806" end="1824" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="1830" end="1843" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015371" start="2102" end="2124" title="Return of the Prodigal (Cui Jian album)" label="Return of the Prodigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062891" start="2951" end="2969" title="Nothing to My Name" label="Nothing to My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434845" start="3051" end="3072" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Stadium" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208370" start="3313" end="3316" title="ADO (band)" label="ADO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354248" start="3475" end="3510" title="Rock and Roll on the New Long March" label="Rock and Roll on the New Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060273" start="3781" end="3795" title="Northwest Wind" label="Northwest Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q293730" start="3841" end="3854" title="Loess Plateau" label="Loess Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="3858" end="3865" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="3904" end="3919" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651218" start="4004" end="4012" title="Nanniwan" label="Nanniwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="4112" end="4138" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="Seoul Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161141" start="4182" end="4226" title="MTV Video Music Award for International Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="MTV International Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="4368" end="4372" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="4384" end="4388" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="4643" end="4676" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062891" start="4689" end="4707" title="Nothing to My Name" label="Nothing to My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="4874" end="4890" title="Wu&amp;#x27;er Kaixi" label="Wu&amp;#x27;er Kaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="5094" end="5109" title="Provinces of China" label="other provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q729561" start="5356" end="5372" title="1990 Asian Games" label="1990 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="5405" end="5414" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="5416" end="5421" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="5423" end="5433" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="5435" end="5442" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q569928" start="6623" end="6641" title="Prince Claus Awards" label="Prince Claus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q312572" start="6935" end="6949" title="Udo Lindenberg" label="Udo Lindenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="7007" end="7018" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052357" start="7156" end="7169" title="Transcendence (2012 film)" label="Transcendence"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="7202" end="7218" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q50484620" start="7440" end="7459" title="Ministry of Culture and Tourism (China)" label="Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q627250" start="7531" end="7552" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Stadium (former)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="7724" end="7730" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="7872" end="7881" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="8009" end="8023" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="8368" end="8372" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="8461" end="8472" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="8892" end="8910" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272710" start="8918" end="8938" title="Shanghai Indoor Stadium" label="Shanghai Grand Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q240211" start="8982" end="8993" title="Wild Horses (The Rolling Stones song)" label="Wild Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="9252" end="9258" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="9387" end="9400" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636373" start="9525" end="9547" title="Hohaiyan Rock Festival" label="Hohaiyan Rock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q31103" start="9551" end="9563" title="Fulong Beach" label="Fulong Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881178" start="9728" end="9748" title="Beijing Pop Festival" label="Beijing Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="9815" end="9827" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="9866" end="9872" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="9989" end="10004" title="Chinese New Year" label="Spring Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="10045" end="10069" title="China Central Television" label="China Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015371" start="10478" end="10500" title="Return of the Prodigal (Cui Jian album)" label="Return of the Prodigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354248" start="10538" end="10583" title="Rock &amp;#x27;N&amp;#x27; Roll on the New Long March" label="Rock &amp;#x27;N&amp;#x27; Roll on the New Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036348" start="10648" end="10656" title="Solution (Cui Jian album)" label="Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243135" start="10689" end="10713" title="Balls Under the Red Flag" label="Balls Under the Red Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014320" start="10760" end="10786" title="The Power of the Powerless (album)" label="The Power of the Powerless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503053" start="10834" end="10849" title="Show You Colour" label="Show You Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q814710" start="11012" end="11028" title="Beijing Bastards" label="Beijing Bastards"/>
<link wikidata="Q197331" start="11072" end="11082" title="Zhang Yuan (director)" label="Zhang Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217473" start="11109" end="11127" title="Roots and Branches (2001 film)" label="Roots and Branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767323" start="11230" end="11248" title="The Sun Also Rises (2007 film)" label="The Sun Also Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q716069" start="11304" end="11313" title="Jiang Wen" label="Jiang Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12593668" start="11362" end="11374" title="Dooman River" label="Dooman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19657444" start="11400" end="11408" title="Zhang Lu (director)" label="Zhang Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052357" start="11436" end="11449" title="Transcendence (2012 film)" label="Transcendence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358739" start="11566" end="11580" title="Blue Sky Bones" label="Blue Sky Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064810" start="11602" end="11614" title="Chinese rock" label="Chinese rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104597" start="11616" end="11635" title="Tang Dynasty (band)" label="Tang Dynasty (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q487125" start="11637" end="11648" title="Viktor Tsoi" label="Viktor Tsoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123583788" start="11689" end="11714" title="Music censorship in China" label="Music censorship in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383629" wikidata="Q5377276" url="?curid=383629" title="Enfield, Massachusetts">
<text>Enfield was a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The town was lost as a result of the creation of the Quabbin Reservoir.

==History==
Incorporated in 1816 from portions of Greenwich and Belchertown. It was named in honor of one of its early settlers, Robert Field. General Joseph Hooker, Union general during the American Civil War, was once a resident, and his grandfather was once a town leader. It was centered at the junction of the east and west branches of the Swift River, and the Athol Branch of the Boston and Albany Railroad ran through the town. The town bordered six other towns - Belchertown, Pelham, Greenwich, Prescott, Ware, and Hardwick.

Enfield was disincorporated on April 28, 1938 and portions of the town were annexed to the adjacent towns of Belchertown, New Salem, Pelham, and Ware. (Not all of the former town is now in Hampshire County: the portion ceded to New Salem is now in Franklin County.) At the town&#x27;s final ball, the band played Auld Lang Syne. When the song ended, the town became a part of Belchertown.

The headquarters of the Metropolitan District Commission during the construction of the Quabbin Reservoir was located in the former town hall, and was the last building razed in the Swift River Valley, in 1940. The majority of the town center now lies submerged beneath the reservoir, although the Quabbin Observatory and Enfield Lookout, located on scenic Quabbin Hill, as well as the main entrance and headquarters of Quabbin State Park, a popular tourist destination with an emphasis on state history and nature, are all within the former town&#x27;s limits.

Enfield House, an on-campus living facility at Hampshire College in Amherst, Massachusetts, is named after the former town.

==Enfield in popular culture==

* Much of the novel &quot;Infinite Jest&quot; takes place in a city called Enfield, Mass.; David Foster Wallace has confirmed that he took the name from the town, but geographic cues make clear that the town in the novel is not the actual Enfield, and is instead a fictional stand-in for Brighton. The Enfield Tennis Academy and Ennet House, major locations in the novel, are located there.
* Mark Erelli&#x27;s song &quot;The Farewell Ball&quot; (from the album &quot;Hillbilly Pilgrim&quot;) wistfully recalls the town&#x27;s final ball from the perspective of a former resident of Enfield.
* &quot;Someday&quot; by Jackie French Koller is a children&#x27;s book about the history of Enfield. It is about a girl who has to move from Enfield so they can flood the town to make a drinking water reservoir for Boston.

==More Quabbin towns that were disincorporated==
*Dana
*Greenwich
*Prescott

==Notable People==
*George Eugene Eager (1859-1919) - U.S. Consul

==Photos==
==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==
*https://web.archive.org/web/20161017095551/http://menotomymaps.com/quab_1.html. Map showing the towns buried under Quabbin as they looked in 1912 with original house locations and current reservoir water level</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5377276" start="0" end="7" title="Enfield, Massachusetts" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="14" end="18" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="22" end="53" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="123" end="140" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604814" start="193" end="202" title="Greenwich, Massachusetts" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="207" end="218" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="294" end="307" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="334" end="352" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740620" start="488" end="499" title="Swift River (Ware River)" label="Swift River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="529" end="555" title="Boston and Albany Railroad" label="Boston and Albany Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416465" start="799" end="808" title="New Salem, Massachusetts" label="New Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536864" start="810" end="816" title="Pelham, Massachusetts" label="Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414325" start="822" end="826" title="Ware, Massachusetts" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="925" end="940" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="990" end="1004" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="1053" end="1064" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543589" start="1091" end="1123" title="MDCR" label="Metropolitan District Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="1155" end="1172" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268225" start="1249" end="1267" title="Swift River Valley" label="Swift River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="1677" end="1694" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="1698" end="1720" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077445" start="1813" end="1826" title="Infinite Jest" label="Infinite Jest"/>
<link wikidata="Q313246" start="1878" end="1898" title="David Foster Wallace" label="David Foster Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q915760" start="2075" end="2083" title="Brighton, Boston" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767531" start="2180" end="2191" title="Mark Erelli" label="Mark Erelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214645" start="2655" end="2659" title="Dana, Massachusetts" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604814" start="2661" end="2670" title="Greenwich, Massachusetts" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240836" start="2672" end="2680" title="Prescott, Massachusetts" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051800" start="2702" end="2721" title="George Eugene Eager" label="George Eugene Eager"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383631" wikidata="Q6500638" url="?curid=383631" title="Laurence Hartnett">
<text>Sir Laurence John Hartnett CBE (26 May 18984 April 1986) was a British engineer and businessman who made several important contributions to the Australian automotive industry, and is often called &quot;The Father of the Holden&quot;. He played a pivotal role in the development of Australia&#x27;s automotive industry by leading General Motors-Holden during the design and production of the first Australian-made car, the Holden 48-215. Hartnett was also involved in defense production during World War II. His innovative vision and leadership left a lasting legacy in both the automotive and industrial sectors of the country. 

==Childhood==

Hartnett was born into a middle-class family in Woking, England. His mother, Katherine Jane Taplin, was the daughter of Wiltshire farmer George Taplin and his wife Kate. His father, Irish born John Joseph Hartnett, was a doctor and inventor of patent medicines from Clonakilty, County Cork, who had an M.D. from Dublin and in 1892 had published a pamphlet on the treatment of tuberculosis. In addition he had invented an inhaling machine by means of which tubercular patients could breathe fresh, dry, medicated air. John Hartnett and Katherine Taplin married in Portsmouth on 1 May 1897 and went to live in Woking where in March of the following year their only child, Laurence (known as Larry) was born. The latter, however, was to retain no memory of his father who died nine months later. Shortly afterwards, mother and son went to live with Katherine&#x27;s childless sister and brother-in-law for whom Katherine acted as housekeeper, initially in Southsea and then in Kingston-upon-Thames. Larry began his schooling in 1903 in the home of a pair of middle-aged spinsters who taught him and some eight or nine other children in their dining room. From there he graduated two years later to Kingston Grammar School and from 1909 he attended Epsom College, which specialised in educating the sons of doctors who were, themselves, generally destined to enter that profession. Larry had obtained a foundation scholarship, offered to those doctors&#x27; sons whose families could not afford the fees. In his first year, the school&#x27;s Natural History Society created an Aeroplane Section in which he took a close interest, pasting photos of aircraft and newspaper cuttings about aviation into an exercise book as well as making detailed drawings of their parts and participating in the construction of a full-sized glider which the Section launched on a five hundred metre flight in 1912. Epsom was the first school in England to include aeronautical training as an optional extra subject. While College records show that Hartnett did not on the whole shine academically, in 1914 an essay he wrote on China won the Epsom College geography prize for which he received a book called &quot;Engineering Today&quot; by Thomas Corbin.

==Early career==
After leaving school in 1915 he became a management apprentice with British arms manufacturer Vickers Ltd, demand for whose products had been heightened by the outbreak of war with Germany in the previous year. In the day-time his training focused on industrial management at the company&#x27;s Crayford plant while in the evenings he studied theoretical subjects such as metallurgy and mathematics at a nearby technical school. Then in March 1918 he decided to enlist in the war, entering the Royal Naval College at Greenwich as a Probationary Flying Officer, a rank he retained until hostilities ended in the following November. He received practical training at Chingford and Northolt airports before being appointed to Number 304 Bomber Squadron in Shropshire. However, the Armistice was signed before he had been able to fly a single mission. Nevertheless, prior to his return to civilian life, he did do a stint as manager of an Air Force ground transport unit thereby qualifying in Aerodrome Management.

In 1919 he purchased a South London business which he renamed the Wallington Motor Company. In addition to making parts for gas stoves, it bought, sold, hired and repaired bicycles as well as the occasional automobile. Demand for motor cars in England in the immediate aftermath of the war was far greater than the supply and Hartnett increased the automotive side of his new venture by instructing his employees to make inquiries in nearby villages with a view to locating war widows who couldn&#x27;t drive but whose husbands prior to enlisting had left their cars up on blocks to await their owners&#x27; return. He would offer to buy these vehicles, which often needed work done to make them roadworthy, with a view to repairing and reselling them at Wallington Motors. Initially, he was very successful. But then the bubble burst as the economy slowed and motor cars became harder to sell. Already in September 1920, the Wallington Motor Company was forced to take out a £200 bank loan to remain afloat. Three months later, a further £600 was borrowed. Even so, the venture was unable to meet its liabilities, closing its doors for the last time in December 1921.

Undeterred, in the following year, Hartnett set up as an automobile engineer, renting part of a Wallington boot repair shop and dealing in bicycles, motor bikes and cars. But the economy had grown sluggish and when this, too, failed he turned to earning a precarious living as a freelance automotive consultant. He obtained commissions with firms such as the Nyasa Consolidated Company which wanted him to inspect vehicles it was considering buying for its commercial operations in central and east Africa. But the pickings were meager and time weighed on his hands. In 1923 he sold a patent for improving insulators on radio aerials to a ceramics firm.

His next important career move came in March 1923 when he was offered and accepted a job as Automobile Engineer with trading firm Guthrie and Company which administered rubber plantations in southeast Asia as well as importing goods such as tea, alcoholic beverages and motor cars into the region. On his arrival in Singapore two months later he was put in charge of Guthrie and Co&#x27;s automobile distribution and sales operation in Grange Road. There, he handled mainly Buick cars for which the company had obtained the local franchise from American manufacturer General Motors in the previous February. Hartnett&#x27;s job was to unload and assemble these vehicles when they arrived by ship and to distribute them to a network of dealers he had appointed and whose activities he supervised throughout the region. He conducted the Singapore dealership himself.

The Grange Road operation flourished as booming worldwide demand for rubber brought prosperity to southeast Asia, greatly increasing demand for motor vehicles. At the same time, Hartnett benefited personally from the boom by speculating in rubber futures as a sideline. He also took an extracurricular interest in commercial radio during this period. When his employer imported a small transmitter, he began broadcasting music and talks from the Grange Road premises for about 15 minutes each day with financial support from local advertisers. However, he had neglected to obtain a licence and the colonial authorities, fearing that such a small, shoestring operation would fail and thereby make it more difficult for any subsequent larger venture to succeed, soon forced him to close down. So, he moved the operation to Johore where the British fiat had less force and whose Sultan initially welcomed it. But it didn&#x27;t last long there either as pressure exerted on Guthrie and Co by the imperial government in Singapore once more ensured its closure—this time definitively.

Then in 1924, following a change in the composition of Guthrie and Co&#x27;s London management, Hartnett began to feel that the firm was losing interest in the automotive side of its southeast Asian business. His consequent disaffection grew so that in September of the following year, determined to leave, he wrote to General Motors Export Company seeking employment. Global automobile sales were rapidly expanding at this time due in large part to a general reduction in prices resulting from the adoption of mass production techniques. This in turn had generated a spiralling demand for senior staff to work for automotive exporting companies in markets proliferating throughout the world.

General Motors, which had just sold its five millionth car and had been impressed with Hartnett&#x27;s success in distributing and selling its Buicks in southeast Asia, now offered him a job as a field representative in southern India. His main function would be to appoint and supervise the work of GM distributors in the Madras district. He accepted the position, resigning from Guthrie and Co on 31 March 1926, and embarked for Calcutta on 10 June accompanied by his wife, Gladys (née Tyler), whom he had met when, as an employee of Vickers Ltd., he had lived with his mother next door to the Tyler family in Bexley Heath. They had married in Singapore on 26 February 1925

He found GM&#x27;s business in Madras was being conducted in a haphazard manner and he appears to have been successful in improving the situation—so much so that he became one of only four salesmen world wide to win an award in General Motors&#x27; 1926 &quot;Prize Contest&quot;—which earned him a large bonus. But, repelled by the poverty he encountered almost everywhere and the rigidity of the Hindu caste system, he felt no desire to remain in India any longer than necessary. It was GM&#x27;s policy that all senior employees working overseas should spend some time in America studying the relationship between the Corporation&#x27;s business there and its international operations. So in April 1927, following a bout of malaria and dysentery, Hartnett headed for the US where, during the next five months he focused in particular on gaining a sound working knowledge of automobile manufacturing in Detroit and also took part in various feasibility studies at head office, examining proposals for setting up automobile assembly plants abroad to get around rising foreign tariff barriers.

But he was not to remain long in America. Late in September 1927, he was appointed sales manager of General Motors Nordiska in Stockholm, taking charge of marketing the company&#x27;s vehicles throughout Sweden and Finland. His horizons were widened when he played a role there in choosing some of the superficial features comprising the outward appearance of the vehicles for whose sale he was responsible—especially their colour. Attention to such external details was becoming increasingly important in determining GM&#x27;s growing success and senior overseas representatives like Hartnett were given some leeway in choosing them in the light of perceived local preferences. Hartnett would send his staff to interview actual and potential customers in his territory concerning their colour preferences. Then he made recommendations accordingly to the American parent company. Among other things, he found that Finns disliked the colour red, which they associated with the Soviet Union whose aggressive propensities they distrusted. While making use of the glitzy publicity-seeking techniques that were benefiting GM&#x27;s bottom line in America at that time—such as the much hyped theatrical unveiling of new models as they arrived—he argued that emphasis should be placed on securing customer confidence rather than just making quick profits and to this end he focused heavily on the provision of effective after sales service.

His success in Sweden was rewarded in January 1929 when he was appointed head of the export section of the troubled Vauxhall Motors operation in Luton, England, which GM had acquired four years earlier and which was then operating at a considerable loss. He found a poisonous atmosphere prevailing at Luton where Vauxhall staff seemed consumed by resentment at the American parent company&#x27;s tendency to interfere with their operations. So, he welcomed the frequent opportunities afforded him as export sales manager for getting away from all this ill humour to familiarise himself with the firm&#x27;s foreign markets. In September 1929, with his wife and daughter Maureen, he set out on a yearlong round-the-world-trip to acquaint himself with Vauxhall&#x27;s overseas markets, including in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.

While Vauxhall, like most businesses, suffered during the Depression, its export arm actually prospered between 1931 and 1933. This was due partly to a sense of loyalty to the mother country among both British nationals abroad and the populations of Britain&#x27;s overseas dominions. At the same time, it was also a result of the popularity of exported Vauxhall Cadet cars. These were difficult to sell on the home market because their engines had little power as a result of the extremely high British horsepower tax. That tax, however, did not apply to exports, which meant Cadets offered for sale outside Britain were fitted with the new, powerful Bedford Truck engines first manufactured by Vauxhall in 1931 and were therefore very popular in foreign markets. In addition, a significant devaluation of the pound sterling in that year greatly reduced the price of British goods abroad, including cars, while a general shortage of US dollars during the Depression years further inclined foreign buyers to purchase British vehicles.

==General Motors-Holden&#x27;s==
Hartnett&#x27;s success at Vauxhall was no doubt an important factor in General Motors&#x27; decision to offer him the post of managing director of the Australian firm General Motors-Holden&#x27;s Ltd (GMH). This operation had been formed in 1931 when Melbourne-based chassis importer General Motors (Australia) had amalgamated with Adelaide automotive body manufacturer Holden&#x27;s Motor Body Builders Ltd. The Australian government at this time, bent on diversifying what was still primarily a rural economy, had imposed high duties on fully imported cars. In response, GMH manufactured bodies for its vehicles in Adelaide and imported its chassis parts in unassembled form to assemble them locally.

Arriving in March 1934, to take over his new role at GMH&#x27;s head office in Melbourne, he found himself almost immediately embroiled in a struggle for control of the Australian operation with the chairman of the board of directors, (Sir) Edward Holden, whose family had founded the Adelaide motor body building part of the business. With a fair amount of tact and the support both of the American head office and most of the other Australian directors, Hartnett managed to emerge victorious from this conflict and this in turn enabled him to reorganise the company&#x27;s clumsy administrative structure and to increase its efficiency generally.

He proceeded to consolidate its Melbourne operations which he had found scattered over seven widely separated locations. The main one—the Victorian chassis assembly plant in City Road—occupied a leased building that was too small to keep up with the increasing demand for vehicles as the economy was picking up in the mid &#x27;thirties. So, he decided to centralise the firm&#x27;s dispersed Victorian activities by erecting new, purpose-built accommodation on a vacant Government-owned 50-acre block of land at Fisherman&#x27;s Bend, whose sale required an act of the Victorian Parliament. He made sure that the construction of the new plant on this land received maximum publicity. To open it on 5 November 1936, he secured the services of none other than prime minister Joseph Lyons. The ceremony captured wide attention in Victoria, at least, the Melbourne &quot;Argus&quot; devoting sixteen pages to it in addition to its editorial which predicted that it marked the beginning of the city&#x27;s transformation into &quot;an Australian Coventry&quot;.

At the same time, Hartnett became aware of widespread hostility among Australians towards GMH, which many viewed as a ruthless, profiteering American-oriented organisation cynically bent on enriching its mainly US shareholders at the expense of the local community. To combat this mindset, he took every opportunity to portray the company as a patriotic corporate citizen, emphasising particularly the amount of employment it provided, both directly and indirectly, as well as the auxiliary industries it supported and its contribution to Australia&#x27;s defence potential. In addition, he himself played a high-profile public role in seeking to promote Australian industrial development generally—among other things, by calling for the creation of a national standards laboratory and an aeronautical research facility, while also helping to advance the objectives of the Australian Industries Protection League and advocating a more thorough exploitation of the country&#x27;s mineral resources and the harnessing of tidal movements in Spencer Gulf for energy generation.

==Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation==
In the 1930s, his most important contribution outside the automobile industry was in the field of aircraft manufacture. In 1936, together with Essington Lewis, CEO of the Broken Hill Proprietary company, W.S. Robinson, joint chairman of Broken Hill Associated Smelters, and Sir Lennon Raws and Sir Harry (later Lord) McGowan of Imperial Chemical Industries—all of whose companies contributed, along with General Motors, to the financing of the venture—he was involved in setting up the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation, which proceeded to manufacture aircraft on a site at Fisherman&#x27;s Bend. Later known as &quot;Wirraways&quot;, they were based on a design of the North American Aviation Corporation, a partly owned General Motors subsidiary. When used in the Pacific war, however, they proved to be inferior in dogfights to the highly manoeuvrable Japanese Zeros.

==Wartime Service==

During that decade, Hartnett also showed a keen interest in Australia&#x27;s military preparedness and in June 1939 he publicly criticised the United Australia Party government for not doing enough to ensure the country&#x27;s ability to defend itself in an increasingly dangerous world. This gave rise to a brief slanging match with prime minister Robert Menzies who characterised it as &quot;absurdly incorrect&quot;. Nevertheless, in September, when Britain declared war on Germany and Menzies announced that by consequence Australia, too, was at war, Hartnett placed himself at the government&#x27;s disposal, declaring his readiness to do anything without financial recompense to assist the war effort. The offer was actuated in part by his belief that such generosity would benefit GMH&#x27;s local business. It also reflected his self-confidence and was an expression of his conviction that as a privileged person he had a responsibility to give something back to the community. That it was accepted indicates the government&#x27;s recognition of Hartnett&#x27;s considerable technical, managerial and organisational skills as well as of his World War I experience in the production of arms for Vickers Ltd. As a result, in July 1940, he became Director of Ordnance Production, responsible for the procurement in Australia of weapons and other products such as armoured fighting vehicles, mobile laundries and field kitchens for Australia&#x27;s military forces. He took particular pride in the pioneering work done by his directorate in the development of optical glass for use in gun sights and related weaponry. Some of the prisms produced for use in instruments such as range finders, submarine periscopes and aerial photography were exported to the US.

At first, there was a considerable amount of conflict between the Directorate and the Army, partly because the latter, which knew little about manufacturing, repeatedly changed its orders thus creating serious problems on the factory floor. In addition, the Army&#x27;s initial insistence on specifying the precise design of the items it wanted also gave rise to manufacturing difficulties. Hartnett argued that it was up to his Directorate to design the weapons after being told their purpose and how they were to be used. The design, he argued, should be a matter for those responsible for the manufacturing because they alone understood the problems and costs involved, given the nature of the factory resources and the availability of raw materials. Eventually, he carried his point so that by mid 1943 the Army had become much more co-operative in this regard.

As well as taking charge of ordnance production, Hartnett was also made head of the Army Inventions Directorate created by War Cabinet in January 1942 to solicit and evaluate proposals from the general public for improving the fighting efforts of Australia&#x27;s military forces. While most of the 21,645 suggestions received by this body over the subsequent three and a half years were dismissed out of hand as impracticable, 3,686 were sent to an expert advisory panel for closer consideration and 127, including a process for water-proofing maps and a container for safely dropping supplies from aircraft, were finally accepted for production.

Also in January 1942, as Japanese forces were heading southward down the Malay peninsula towards Singapore, Hartnett offered to forestall them by flying to the island, himself, gathering up valuable machine tool gauging equipment left there and bringing it back to Australia before the enemy&#x27;s arrival. The offer was accepted but he got no further than Darwin before the mission was called off and Singapore fell to the invader.

In recognition of these wartime contributions, following the cessation of hostilities in 1945 he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire.

==Manufacturing an Australian car==

A small number of motor cars had been produced in Australia by a few enterprising individuals even before the end of the 19th century and between the wars, to avoid increasingly heavy import duties imposed by governments anxious to promote industrial employment, a number of Australian firms were already manufacturing replacement parts—which, however, were of generally poor quality. In addition, to avoid high import tariffs the major American auto exporters, including General Motors, were building their vehicle bodies locally and importing their chassis in unassembled form, assembling them in Australia. They didn&#x27;t, however, want the enormous additional expense of manufacturing entire vehicles there.

Hartnett, by contrast, desired nothing more than to head such a manufacturing operation in his adopted land. So, while publicly supporting GM&#x27;s policy, privately he did his best to undermine it by persuading cabinet ministers and senior public servants of the feasibility of that course, making it clear, however, that GM would not do it unless sufficient pressure was applied. The government was certainly interested as Australia&#x27;s industrial competence had increased enormously during the war due to the necessity of manufacturing a wide range of precision products for the fighting services. Furthermore, post-war motor vehicle manufacturing promised to provide many jobs for returning service personnel while the necessary acquisition of the accompanying skills and industrial infrastructure would help build up the country&#x27;s defence capacity.

Accordingly, Hartnett warned his American directors that the Australian government was determined to have cars manufactured locally and might, itself, establish a factory for that purpose if private industry proved unwilling. To enhance the credibility of this threat, he sent his New York head office letters which he had asked J.K. Jensen, chairman of the government&#x27;s Secondary Industries Commission, to write to him, saying the government was resolved to force the creation of the industry. He even supplied Jensen with proposed drafts of such letters. And he warned GM that to head off the prospect of a state-owned industry, Ford and/or Chrysler, would very likely become anxious to erect their own Australian factories for the purpose—which, if GM did nothing, would result in a substantial reduction in demand for the corporation&#x27;s imported cars. It was mainly this that changed General Motors Corporation&#x27;s mind. But whether that represented a personal triumph for Hartnett&#x27;s powers of skulduggery and persuasion or whether he had simply said what was already obvious to the American directors is open to debate.

==Life after GMH==
Hartnett continued to make important contributions to Australian motoring after he left GMH. He instigated an ambitious venture to build a uniquely Australian car, the Hartnett, based on a design by Frenchman, Jean Gregoire. The Hartnett was a front wheel drive design, with an air cooled, 600cc, horizontally opposed twin-cylinder engine. The venture failed, after problems with the supplier of the aluminium body panels. Approximately 120 cars were produced between 1949 and 1955, and few of these survive today.

Then, in 1957, he was involved in production of the Lloyd-Hartnett car, based on a German design. This venture also experienced misfortune, as Borgward, the German supplier of parts for the car, suffered financial problems.

==Promotion of Nissan==

Hartnett&#x27;s luck changed in 1960, when he saw a new Japanese car – the Datsun Bluebird – on display at the Melbourne Motor Show. Hartnett commenced importing the Datsun to Australia, pioneering the importation of Japanese cars to Australia. This became a successful venture, and Hartnett was responsible for popularising the Nissan/Datsun brand in Australia.

In 1966, Hartnett sought to establish local production of Nissan cars, but this was not successful. Nissan went on to assemble cars from CKD kits at the Pressed Metal Corporation plant in Sydney, followed in 1976 by assembly at the Melbourne factory where Volkswagen cars were once produced. Eventually, Nissan did commence full production of cars in Australia. This arrangement continued until 1992, when the Melbourne plant was closed in favour of importing cars direct from Japan.

==Honours==
On New year&#x27;s Day 1945 Hartnett was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).

In 1965, in honour of Sir Laurence Hartnett, the Society of Automotive Engineers Australasia established the annual Hartnett Award as an award for an outstanding original contribution to automotive or aeronautical engineering knowledge or practice.

He was knighted in the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours of June 1967.

==Hartnett&#x27;s legacy==
Hartnett has left a legacy of playing a crucial role in the introduction of two of Australia&#x27;s best selling brands of cars – Holden and Nissan.

==See also==
* Edward Holden

==References==

*L.J. Hartnett Big Wheels and Little Wheels Melbourne: Wildgrass books, 1981 
*Joe Rich, Hartnett: Portrait of a Technocratic Brigand Sydney: Turton and Armstrong, 1986
*Joe Rich, &#x27;Profiting from the Pitfalls of Oral History: the Case of Sir Laurence Hartnett&#x27;, in Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society Vol. 80 Parts 1 and 2, June 1994
*Joe Rich,&#x27;An Edwardian Childhood: Sir Laurence Hartnett and the Search for identity&#x27; in Australian Historical Studies No 95 October 1990
*Robert Conlon and John Perkins, Wheels and Deals: the automotive industry in twentieth century Australia Aldershot:Ashgate, 2001

==External links==
* Australian Science Archives Project – Sir Laurence John Hartnett
* Hartnett Award
* Official Holden history
* Nissan heritage website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6500638" start="0" end="26" title="Laurence Hartnett" label="Sir Laurence John Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27" end="30" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="63" end="70" title="British Isles" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="71" end="79" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43845" start="84" end="95" title="Businessperson" label="businessman"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="144" end="153" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="155" end="165" title="Automotive industry" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="220" end="226" title="Holden" label="Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="329" end="350" title="General Motors-Holden" label="General Motors-Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="413" end="416" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q11286115" start="422" end="435" title="Holden 48-215" label="Holden 48-215"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="493" end="505" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="593" end="611" title="industrial sectors" label="industrial sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="670" end="682" title="Middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="693" end="699" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="701" end="708" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="765" end="774" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="827" end="832" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480271" start="889" end="904" title="patent medicine" label="patent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q996703" start="911" end="934" title="Clonakilty" label="Clonakilty, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="957" end="963" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1021" end="1033" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="1208" end="1218" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="1253" end="1259" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="Q541348" start="1598" end="1606" title="Southsea" label="Southsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="1619" end="1639" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston-upon-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q253506" start="1712" end="1720" title="spinster" label="spinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238550" start="1840" end="1863" title="Kingston Grammar School" label="Kingston Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383987" start="1890" end="1903" title="Epsom College" label="Epsom College"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="2055" end="2066" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="2218" end="2227" title="Airplane" label="Aeroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="2289" end="2297" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="2463" end="2469" title="Glider (aircraft)" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="2586" end="2598" title="Aeronautics" label="aeronautical"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2749" end="2754" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383987" start="2763" end="2776" title="Epsom College" label="Epsom College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385000" start="2862" end="2875" title="Thomas Corwin Mendenhall" label="Thomas Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="2947" end="2957" title="Apprenticeship" label="apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="2971" end="2988" title="arms manufacturer" label="arms manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195090" start="2989" end="3000" title="Vickers Limited" label="Vickers Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3076" end="3083" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662013" start="3146" end="3167" title="industrial management" label="industrial management"/>
<link wikidata="Q146676" start="3190" end="3198" title="Crayford" label="Crayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="3267" end="3277" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089213" start="3389" end="3408" title="Royal Naval College, Greenwich" label="Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="3412" end="3421" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778007" start="3560" end="3569" title="Chingford" label="Chingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83399" start="3574" end="3582" title="Northolt" label="Northolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="3648" end="3658" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="3673" end="3682" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3830" end="3839" title="Royal Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="3884" end="3893" title="Aerodrome" label="Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="3930" end="3942" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3973" end="3997" title="Wallington Motor Company" label="Wallington Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667685" start="4031" end="4041" title="Gas stove" label="gas stoves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="4079" end="4087" title="Bicycle" label="bicycles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5436" end="5462" title="Nyasa Consolidated Company" label="Nyasa Consolidated Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6048" end="6057" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="6299" end="6313" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6567" end="6576" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="6667" end="6673" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="8373" end="8387" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="9454" end="9466" title="Caste system in India" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10178" end="10185" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="10349" end="10355" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="10360" end="10367" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11121" end="11133" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="11696" end="11711" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="11725" end="11730" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="12377" end="12386" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="12388" end="12399" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12404" end="12416" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12477" end="12487" title="Great Depression" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917458" start="12773" end="12787" title="Vauxhall Cadet" label="Vauxhall Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="13756" end="13763" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935142" start="15356" end="15377" title="Fishermans Bend, Victoria" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001700" start="16775" end="16814" title="Australian Industries Protection League" label="Australian Industries Protection League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116315" start="16979" end="17012" title="Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation" label="Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="17879" end="17884" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Zeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="18051" end="18073" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="18257" end="18271" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19057" end="19068" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="21548" end="21554" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="21763" end="21777" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="21835" end="21845" title="Motor car" label="motor cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927196" start="24726" end="24734" title="Hartnett (car)" label="Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q719010" start="24768" end="24781" title="Jean-Albert Grégoire" label="Jean Gregoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q530568" start="25126" end="25140" title="Lloyd-Hartnett" label="Lloyd-Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="25314" end="25320" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324018" start="25399" end="25414" title="Datsun Bluebird" label="Datsun Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151625" start="25435" end="25455" title="Melbourne Motor Show" label="Melbourne Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="25825" end="25828" title="Complete knock down" label="CKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="25944" end="25954" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="26188" end="26207" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="26238" end="26282" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26340" end="26383" title="Society of Automotive Engineers Australasia" label="Society of Automotive Engineers Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26407" end="26421" title="Hartnett Award" label="Hartnett Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951939" start="26577" end="26593" title="Birthday Honours" label="Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343479" start="26801" end="26814" title="Edward Holden" label="Edward Holden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383634" wikidata="Q4117242" url="?curid=383634" title="Chaos model">
<text>In computing, the chaos model is a structure of software development. Its creator, who used the pseudonym L.B.S. Raccoon, noted that project management models such as the spiral model and waterfall model, while good at managing schedules and staff, didn&#x27;t provide methods to fix bugs or solve other technical problems. At the same time, programming methodologies, while effective at fixing bugs and solving technical problems, do not help in managing deadlines or responding to customer requests. The structure attempts to bridge this gap. Chaos theory was used as a tool to help understand these issues.

==Software development life cycle==
The chaos model notes that the phases of the life cycle apply to all levels of projects, from the whole project to individual lines of code.

* The whole project must be defined, implemented, and integrated.
* Systems must be defined, implemented, and integrated.
* Modules must be defined, implemented, and integrated.
* Functions must be defined, implemented, and integrated.
* Lines of code are defined, implemented and integrated.

One important change in perspective is whether projects can be thought of as whole units, or must be thought of in pieces. Nobody writes tens of thousands of lines of code in one sitting. They write small pieces, one line at a time, verifying that the small pieces work. Then they build up from there. The behavior of a complex system emerges from the combined behavior of the smaller building blocks.

==Chaos strategy==
The chaos strategy is a strategy of software development based on the chaos model. The main rule is &quot;always resolve the most important issue first&quot;.

* An &quot;issue&quot; is an incomplete programming task.
* The &quot;most important&quot; issue is a combination of &quot;big&quot;, &quot;urgent&quot;, and &quot;robust&quot;.
** &quot;Big&quot; issues provide value to users as working functionality.
** &quot;Urgent&quot; issues are timely in that they would otherwise hold up other work.
** &quot;Robust&quot; issues are trusted and tested when resolved. Developers can then safely focus their attention elsewhere.
* To &quot;resolve&quot; means to bring it to a point of stability.

The chaos strategy resembles the way that programmers work toward the end of a project, when they have a list of bugs to fix and features to create. Usually someone prioritizes the remaining tasks, and the programmers fix them one at a time. The chaos strategy states that this is the only valid
way to do the work.

The chaos strategy was inspired by Go strategy.

==Connections with chaos theory==
There are several tie-ins with chaos theory.

* The chaos model may help explain why software tends to be so unpredictable.
* It explains why high-level concepts like architecture cannot be treated independently of low-level lines of code.
* It provides a hook for explaining what to do next, in terms of the chaos strategy.

==See also==

*V-model

==References==
==Further reading==
* Roger Pressman (1997) Software Engineering: A Practitioner&#x27;s Approach 4th edition, pages 29–30, McGraw Hill.
* Raccoon (1995) The Chaos Model and the Chaos Life Cycle, in ACM Software Engineering Notes, Volume 20, Number 1, Pages 55 to 66, January 1995, ACM Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3" end="12" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117242" start="18" end="29" title="Chaos model" label="chaos model"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="48" end="68" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460738" start="171" end="183" title="spiral model" label="spiral model"/>
<link wikidata="Q478175" start="188" end="203" title="waterfall model" label="waterfall model"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="545" end="557" title="Chaos theory" label="Chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="2555" end="2557" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="2634" end="2646" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="2770" end="2782" title="software architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297086" start="2944" end="2951" title="V-Model (software development)" label="V-model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383637" wikidata="Q1543960" url="?curid=383637" title="List of football clubs in Japan">
<text>This is a list of association football clubs in Japan from the 2025 season.

== Japan Professional Football League (J.League) ==

Three leagues will consist of 20 teams from 2024 onwards.

=== J1 League ===

&quot;First division of the Japanese professional football system with 20 clubs:&quot;

* Albirex Niigata
* Avispa Fukuoka
* Cerezo Osaka
* Fagiano Okayama
* Gamba Osaka
* Kashima Antlers
* Kashiwa Reysol
* Kawasaki Frontale
* Kyoto Sanga
* Machida Zelvia
* Nagoya Grampus
* Sanfrecce Hiroshima
* Shimizu S-Pulse
* Shonan Bellmare
* FC Tokyo
* Tokyo Verdy
* Urawa Red Diamonds
* Vissel Kobe
* Yokohama F. Marinos
* Yokohama FC

=== J2 League ===

&quot;Second division of the Japanese professional football system with 20 clubs:&quot;

* Blaublitz Akita
* Ehime FC
* Fujieda MYFC
* Hokkaido Consadole Sapporo
* FC Imabari
* Iwaki FC
* JEF United Chiba
* Júbilo Iwata
* Kataller Toyama
* Mito HollyHock
* Montedio Yamagata
* Oita Trinita
* RB Omiya Ardija
* Renofa Yamaguchi
* Roasso Kumamoto
* Sagan Tosu
* Tokushima Vortis
* V-Varen Nagasaki
* Vegalta Sendai
* Ventforet Kofu

=== J3 League ===

&quot;Third and last division of the Japanese professional football system with 20 clubs:&quot;

* Azul Claro Numazu
* Fukushima United
* Gainare Tottori
* FC Gifu
* Giravanz Kitakyushu
* Kagoshima United
* Kamatamare Sanuki
* Kochi United
* Matsumoto Yamaga
* Nagano Parceiro
* Nara Club
* FC Osaka
* Ryukyu Okinawa
* SC Sagamihara
* Tegevajaro Miyazaki
* Thespa Gunma
* Tochigi City FC
* Tochigi SC
* Vanraure Hachinohe
* Zweigen Kanazawa

== Japan Football League (JFL) ==

&quot;First division of the Japanese amateur football system and the only nationwide division for amateur clubs.&quot;

&quot;16 clubs:&quot;

* Asuka FC
* Atletico Suzuka
* Briobecca Urayasu Ichikawa
* Criacao Shinjuku (L)
* Honda FC (C)
* Iwate Grulla Morioka (L)
* Maruyasu Okazaki (C)
* Minebea Mitsumi FC (C)
* Okinawa SV
* Reilac Shiga (L)
* ReinMeer Aomori (L)
* Tiamo Hirakata
* Veertien Mie (L)
* Verspah Oita (L)
* Yokogawa Musashino
* Yokohama Sports &amp; Culture Club (L)

== Japanese Regional Leagues ==

&quot;It are a group of nine parallel association football leagues in Japan that are organized on the regional basis. They form the fifth and sixth tier of the Japanese association football league system.&quot;

=== Hokkaidō League ===
* ASC Hokkaido (Tomakomai, Hokkaido)
* Sabas (Sapporo, Hokkaido, Hokkaido)
* BTOP Hokkaido (Kuriyama, Hokkaido)
* Canale Otaru (Otaru, Hokkaido)
* Hokkaido Tokachi Sky Earth (Obihiro, Hokkaido)
* Japan Steel Muroran (Muroran, Hokkaido)
* Norbritz Hokkaido (Sapporo, Hokkaido)
* Sapporo Univ. Goal Plunderers (Sapporo, Hokkaido) (&quot;Un&quot;)

=== Tōhoku League ===
==== Division 1====
* Blancdieu Hirosaki (Hirosaki, Aomori)
* Cobaltore Onagawa (Onagawa, Miyagi)
* Fuji Club 2003 (Hanamaki, Iwate) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Ganju Iwate (Hachimantai, Iwate)
* Hitome Senbonzakura ft. S.U.F.T. (Shibata, Miyagi) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Michinoku Sendai (Sendai, Miyagi Prefecture)
* Shichigahama SC (Shichigahama, Miyagi)
* Shichinohe SC (Shichinohe, Aomori)
* Sendai Sasuke (Sendai, Miyagi)
* FC La Universidad de Sendai (Shibata, Miyagi) (&quot;Un&quot;)

==== Division 2 ====

===== North =====
* Bogolle D. Tsugaru (Tsugaru, Aomori)
* Morioka Zebra (Morioka, Iwate)
* Nu Perle Hiraizumi Maesawa (Hiraizumi, Iwate)
* Nippon Steel Kamaishi (Kamaishi, Iwate) (C)
* Omiya SC (Ōmiya-ku, Saitama)
* Oshu United (Oshu, Iwate)
* Saruta Kōgyō (Akita, Akita) (C)
* TDK Shinwakai (Nikaho, Akita)

===== South =====
* Chaneaule Koriyama (Koriyama, Fukushima)
* Iwaki Furukawa (Iwaki, Fukushima)
* Merry (Fukushima, Fukushima)
* Oyama Club (Morioka, Iwate)
* Parafrente Yonezawa (Yonezawa, Yamagata)
* Primeiro Fukushima (Fukushima prefecture)
* Ricoh Industry Tohoku (Shibata, Miyagi) (C)
* FC La Universidad de Sendai Segunda (Sendai, Miyagi) (&quot;Un&quot;)

=== Kantō Soccer League (KSL) ===
==== Division 1 ====
* Aries Toshima (Toshima, Tokyo) (renamed from Aries Tokyo
* Joyful Honda Tsukuba (Tsukuba, Ibaraki) (C)
* Nankatsu SC (Katsushika, Tokyo)
* FC N. (Inagi, Tokyo) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* RKD Ryugasaki (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Toho Titanium (Kanagawa Prefecture)
* Toin University of Yokohama FC (Yokohama, Kanagawa) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Tokyo 23 (Special wards of Tokyo)
* Tokyo United (Bunkyō, Tokyo)
* Vonds Ichihara (Ichihara, Chiba)

==== Division 2 ====
* Atsugi Hayabusa (Atsugi, Kanagawa)
* Edo All United (Edogawa, Tokyo)
* Coedo Kawagoe (Kawagoe, Saitama)
* Esperanza SC (Yokohama, Kanagawa)
* Hitachi Building System SC (Chiyoda, Tokyo) (C)
* Shibuya City FC (Shibuya, Tokyo)
* Tokyo International University (Sakado, Saitama) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Tonan Maebashi (Maebashi, Gunma)
* Vertfee Yaita (Yaita, Tochigi)
* Yokohama Takeru (Yokohama, Kanagawa)

=== Hokushin&#x27;etsu League (HFL) ===

==== Division 1 ====
* &#x27;05 Kamo FC (Kamo, Niigata) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Artista Asama (Tōmi, Nagano)
* Fukui United (Fukui, Fukui)
* FC Hokuriku (Kanazawa, Ishikawa) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* JSC FC (Seirō, Niigata) (aka. College of Upward Players in Soccer or CUPS)
* Niigata UHW (Niigata, Niigata) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* SR Komatsu (Komatsu, Ishikawa)
* Toyama Shinjo Club (Toyama, Toyama)

==== Division 2 ====
* FC Abies (Chino, Nagano)
* Antelope Shoijiri (Shiojiri, Nagano)
* CUPS Seirō (Seirō, Niigata) (Japan Soccer College &quot;B&quot; team)
* Kanazawa Gakuin University (Kanazawa, Ishikawa) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* FC Matsucelona (Matsumoto, Nagano) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* N-Style Toyama (Toyama)
* NUHW FC (Niigata, Niigata) (&quot;Un&quot; B team)
* Sakai Phoenix (Sakai, Fukui)

=== Tōkai League ===
==== Division 1====
* Chukyo University FC (Toyota, Aichi) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Fujieda City Hall (Fujieda, Shizuoka)
* Gakunan F. Mosuperio (Gakunan, Shizuoka)
* FC Ise-Shima (Shima, Mie)
* AS Kariya (Kariya, Aichi)
* FC Kariya (Kariya, Aichi)
* Vencendor Mie UC (Tsu, Mie)
* Wyvern FC (Kariya, Aichi)
==== Division 2 ====
* Chukyo Univ. FC (Toyota, Aichi) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* FC Gifu Second (Gifu, Gifu) (&quot;FC Gifu&quot; &quot;B&quot; team)
* Nagoya SC (Nagoya, Aichi)
* Rajil FC Higashimikawa (Nagoya, Aichi)
* Sports &amp; Society Izu (Izu, Shizuoka)
* Tokai FC (Nagoya, Aichi)
* Tokai Gakuen FC (Nagoya, Aichi) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Yazaki Valente (Shimada, Shizuoka)

=== Kansai League ===
==== Division 1 ====
* Arterivo Wakayama (Wakayama, Wakayama)
* FC AWJ (Awaji, Hyōgo)
* Basara Hyōgo (Akashi, Hyōgo) (renamed from FC Easy 02 Akashi)
* Cento Cuore Harima (Harima, Hyōgo)
* Kobe FC 1970 (Kobe)
* Laranja Kyoto (Kyoto, Kyoto)
* Velago Ikoma (Ikoma, Nara) (relocated from Lagend Shiga)
* Moriyama Samurai 2000 (Moriyama, Shiga)

==== Division 2 ====
* Hannan University Club (Matsubara, Osaka) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Kandai FC 2008 (Suita, Osaka) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Kyoto Shiko Club (Kyoto, Kyoto)
* AC Middle Range (Higashiyodogawa, Osaka)
* Ococias Kyoto (Kyoto, Kyoto)
* Osaka Korean FC (Ikuno, Osaka)
* Route 11 (Kishiwada, Osaka)
* St. Andrew&#x27;s FC (Izumi, Osaka) (&quot;Un&quot;)

=== Chūgoku League ===
* Baleine Shimonoseki (Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi)
* Banmel Tottori (Tottori, Tottori)
* Belugarosso Iwami (Hamada, Shimane)
* Eneos Mizushima (Kurashiki, Okayama)
* Fukuyama City FC (Fukuyama, Hiroshima)
* Hatsukaichi FC (Hatsukaichi, Hiroshima)
* International Pacific University FC (Okayama, Okayama) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Mitsubishi Motors Mizushima (Kurashiki, Okayama) (C)
* SRC Hiroshima (Hiroshima, Hiroshima)
* Yonago Genki SC (Yonago, Tottori)

=== Shikoku League ===
* KUFC Nankoku (Nankoku, Kōchi) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Llamas Kochi (Kōchi, Kōchi)
* Lvnirosso NC (Niihama, Ehime)
* R. Velho Takamatsu (Takamatsu, Kagawa)
* Sonio Takamatsu (Takamatsu, Kagawa)
* Tadotsu FC (Tadotsu, Kagawa)
* FC Tokushima (Tokushima, Tokushima)
* Yamaji FC (Shikokuchūō, Ehime)

=== Kyūshū League (Kyu-League) ===
* Brew Kashima (Kashima, Saga)
* Itazuke FC (Fukuoka, Fukuoka)
* Kawasoe Club (Saga, Saga)
* KMG Holdings FC (Fukuoka, Fukuoka) (C)
* J-Lease FC (Ōita)
* MHI Nagasaki SC (Nagasaki, Nagasaki)
* NIFS Kanoya FC (Kanoya, Kagoshima) (&quot;Un&quot;)
* Nippon Steel Oita SC (Ōita, Ōita)
* Nobeoka Agata (Nobeoka, Miyazaki)
* Veroskronos Tsuno (Tsuno, Miyazaki)

==Notes==
* Teams with &quot;L&quot; have a J3 club license issued for the 2025 season.
* Teams with &quot;C&quot; are company teams.
* Teams with &quot;Un&quot; are feeder (or &quot;B&quot;) teams for their universities&#x27; main football teams.
* In the Regional Leagues, first divisions equal to Japanese fifth tier of league football, while second divisions equal to the sixth tier. So, regional leagues who only have one single division, such as Shikoku, have teams going straight from the prefectural top divisions to the fifth tier in case of a promotion.

==See also==
* Japanese association football league system
* List of women&#x27;s football clubs in Japan

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="18" end="38" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="48" end="53" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543960" start="63" end="74" title="List of football clubs in Japan" label="2025 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q383358" start="298" end="313" title="Albirex Niigata" label="Albirex Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q791164" start="316" end="330" title="Avispa Fukuoka" label="Avispa Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q855809" start="333" end="345" title="Cerezo Osaka" label="Cerezo Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q595489" start="348" end="363" title="Fagiano Okayama" label="Fagiano Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q738423" start="366" end="377" title="Gamba Osaka" label="Gamba Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932" start="380" end="395" title="Kashima Antlers" label="Kashima Antlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q844931" start="398" end="412" title="Kashiwa Reysol" label="Kashiwa Reysol"/>
<link wikidata="Q874016" start="415" end="432" title="Kawasaki Frontale" label="Kawasaki Frontale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047535" start="435" end="446" title="Kyoto Sanga" label="Kyoto Sanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366905" start="449" end="463" title="FC Machida Zelvia" label="Machida Zelvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249662" start="466" end="480" title="Nagoya Grampus" label="Nagoya Grampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q630279" start="483" end="502" title="Sanfrecce Hiroshima" label="Sanfrecce Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q823384" start="505" end="520" title="Shimizu S-Pulse" label="Shimizu S-Pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q692856" start="523" end="538" title="Shonan Bellmare" label="Shonan Bellmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q856619" start="541" end="549" title="FC Tokyo" label="FC Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q620499" start="552" end="563" title="Tokyo Verdy" label="Tokyo Verdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q218883" start="566" end="584" title="Urawa Red Diamonds" label="Urawa Red Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q844271" start="587" end="598" title="Vissel Kobe" label="Vissel Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854932" start="601" end="620" title="Yokohama F. Marinos" label="Yokohama F. Marinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062259" start="623" end="634" title="Yokohama FC" label="Yokohama FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q882425" start="746" end="761" title="Blaublitz Akita" label="Blaublitz Akita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059329" start="764" end="772" title="Ehime FC" label="Ehime FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342155" start="775" end="787" title="Fujieda MYFC" label="Fujieda MYFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q586787" start="790" end="816" title="Hokkaido Consadole Sapporo" label="Hokkaido Consadole Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198999" start="819" end="829" title="FC Imabari" label="FC Imabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q21652498" start="832" end="840" title="Iwaki FC" label="Iwaki FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q646204" start="843" end="859" title="JEF United Chiba" label="JEF United Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q855401" start="862" end="874" title="Júbilo Iwata" label="Júbilo Iwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140017" start="877" end="892" title="Kataller Toyama" label="Kataller Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060184" start="895" end="909" title="Mito HollyHock" label="Mito HollyHock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045524" start="912" end="929" title="Montedio Yamagata" label="Montedio Yamagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q385074" start="932" end="944" title="Oita Trinita" label="Oita Trinita"/>
<link wikidata="Q385496" start="947" end="962" title="RB Omiya Ardija" label="RB Omiya Ardija"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313421" start="965" end="981" title="Renofa Yamaguchi FC" label="Renofa Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q287571" start="984" end="999" title="Roasso Kumamoto" label="Roasso Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051238" start="1002" end="1012" title="Sagan Tosu" label="Sagan Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q513145" start="1015" end="1031" title="Tokushima Vortis" label="Tokushima Vortis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029309" start="1034" end="1050" title="V-Varen Nagasaki" label="V-Varen Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044651" start="1053" end="1067" title="Vegalta Sendai" label="Vegalta Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061696" start="1070" end="1084" title="Ventforet Kofu" label="Ventforet Kofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283587" start="1204" end="1221" title="Azul Claro Numazu" label="Azul Claro Numazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916541" start="1224" end="1240" title="Fukushima United FC" label="Fukushima United"/>
<link wikidata="Q957420" start="1243" end="1258" title="Gainare Tottori" label="Gainare Tottori"/>
<link wikidata="Q778887" start="1261" end="1268" title="FC Gifu" label="FC Gifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151182" start="1271" end="1290" title="Giravanz Kitakyushu" label="Giravanz Kitakyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17208878" start="1293" end="1309" title="Kagoshima United FC" label="Kagoshima United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210742" start="1312" end="1329" title="Kamatamare Sanuki" label="Kamatamare Sanuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815363" start="1332" end="1344" title="Kochi United SC" label="Kochi United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145693" start="1347" end="1363" title="Matsumoto Yamaga FC" label="Matsumoto Yamaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q289451" start="1366" end="1381" title="AC Nagano Parceiro" label="Nagano Parceiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965231" start="1384" end="1393" title="Nara Club" label="Nara Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423703" start="1396" end="1404" title="FC Osaka" label="FC Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q59645" start="1407" end="1421" title="FC Ryukyu" label="Ryukyu Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387169" start="1424" end="1437" title="SC Sagamihara" label="SC Sagamihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11232186" start="1440" end="1459" title="Tegevajaro Miyazaki" label="Tegevajaro Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069071" start="1462" end="1474" title="Thespa Gunma" label="Thespa Gunma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811989" start="1477" end="1492" title="Tochigi City FC" label="Tochigi City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069091" start="1495" end="1505" title="Tochigi SC" label="Tochigi SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351958" start="1508" end="1526" title="Vanraure Hachinohe" label="Vanraure Hachinohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075651" start="1529" end="1545" title="Zweigen Kanazawa" label="Zweigen Kanazawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1727" end="1735" title="Asuka FC" label="Asuka FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423732" start="1738" end="1753" title="Atletico Suzuka Club" label="Atletico Suzuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11558192" start="1756" end="1782" title="Briobecca Urayasu Ichikawa" label="Briobecca Urayasu Ichikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60997259" start="1785" end="1801" title="Criacao Shinjuku" label="Criacao Shinjuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031858" start="1808" end="1816" title="Honda FC" label="Honda FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612030" start="1823" end="1843" title="Iwate Grulla Morioka" label="Iwate Grulla Morioka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341452" start="1850" end="1866" title="FC Maruyasu Okazaki" label="Maruyasu Okazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139942" start="1873" end="1891" title="Minebea Mitsumi FC" label="Minebea Mitsumi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22661551" start="1898" end="1908" title="Okinawa SV" label="Okinawa SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029281" start="1911" end="1923" title="Reilac Shiga FC" label="Reilac Shiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346599" start="1930" end="1945" title="ReinMeer Aomori FC" label="ReinMeer Aomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198990" start="1952" end="1966" title="FC Tiamo Hirakata" label="Tiamo Hirakata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17193864" start="1969" end="1981" title="Veertien Mie" label="Veertien Mie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180821" start="1988" end="2000" title="Verspah Oita" label="Verspah Oita"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054614" start="2007" end="2025" title="Yokogawa Musashino FC" label="Yokogawa Musashino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054646" start="2028" end="2062" title="YSCC Yokohama" label="Yokohama Sports &amp;amp; Culture Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2339" end="2351" title="ASC Hokkaido" label="ASC Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q390413" start="2353" end="2362" title="Tomakomai" label="Tomakomai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="2364" end="2372" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2376" end="2381" title="Sabas FC" label="Sabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="2383" end="2400" title="Sapporo, Hokkaido" label="Sapporo, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="2402" end="2410" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305521" start="2414" end="2427" title="BTOP Hokkaido" label="BTOP Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357008" start="2429" end="2447" title="Kuriyama, Hokkaido" label="Kuriyama, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2451" end="2463" title="Canale Otaru" label="Canale Otaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q242108" start="2465" end="2470" title="Otaru" label="Otaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="2472" end="2480" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813455" start="2484" end="2510" title="Hokkaido Tokachi Sky Earth" label="Hokkaido Tokachi Sky Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q177149" start="2512" end="2529" title="Obihiro, Hokkaido" label="Obihiro, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2533" end="2552" title="Japan Steel Muroran" label="Japan Steel Muroran"/>
<link wikidata="Q496667" start="2554" end="2571" title="Muroran, Hokkaido" label="Muroran, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195302" start="2575" end="2592" title="Norbritz Hokkaido" label="Norbritz Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="2594" end="2611" title="Sapporo, Hokkaido" label="Sapporo, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2615" end="2644" title="Sapporo Univ. Goal Plunderers" label="Sapporo Univ. Goal Plunderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="2646" end="2663" title="Sapporo, Hokkaido" label="Sapporo, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q859258" start="2672" end="2674" title="Sapporo University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q11334677" start="2727" end="2745" title="Blancdieu Hirosaki FC" label="Blancdieu Hirosaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q194087" start="2747" end="2763" title="Hirosaki, Aomori" label="Hirosaki, Aomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302358" start="2767" end="2784" title="Cobaltore Onagawa" label="Cobaltore Onagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011185" start="2786" end="2801" title="Onagawa, Miyagi" label="Onagawa, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2805" end="2819" title="Fuji Club 2003" label="Fuji Club 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q317827" start="2821" end="2836" title="Hanamaki, Iwate" label="Hanamaki, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507361" start="2845" end="2847" title="Fuji University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198986" start="2857" end="2868" title="FC Ganju Iwate" label="Ganju Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q765884" start="2870" end="2888" title="Hachimantai, Iwate" label="Hachimantai, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2892" end="2924" title="FC Sendai University" label="Hitome Senbonzakura ft. S.U.F.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q1204965" start="2926" end="2941" title="Shibata, Miyagi" label="Shibata, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450188" start="2950" end="2952" title="Sendai University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2962" end="2978" title="Michinoku Sendai" label="Michinoku Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="2980" end="2986" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q47896" start="2988" end="3005" title="Miyagi Prefecture" label="Miyagi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3009" end="3024" title="Shichigahama SC" label="Shichigahama SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q478272" start="3026" end="3046" title="Shichigahama, Miyagi" label="Shichigahama, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3050" end="3063" title="Shichinohe SC" label="Shichinohe SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349448" start="3065" end="3075" title="Shichinohe" label="Shichinohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71699" start="3077" end="3083" title="Aomori Prefecture" label="Aomori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3087" end="3100" title="Sendai Sasuke FC" label="Sendai Sasuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="3102" end="3116" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3120" end="3147" title="FC La Universidad de Sendai" label="FC La Universidad de Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204965" start="3149" end="3164" title="Shibata, Miyagi" label="Shibata, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450188" start="3173" end="3175" title="Sendai University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3226" end="3244" title="Bogolle D. Tsugaru" label="Bogolle D. Tsugaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q372517" start="3246" end="3261" title="Tsugaru, Aomori" label="Tsugaru, Aomori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3265" end="3278" title="Morioka Zebra" label="Morioka Zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200077" start="3280" end="3294" title="Morioka, Iwate" label="Morioka, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3298" end="3324" title="Nu Perle Hiraizumi Maesawa" label="Nu Perle Hiraizumi Maesawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203004" start="3326" end="3342" title="Hiraizumi, Iwate" label="Hiraizumi, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151693" start="3346" end="3367" title="Nippon Steel" label="Nippon Steel Kamaishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329790" start="3369" end="3384" title="Kamaishi, Iwate" label="Kamaishi, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3392" end="3400" title="Omiya SC" label="Omiya SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q153629" start="3402" end="3419" title="Ōmiya-ku, Saitama" label="Ōmiya-ku, Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3423" end="3434" title="Oshu United FC" label="Oshu United"/>
<link wikidata="Q386052" start="3436" end="3447" title="Oshu, Iwate" label="Oshu, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276938" start="3451" end="3463" title="Saruta Kōgyō S.C." label="Saruta Kōgyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q17139" start="3465" end="3477" title="Akita, Akita" label="Akita, Akita"/>
<link wikidata="Q28685579" start="3485" end="3498" title="TDK Shinwakai S.C." label="TDK Shinwakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q847550" start="3500" end="3513" title="Nikaho, Akita" label="Nikaho, Akita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3536" end="3554" title="Chaneaule Koriyama" label="Chaneaule Koriyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q264206" start="3556" end="3575" title="Koriyama, Fukushima" label="Koriyama, Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3579" end="3593" title="Iwaki Furukawa FC" label="Iwaki Furukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q274384" start="3595" end="3611" title="Iwaki, Fukushima" label="Iwaki, Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3615" end="3620" title="Merry (football club)" label="Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161176" start="3622" end="3642" title="Fukushima, Fukushima" label="Fukushima, Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q106900482" start="3646" end="3656" title="Oyama Club" label="Oyama Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q200077" start="3658" end="3672" title="Morioka, Iwate" label="Morioka, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3676" end="3695" title="Parafrente Yonezawa" label="Parafrente Yonezawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q734378" start="3697" end="3715" title="Yonezawa, Yamagata" label="Yonezawa, Yamagata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3719" end="3737" title="FC Primeiro Fukushima" label="Primeiro Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="3739" end="3759" title="Fukushima prefecture" label="Fukushima prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3763" end="3784" title="Ricoh Industry Tohoku SC" label="Ricoh Industry Tohoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204965" start="3786" end="3801" title="Shibata, Miyagi" label="Shibata, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3809" end="3844" title="Sendai Universität" label="FC La Universidad de Sendai Segunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="3846" end="3860" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450188" start="3869" end="3871" title="Sendai University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3937" end="3950" title="Aries Toshima" label="Aries Toshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q236680" start="3952" end="3959" title="Toshima" label="Toshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="3961" end="3966" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272197" start="3996" end="4016" title="Tsukuba FC" label="Joyful Honda Tsukuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q273863" start="4018" end="4034" title="Tsukuba, Ibaraki" label="Tsukuba, Ibaraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693099" start="4042" end="4053" title="Nankatsu SC" label="Nankatsu SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q232628" start="4055" end="4072" title="Katsushika, Tokyo" label="Katsushika, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4076" end="4081" title="FC N." label="FC N."/>
<link wikidata="Q317847" start="4083" end="4088" title="Inagi" label="Inagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="4090" end="4095" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326230" start="4104" end="4106" title="Nihon University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577724" start="4116" end="4129" title="Ryutsu Keizai Dragons Ryugasaki" label="RKD Ryugasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q836150" start="4137" end="4139" title="Ryutsu Keizai University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813282" start="4149" end="4162" title="Toho Titanium SC" label="Toho Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="4164" end="4183" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48751943" start="4187" end="4217" title="Toin University of Yokohama FC" label="Toin University of Yokohama FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="4219" end="4237" title="Yokohama, Kanagawa" label="Yokohama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813375" start="4246" end="4248" title="Toin University of Yokohama" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813809" start="4258" end="4266" title="Tokyo 23 FC" label="Tokyo 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q308891" start="4268" end="4290" title="Special wards of Tokyo" label="Special wards of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22118054" start="4294" end="4306" title="Tokyo United FC" label="Tokyo United"/>
<link wikidata="Q212713" start="4308" end="4321" title="Bunkyō, Tokyo" label="Bunkyō, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252808" start="4325" end="4339" title="Vonds Ichihara" label="Vonds Ichihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q207881" start="4341" end="4356" title="Ichihara, Chiba" label="Ichihara, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4382" end="4397" title="Atsugi Hayabusa FC" label="Atsugi Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q389711" start="4399" end="4405" title="Atsugi" label="Atsugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="4407" end="4415" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4419" end="4433" title="Edo All United" label="Edo All United"/>
<link wikidata="Q214056" start="4435" end="4449" title="Edogawa, Tokyo" label="Edogawa, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4453" end="4466" title="Coedo Kawagoe FC" label="Coedo Kawagoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q319740" start="4468" end="4484" title="Kawagoe, Saitama" label="Kawagoe, Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4488" end="4500" title="Esperanza SC" label="Esperanza SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="4502" end="4520" title="Yokohama, Kanagawa" label="Yokohama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4524" end="4550" title="Hitachi Building System SC" label="Hitachi Building System SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="4552" end="4566" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4574" end="4589" title="Shibuya City FC" label="Shibuya City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193638" start="4591" end="4605" title="Shibuya, Tokyo" label="Shibuya, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4609" end="4639" title="Tokyo International University FC" label="Tokyo International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q850344" start="4641" end="4656" title="Sakado, Saitama" label="Sakado, Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813901" start="4665" end="4667" title="Tokyo International University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q11251268" start="4677" end="4691" title="Tonan Maebashi" label="Tonan Maebashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201613" start="4693" end="4708" title="Maebashi, Gunma" label="Maebashi, Gunma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922785" start="4712" end="4725" title="Vertfee Yaita" label="Vertfee Yaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q695926" start="4727" end="4732" title="Yaita" label="Yaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q44843" start="4734" end="4741" title="Tochigi Prefecture" label="Tochigi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4745" end="4760" title="Yokohama Takeru FC" label="Yokohama Takeru"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="4762" end="4780" title="Yokohama, Kanagawa" label="Yokohama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4847" end="4863" title="&amp;#x27;05 Kamo FC" label="&amp;#x27;05 Kamo FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q857293" start="4865" end="4878" title="Kamo, Niigata" label="Kamo, Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034399" start="4887" end="4889" title="Niigata University of Management" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q17192184" start="4899" end="4912" title="Artista Asama" label="Artista Asama"/>
<link wikidata="Q840859" start="4914" end="4926" title="Tōmi, Nagano" label="Tōmi, Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q61058135" start="4930" end="4942" title="Fukui United FC" label="Fukui United"/>
<link wikidata="Q201618" start="4944" end="4956" title="Fukui, Fukui" label="Fukui, Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4960" end="4971" title="FC Hokuriku" label="FC Hokuriku"/>
<link wikidata="Q191130" start="4973" end="4991" title="Kanazawa, Ishikawa" label="Kanazawa, Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878327" start="5000" end="5002" title="Hokuriku University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q11225368" start="5012" end="5018" title="Japan Soccer College" label="JSC FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204293" start="5020" end="5034" title="Seirō, Niigata" label="Seirō, Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5089" end="5100" title="Niigata University of Health and Welfare FC" label="Niigata UHW"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="5102" end="5118" title="Niigata, Niigata" label="Niigata, Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11502846" start="5127" end="5129" title="Niigata University of Health and Welfare" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5139" end="5149" title="SR Komatsu" label="SR Komatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q646898" start="5151" end="5168" title="Komatsu, Ishikawa" label="Komatsu, Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456425" start="5172" end="5190" title="Toyama Shinjo Club" label="Toyama Shinjo Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q204266" start="5192" end="5206" title="Toyama, Toyama" label="Toyama, Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5232" end="5240" title="FC Abies" label="FC Abies"/>
<link wikidata="Q838660" start="5242" end="5255" title="Chino, Nagano" label="Chino, Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5259" end="5276" title="FC Antelope Shoijiri" label="Antelope Shoijiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q857272" start="5278" end="5294" title="Shiojiri, Nagano" label="Shiojiri, Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5298" end="5308" title="CUPS Seirō" label="CUPS Seirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204293" start="5310" end="5324" title="Seirō, Niigata" label="Seirō, Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11225368" start="5327" end="5347" title="Japan Soccer College" label="Japan Soccer College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5370" end="5396" title="Kanazawa Gakuin University FC" label="Kanazawa Gakuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q191130" start="5398" end="5416" title="Kanazawa, Ishikawa" label="Kanazawa, Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360883" start="5425" end="5427" title="Kanazawa Gakuin University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5437" end="5451" title="FC Matsucelona" label="FC Matsucelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q213324" start="5453" end="5470" title="Matsumoto, Nagano" label="Matsumoto, Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788155" start="5479" end="5481" title="Matsumoto University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5491" end="5505" title="N-Style Toyama" label="N-Style Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q204266" start="5507" end="5513" title="Toyama, Toyama" label="Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5517" end="5524" title="Niigata University of Health and Welfare FC" label="NUHW FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="5526" end="5542" title="Niigata, Niigata" label="Niigata, Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11502846" start="5551" end="5553" title="Niigata University of Health and Welfare" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5570" end="5583" title="Sakai Phoenix SC" label="Sakai Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q990342" start="5585" end="5597" title="Sakai, Fukui" label="Sakai, Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5643" end="5663" title="Chukyo University FC" label="Chukyo University FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201117" start="5665" end="5678" title="Toyota, Aichi" label="Toyota, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083225" start="5687" end="5689" title="Chukyo University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507385" start="5699" end="5716" title="Fujieda City Hall SC" label="Fujieda City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q734432" start="5718" end="5735" title="Fujieda, Shizuoka" label="Fujieda, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5739" end="5759" title="Gakunan F. Mosuperio" label="Gakunan F. Mosuperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320" start="5770" end="5778" title="Shizuoka Prefecture" label="Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17989461" start="5782" end="5794" title="FC Ise-Shima" label="FC Ise-Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q338009" start="5796" end="5806" title="Shima, Mie" label="Shima, Mie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5810" end="5819" title="AS Kariya" label="AS Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q389515" start="5821" end="5834" title="Kariya, Aichi" label="Kariya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119342" start="5838" end="5847" title="FC Kariya" label="FC Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q389515" start="5849" end="5862" title="Kariya, Aichi" label="Kariya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5866" end="5882" title="Vencendor Mie United Club" label="Vencendor Mie UC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203027" start="5884" end="5892" title="Tsu, Mie" label="Tsu, Mie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115609459" start="5896" end="5905" title="Wyvern FC" label="Wyvern FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q389515" start="5907" end="5920" title="Kariya, Aichi" label="Kariya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5945" end="5960" title="Chukyo Univ. FC" label="Chukyo Univ. FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201117" start="5962" end="5975" title="Toyota, Aichi" label="Toyota, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083225" start="5984" end="5986" title="Chukyo University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5996" end="6010" title="FC Gifu Second" label="FC Gifu Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q45798" start="6012" end="6022" title="Gifu, Gifu" label="Gifu, Gifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q778887" start="6031" end="6038" title="FC Gifu" label="FC Gifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958990" start="6067" end="6076" title="Nagoya SC" label="Nagoya SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="6078" end="6091" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6095" end="6117" title="Rajil FC Higashimikawa" label="Rajil FC Higashimikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="6119" end="6132" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6136" end="6160" title="Sports &amp;amp; Society Izu" label="Sports &amp;amp; Society Izu"/>
<link wikidata="Q696840" start="6162" end="6175" title="Izu, Shizuoka" label="Izu, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6179" end="6187" title="Tokai FC" label="Tokai FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="6189" end="6202" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6206" end="6221" title="Tokai Gakuen FC" label="Tokai Gakuen FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="6223" end="6236" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813465" start="6245" end="6247" title="Tokai Gakuen University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6257" end="6271" title="Yazaki Valente" label="Yazaki Valente"/>
<link wikidata="Q605256" start="6273" end="6290" title="Shimada, Shizuoka" label="Shimada, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16482103" start="6338" end="6355" title="Arterivo Wakayama" label="Arterivo Wakayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q200747" start="6357" end="6375" title="Wakayama, Wakayama" label="Wakayama, Wakayama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6379" end="6385" title="FC AWJ" label="FC AWJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q373107" start="6387" end="6399" title="Awaji, Hyōgo" label="Awaji, Hyōgo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6403" end="6415" title="FC Basara Hyōgo" label="Basara Hyōgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26406" start="6417" end="6430" title="Akashi, Hyōgo" label="Akashi, Hyōgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11328418" start="6467" end="6485" title="Cento Cuore Harima FC" label="Cento Cuore Harima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155297" start="6487" end="6500" title="Harima, Hyōgo" label="Harima, Hyōgo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6504" end="6516" title="Kobe Football Club" label="Kobe FC 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="6518" end="6522" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17218392" start="6526" end="6539" title="AS Laranja Kyoto" label="Laranja Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="6541" end="6553" title="Kyoto, Kyoto" label="Kyoto, Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6557" end="6569" title="Velago Ikoma" label="Velago Ikoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q328610" start="6571" end="6582" title="Ikoma, Nara" label="Ikoma, Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349317" start="6600" end="6612" title="Lagend Shiga FC" label="Lagend Shiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6616" end="6637" title="Moriyama Samurai 2000" label="Moriyama Samurai 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q857225" start="6639" end="6654" title="Moriyama, Shiga" label="Moriyama, Shiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6680" end="6702" title="Hannan University Club" label="Hannan University Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q774952" start="6704" end="6720" title="Matsubara, Osaka" label="Matsubara, Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649027" start="6729" end="6731" title="Hannan University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6741" end="6755" title="Kansai University FC 2008" label="Kandai FC 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q653510" start="6757" end="6769" title="Suita, Osaka" label="Suita, Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149393" start="6778" end="6780" title="Kansai University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6790" end="6806" title="Kyoto Shiko S.C." label="Kyoto Shiko Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="6808" end="6820" title="Kyoto, Kyoto" label="Kyoto, Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6824" end="6839" title="AC Middle Range" label="AC Middle Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q490514" start="6841" end="6856" title="Higashiyodogawa-ku, Osaka" label="Higashiyodogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122723" start="6858" end="6863" title="Osaka Prefecture" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746934" start="6867" end="6880" title="Ococias Kyoto AC" label="Ococias Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="6882" end="6894" title="Kyoto, Kyoto" label="Kyoto, Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6898" end="6913" title="Osaka Korean Football Club" label="Osaka Korean FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q490520" start="6915" end="6920" title="Ikuno-ku, Osaka" label="Ikuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="6922" end="6927" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6931" end="6939" title="Route 11 FC" label="Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q740456" start="6941" end="6957" title="Kishiwada, Osaka" label="Kishiwada, Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6961" end="6981" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s FC" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q696412" start="6983" end="6995" title="Izumi, Osaka" label="Izumi, Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017700" start="7004" end="7006" title="Momoyama Gakuin University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198993" start="7040" end="7059" title="FC Baleine Shimonoseki" label="Baleine Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="7061" end="7083" title="Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi" label="Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7087" end="7101" title="FC Banmel Tottori" label="Banmel Tottori"/>
<link wikidata="Q200731" start="7103" end="7119" title="Tottori, Tottori" label="Tottori, Tottori"/>
<link wikidata="Q118146638" start="7123" end="7140" title="Belugarosso Iwami" label="Belugarosso Iwami"/>
<link wikidata="Q432055" start="7142" end="7157" title="Hamada, Shimane" label="Hamada, Shimane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7161" end="7176" title="Eneos Mizushima" label="Eneos Mizushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q467487" start="7178" end="7187" title="Kurashiki" label="Kurashiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q132936" start="7189" end="7196" title="Okayama Prefecture" label="Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411723" start="7200" end="7216" title="Fukuyama City FC" label="Fukuyama City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q661038" start="7218" end="7237" title="Fukuyama, Hiroshima" label="Fukuyama, Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7241" end="7255" title="Hatsukaichi FC" label="Hatsukaichi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q736897" start="7257" end="7268" title="Hatsukaichi" label="Hatsukaichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q617375" start="7270" end="7279" title="Hiroshima Prefecture" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7283" end="7318" title="International Pacific University FC" label="International Pacific University FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200078" start="7320" end="7336" title="Okayama, Okayama" label="Okayama, Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052304" start="7345" end="7347" title="International Pacific University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883104" start="7357" end="7384" title="Mitsubishi Mizushima FC" label="Mitsubishi Motors Mizushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q467487" start="7386" end="7395" title="Kurashiki" label="Kurashiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q132936" start="7397" end="7404" title="Okayama Prefecture" label="Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244324" start="7412" end="7425" title="SRC Hiroshima" label="SRC Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="7427" end="7447" title="Hiroshima, Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima, Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7451" end="7466" title="Yonago Genki Soccer Club" label="Yonago Genki SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q320964" start="7468" end="7483" title="Yonago, Tottori" label="Yonago, Tottori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7511" end="7523" title="Kochi University FC Nankoku" label="KUFC Nankoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q861621" start="7525" end="7539" title="Nankoku, Kōchi" label="Nankoku, Kōchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q935246" start="7548" end="7550" title="Kōchi University" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7560" end="7572" title="Llamas Kochi FC" label="Llamas Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200251" start="7574" end="7586" title="Kōchi, Kōchi" label="Kōchi, Kōchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7590" end="7602" title="Lvnirosso Niihama Club" label="Lvnirosso NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q386628" start="7604" end="7618" title="Niihama, Ehime" label="Niihama, Ehime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7622" end="7640" title="R. Velho Takamatsu" label="R. Velho Takamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q200707" start="7642" end="7659" title="Takamatsu, Kagawa" label="Takamatsu, Kagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7663" end="7678" title="Sonio Takamatsu" label="Sonio Takamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q200707" start="7680" end="7697" title="Takamatsu, Kagawa" label="Takamatsu, Kagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7701" end="7711" title="Tadotsu FC" label="Tadotsu FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357346" start="7713" end="7728" title="Tadotsu, Kagawa" label="Tadotsu, Kagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693134" start="7732" end="7744" title="FC Tokushima" label="FC Tokushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q207309" start="7746" end="7766" title="Tokushima, Tokushima" label="Tokushima, Tokushima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7770" end="7779" title="Yamaji FC" label="Yamaji FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q838666" start="7781" end="7792" title="Shikokuchūō" label="Shikokuchūō"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376" start="7794" end="7799" title="Ehime Prefecture" label="Ehime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384602" start="7839" end="7851" title="Brew Kashima" label="Brew Kashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q684494" start="7853" end="7866" title="Kashima, Saga" label="Kashima, Saga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7870" end="7880" title="Itazuke FC" label="Itazuke FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="7882" end="7898" title="Fukuoka, Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7902" end="7914" title="Kawasoe Club" label="Kawasoe Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="7916" end="7926" title="Saga, Saga" label="Saga, Saga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7930" end="7945" title="KMG Holdings Football Club" label="KMG Holdings FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="7947" end="7963" title="Fukuoka, Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q109363958" start="7971" end="7981" title="J-Lease FC" label="J-Lease FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q199609" start="7983" end="7987" title="Ōita (city)" label="Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7991" end="8006" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Nagasaki Soccer Club" label="MHI Nagasaki SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="8008" end="8016" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q169376" start="8018" end="8026" title="Nagasaki Prefecture" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8030" end="8044" title="NIFS Kanoya FC" label="NIFS Kanoya FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q819578" start="8046" end="8063" title="Kanoya, Kagoshima" label="Kanoya, Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q836530" start="8072" end="8074" title="National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya" label="Un"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8084" end="8104" title="Nippon Steel Oita Soccer Club" label="Nippon Steel Oita SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q199609" start="8106" end="8116" title="Ōita (city)" label="Ōita, Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="Q109452762" start="8120" end="8133" title="FC Nobeoka Agata" label="Nobeoka Agata"/>
<link wikidata="Q653389" start="8135" end="8152" title="Nobeoka, Miyazaki" label="Nobeoka, Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q24863996" start="8156" end="8173" title="Veroskronos Tsuno" label="Veroskronos Tsuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205974" start="8175" end="8190" title="Tsuno, Miyazaki" label="Tsuno, Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8237" end="8252" title="J.League 100 Year Plan club status#Criteria for J3 promotion" label="J3 club license"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8312" end="8325" title="Works team#Asia" label="company teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252666" start="8773" end="8816" title="Japanese association football league system" label="Japanese association football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645472" start="8819" end="8863" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s football clubs in Japan" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s football clubs in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383638" wikidata="Q2477787" url="?curid=383638" title="American Impressionism">
<text>American Impressionism was a style of painting related to European Impressionism and practiced by American artists in the United States from the mid-nineteenth century through the beginning of the twentieth. The style is characterized by loose brushwork and vivid colors with a wide array of subject matters but focusing on landscapes and upper-class domestic life.

==Emerging style==
Impressionism emerged as an artistic style in France in the 1860s. Major exhibitions of French impressionist works in Boston and New York in the 1880s introduced the style to the American public. The first exhibit took place in 1886 in New York and was presented by the American Art Association and organized by Paul Durand-Ruel . Some of the first American artists to paint in an impressionistic mode, such as Theodore Robinson and Mary Cassatt, did so in the late 1880s after visiting France and meeting with artists such as Claude Monet. Others, such as Childe Hassam, took notice of the increasing numbers of French impressionist works at American exhibitions.

Impressionism was initially unpopular in the United States. At the first exhibit in 1886, Americans were attracted to the landscape paintings but were offended by the realist figures and nudity depicted in other paintings. American artists were hesitant to adopt the style of Impressionism while studying in France as it was created as a radical rejection of tradition at the Academy and American artists hoped to gain acceptance through their traditional academy studies. Over time, American patrons began to accept the abstract forms of Impressionism, especially as American artists, such as Mary Cassatt, began to adopt the styles of French Impressionism.

===Mary Cassatt===
Mary Cassatt played a large role in the adoption of Impressionism by American patrons. Mary Cassatt formed a close relationship with Edgar Degas, who, impressed by her work, invited her to show with the French Impressionists in 1877. She was the only American ever to exhibit her work alongside the original Impressionists in France. Through her connections to wealthy upperclass Americans, Cassatt convinced many of her friends of the artistic merits of Impressionism and encouraged the purchase of French works.

==Characteristics of American Impressionism==
Unlike early Renaissance painters, American Impressionists favored asymmetrical composition, cropped figures, and plunging perspectives in their works in order to create a more &quot;impressionist&quot; version of the subject. In addition, American impressionists used pure color straight from the tubes to make the works more vibrant, used broken brushstrokes, and practiced &quot;impasto&quot;- a style of painting characterized by thick raised strokes. European impressionists painted tranquil scenes of landscapes or the lower and middle classes. American impressionists focused on landscapes like the European impressionists, but unlike their European counterparts, American impressionists also painted scenes of quiet domesticity, in contrast to the emergence of industrialization.

==Impressionism in the Industrial Age==

As railroads, automobiles, and other new technologies emerged, American impressionists often painted vast landscapes and small towns in an effort to return to nature.

==Trailblazers==
From the 1890s through the 1910s, American impressionism flourished in art colonies—loosely affiliated groups of artists who lived and worked together and shared a common aesthetic vision. Art colonies tended to form in small towns that provided affordable living, abundant scenery for painting, and relatively easy access to large cities where artists could sell their work. Some of the most important American impressionist artists gathered at Cos Cob and Old Lyme, Connecticut, both on Long Island Sound; New Hope, Pennsylvania, on the Delaware River; and Brown County, Indiana. American impressionist artists also thrived in California at Carmel and Laguna Beach; in New York on eastern Long Island at Shinnecock, largely due to the influence of William Merritt Chase; and in Boston where Edmund Charles Tarbell and Frank Weston Benson became important practitioners of the impressionist style.

==Jazz Age decline==
Some American art colonies remained vibrant centers of impressionist art into the 1920s. But with the advent of the Ashcan School in 1910, the tides of the American art world started change. Impressionism in America further lost its cutting-edge status in 1913 when a historic exhibition of modern art took place at the 69th Regiment Armory building in New York City. The “Armory Show”, as it came to be called, heralded a new painting style regarded as more in touch with the increasingly fast-paced and chaotic world, especially with the outbreak of World War I, The Great Depression and World War II.

==Notable American impressionists==
Prominent impressionist painters, from the United States include:
* John White Alexander (1856–1915)
* J. Ottis Adams (1851–1927)
* Lucy Bacon (1857–1932)
* George Herbert Baker (1878–1943)
* John Noble Barlow (1861–1917)
* Thomas P. Barnett (1870–1929)
* Reynolds Beal (1867–1951)
* Marilyn Bendell (1921–2003)
* Frank Weston Benson (1862–1951)
* Johann Berthelsen (1883–1972)
* Warren Eugene Brandon (1916–1977)
* John Leslie Breck (1860–1899)
* Matilda Browne (1869–1947)
* John Elwood Bundy (1853–1933)
* Dennis Miller Bunker (1861–1890)
* Theodore Earl Butler (1861–1936)
* Mary Cassatt (1844–1926)
* William Merritt Chase (1849–1916)
* Alson S. Clark (1876–1949)
* Colin Campbell Cooper (1856–1937)
* Paul Cornoyer (1864–1923)
* Joseph DeCamp (1858–1923)
* Thomas Dewing (1851–1938)
* George Dinckel (1890–1976)
* Frank DuMond (1865–1951)
* John Joseph Enneking (1841–1916)
* Carl Eytel (1862–1925)
* Pedro Figari (1861–1938)
* Frederick Carl Frieseke (1874–1939)
* Daniel Garber (1880–1958)
* Robert F. Gault (1898–1977) AWS
* Arthur Hill Gilbert (1893–1970)
* Edmund Greacen (1877–1949)
* Richard Gruelle (1851–1914)
* Childe Hassam (1859–1935)
* William Samuel Horton (1865–1936)
* Wilson Irvine (1869–1936)
* Charles S. Kaelin (1858–1929)
* Joseph Kleitsch (1882–1931) (California Impressionist)
* Albert Henry Krehbiel (1873–1945)
* William Langson Lathrop (1859–1938)
* Hayley Lever (1876–1958)
* Laura Muntz Lyall (1860–1930)
* Theodore Lukits (1897–1992)
* Victor Matson (1895–1972)
* Willard Metcalf (1858–1925)
* Richard Edward Miller (1875–1943)
* Abram Molarsky (1879–1955)
* Robertson Kirtland Mygatt (1861–1919)
* George Loftus Noyes (1864–1954)
* Frank Nuderscher (1880–1959)
* Leonard Ochtman (1854–1935)
* Julian Onderdonk (1882–1922)
* William McGregor Paxton (1869–1941)
* Edgar Alwin Payne (1883–1947)
* Clara Elsene Peck (1883–1968)
* Van Dearing Perrine (1869–1955)
* Lilla Cabot Perry (1848–1933)
* Fritz Poock (1877–1945)
* Edward Henry Potthast (1857–1927)
* Edward Willis Redfield (1869–1925)
* Robert Reid (1862–1929)
* Theodore Robinson (1852–1896)
* Edward Francis Rook (1870–1960)
* Guy Rose (1867–1925)
* Porfirio Salinas (1910–1973)
* John Singer Sargent (1856–1925)
* Paul Sawyier (1865–1917)
* Christian von Schneidau (1893–1976)
* Edward Simmons (1852–1931)
* Sueo Serisawa (1910–2004) (California Impressionist)
* Tim Solliday (born 1952)
* George Sotter (1879–1953)
* Anna Huntington Stanley (1864–1907)
* Otto Stark (1859–1926)
* T. C. Steele (1847–1926)
* Edmund Charles Tarbell (1862–1938)
* John Henry Twachtman (1853–1902)
* Edward Charles Volkert (1871–1935)
* Robert Vonnoh (1858–1933)
* Clark Voorhees (1871–1933)
* Marion Wachtel (1875–1954)
* Fred Wagner (1860–1940)
* Martha Walter (1895–1976)
* J. Alden Weir (1852–1919)
* Catherine Wiley (1879–1958)
* Robert William Wood (1889–1979)
* Mary Agnes Yerkes (1886–1989)
==Gallery==
==See also==
* Boston School
* California Impressionism
* Hoosier Group
* Pennsylvania Impressionism
* Richmond Group
* Ten American Painters

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*&quot;American Paintings in The Metropolitan Museum of Art&quot;, a fully digitized 3 volume exhibition catalog
*&quot;American impressionism and realism : a landmark exhibition from the Met&quot;, a 1991 exhibition catalog from the Metropolitan Museum of Art libraries
* Impressionism at the Smithsonian American Art Museum
* &quot;The Artist&#x27;s Garden: American Impressionism&quot;, Exhibition on Screen
* &quot;American Impressionism of the Late 1800s and early 1900s&quot;, National Gallery of Art
* &quot;American Impressionism&quot;, The Met Museum
* &quot;Finding Beauty in Land&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2477787" start="0" end="22" title="American Impressionism" label="American Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="67" end="80" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="339" end="350" title="upper class" label="upper-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="386" end="399" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="432" end="438" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961275" start="656" end="680" title="American Art Association" label="American Art Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q649052" start="698" end="714" title="Paul Durand-Ruel" label="Paul Durand-Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384543" start="797" end="814" title="Theodore Robinson" label="Theodore Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="819" end="831" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="913" end="925" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q737635" start="943" end="956" title="Childe Hassam" label="Childe Hassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="1864" end="1875" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="3378" end="3390" title="Art colony" label="art colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173827" start="3753" end="3760" title="Cos Cob Art Colony" label="Cos Cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980190" start="3765" end="3786" title="Old Lyme, Connecticut" label="Old Lyme, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="3796" end="3813" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="3815" end="3837" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q499551" start="3866" end="3887" title="Brown County, Indiana" label="Brown County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="3950" end="3956" title="Carmel-by-the-Sea, California" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908566" start="3961" end="3973" title="Laguna Beach, California" label="Laguna Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="3998" end="4009" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q265820" start="4057" end="4078" title="William Merritt Chase" label="William Merritt Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460318" start="4100" end="4122" title="Edmund Charles Tarbell" label="Edmund Charles Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q956055" start="4127" end="4146" title="Frank Weston Benson" label="Frank Weston Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q724976" start="4344" end="4357" title="Ashcan School" label="Ashcan School"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="4601" end="4612" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4780" end="4791" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4797" end="4813" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4818" end="4830" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="4879" end="4892" title="Impressionism" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702146" start="4937" end="4957" title="John White Alexander" label="John White Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821781" start="4972" end="4986" title="J. Ottis Adams" label="J. Ottis Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q448249" start="5001" end="5011" title="Lucy Bacon" label="Lucy Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540521" start="5026" end="5046" title="George Herbert Baker" label="George Herbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250566" start="5061" end="5078" title="John Noble Barlow" label="John Noble Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792916" start="5093" end="5110" title="Thomas P. Barnett" label="Thomas P. Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319629" start="5125" end="5138" title="Reynolds Beal" label="Reynolds Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763502" start="5153" end="5168" title="Marilyn Bendell" label="Marilyn Bendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q956055" start="5183" end="5202" title="Frank Weston Benson" label="Frank Weston Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215655" start="5217" end="5234" title="Johann Berthelsen" label="Johann Berthelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970181" start="5249" end="5270" title="Warren Eugene Brandon" label="Warren Eugene Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15247081" start="5285" end="5302" title="John Leslie Breck" label="John Leslie Breck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787498" start="5317" end="5331" title="Matilda Browne" label="Matilda Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231729" start="5346" end="5363" title="John Elwood Bundy" label="John Elwood Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325568" start="5378" end="5398" title="Dennis Miller Bunker" label="Dennis Miller Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523689" start="5413" end="5433" title="Theodore Earl Butler" label="Theodore Earl Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="5448" end="5460" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q265820" start="5475" end="5496" title="William Merritt Chase" label="William Merritt Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735826" start="5511" end="5525" title="Alson S. Clark" label="Alson S. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871464" start="5540" end="5561" title="Colin Campbell Cooper" label="Colin Campbell Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003364" start="5576" end="5589" title="Paul Cornoyer" label="Paul Cornoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151149" start="5604" end="5617" title="Joseph DeCamp" label="Joseph DeCamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378807" start="5632" end="5645" title="Thomas Dewing" label="Thomas Dewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21520549" start="5660" end="5674" title="George Dinckel" label="George Dinckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486311" start="5689" end="5701" title="Frank DuMond" label="Frank DuMond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788467" start="5716" end="5736" title="John Joseph Enneking" label="John Joseph Enneking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040111" start="5751" end="5761" title="Carl Eytel" label="Carl Eytel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388990" start="5776" end="5788" title="Pedro Figari" label="Pedro Figari"/>
<link wikidata="Q537002" start="5803" end="5826" title="Frederick Carl Frieseke" label="Frederick Carl Frieseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217239" start="5841" end="5854" title="Daniel Garber" label="Daniel Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q24988403" start="5869" end="5884" title="Robert F. Gault" label="Robert F. Gault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799076" start="5903" end="5922" title="Arthur Hill Gilbert" label="Arthur Hill Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339509" start="5937" end="5951" title="Edmund Greacen" label="Edmund Greacen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326101" start="5966" end="5981" title="Richard Gruelle" label="Richard Gruelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q737635" start="5996" end="6009" title="Childe Hassam" label="Childe Hassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18508742" start="6024" end="6045" title="William Samuel Horton" label="William Samuel Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023101" start="6060" end="6073" title="Wilson Irvine" label="Wilson Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082270" start="6088" end="6105" title="Charles S. Kaelin" label="Charles S. Kaelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284631" start="6120" end="6135" title="Joseph Kleitsch" label="Joseph Kleitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710455" start="6177" end="6198" title="Albert Henry Krehbiel" label="Albert Henry Krehbiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014307" start="6213" end="6236" title="William Langson Lathrop" label="William Langson Lathrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686851" start="6251" end="6263" title="Hayley Lever" label="Hayley Lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q527191" start="6278" end="6295" title="Laura Muntz Lyall" label="Laura Muntz Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781897" start="6310" end="6325" title="Theodore Lukits" label="Theodore Lukits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926141" start="6340" end="6353" title="Victor Matson" label="Victor Matson"/>
<link wikidata="Q736843" start="6368" end="6383" title="Willard Metcalf" label="Willard Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325393" start="6398" end="6419" title="Richard Edward Miller" label="Richard Edward Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998719" start="6434" end="6448" title="Abram Molarsky" label="Abram Molarsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352112" start="6463" end="6488" title="Robertson Kirtland Mygatt" label="Robertson Kirtland Mygatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541807" start="6503" end="6522" title="George Loftus Noyes" label="George Loftus Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488716" start="6537" end="6553" title="Frank Nuderscher" label="Frank Nuderscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525596" start="6568" end="6583" title="Leonard Ochtman" label="Leonard Ochtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307423" start="6598" end="6614" title="Julian Onderdonk" label="Julian Onderdonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052021" start="6629" end="6652" title="William McGregor Paxton" label="William McGregor Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047478" start="6667" end="6684" title="Edgar Alwin Payne" label="Edgar Alwin Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125980" start="6699" end="6716" title="Clara Elsene Peck" label="Clara Elsene Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q22086831" start="6731" end="6750" title="Van Dearing Perrine" label="Van Dearing Perrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431705" start="6765" end="6782" title="Lilla Cabot Perry" label="Lilla Cabot Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504995" start="6797" end="6808" title="Fritz Poock" label="Fritz Poock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252045" start="6823" end="6844" title="Edward Henry Potthast" label="Edward Henry Potthast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048654" start="6859" end="6881" title="Edward Willis Redfield" label="Edward Willis Redfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q577370" start="6896" end="6907" title="Robert Reid (painter)" label="Robert Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384543" start="6922" end="6939" title="Theodore Robinson" label="Theodore Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21985403" start="6954" end="6973" title="Edward Francis Rook" label="Edward Francis Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366671" start="6988" end="6996" title="Guy Rose" label="Guy Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230075" start="7011" end="7027" title="Porfirio Salinas" label="Porfirio Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q155626" start="7042" end="7061" title="John Singer Sargent" label="John Singer Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888538" start="7076" end="7088" title="Paul Sawyier" label="Paul Sawyier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110407" start="7103" end="7126" title="Christian von Schneidau" label="Christian von Schneidau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070314" start="7141" end="7155" title="Edward Simmons (painter)" label="Edward Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634389" start="7170" end="7183" title="Sueo Serisawa" label="Sueo Serisawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804312" start="7225" end="7237" title="Tim Solliday" label="Tim Solliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544701" start="7252" end="7265" title="George Sotter" label="George Sotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031493" start="7280" end="7303" title="Anna Huntington Stanley" label="Anna Huntington Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109836" start="7318" end="7328" title="Otto Stark" label="Otto Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668184" start="7343" end="7355" title="T. C. Steele" label="T. C. Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460318" start="7370" end="7392" title="Edmund Charles Tarbell" label="Edmund Charles Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342683" start="7407" end="7427" title="John Henry Twachtman" label="John Henry Twachtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342272" start="7442" end="7464" title="Edward Charles Volkert" label="Edward Charles Volkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856567" start="7479" end="7492" title="Robert Vonnoh" label="Robert Vonnoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127417" start="7507" end="7521" title="Clark Voorhees" label="Clark Voorhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765445" start="7536" end="7550" title="Marion Wachtel" label="Marion Wachtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496488" start="7565" end="7576" title="Fred Wagner" label="Fred Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774593" start="7591" end="7604" title="Martha Walter" label="Martha Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284220" start="7619" end="7632" title="J. Alden Weir" label="J. Alden Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052974" start="7647" end="7662" title="Catherine Wiley" label="Catherine Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351115" start="7677" end="7696" title="Robert William Wood" label="Robert William Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327858" start="7711" end="7728" title="Mary Agnes Yerkes" label="Mary Agnes Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948078" start="7768" end="7781" title="Boston School (painting)" label="Boston School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020754" start="7784" end="7808" title="California Impressionism" label="California Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898564" start="7811" end="7824" title="Hoosier Group" label="Hoosier Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163982" start="7827" end="7853" title="Pennsylvania Impressionism" label="Pennsylvania Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330842" start="7856" end="7870" title="Richmond Group" label="Richmond Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971798" start="7873" end="7894" title="Ten American Painters" label="Ten American Painters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383639" wikidata="Q1342683" url="?curid=383639" title="John Henry Twachtman">
<text>John Henry Twachtman (August 4, 1853 – August 8, 1902) was an American painter best known for his impressionist landscapes, though his painting style varied widely through his career. Art historians consider Twachtman&#x27;s style of American Impressionism to be among the more personal and experimental of his generation. He was a member of &quot;The Ten,&quot; a loosely-allied group of American artists dissatisfied with professional art organizations, who banded together in 1898 to exhibit their works as a stylistically unified group.

==Studies==

Twachtman was born in Cincinnati, Ohio and received his first art training there, including studying under Frank Duveneck. Like many other gifted and driven artists of his generation, including Henry Ossawa Tanner and Diego Rivera, he sought his training in Europe. He enrolled in the Academy of Fine Arts in Munich in 1875 and visited Venice with Duveneck and William Merritt Chase in 1878. His landscapes from this time exhibit the loosely brushed, shadowy technique taught at Munich. Twachtman also learned etching, and sometimes carried etching plates with him that he could use to spontaneously record a scene.

After a brief return to America, Twachtman studied from 1883 to 1885 at the Académie Julian in Paris, and his paintings dramatically shifted towards a soft, gray and green tonalist style. During this time he painted what some art historians consider to be his greatest masterpieces, including &quot;Arques-la-Bataille&quot;, in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and &quot;Springtime&quot;, in the collection of the Cincinnati Art Museum.
==Maturity==

In 1886 he returned to America. In 1890, he bought a farm in Greenwich. He often painted and exhibited with fellow artist Julian Alden Weir, and spent considerable time at the art colony in Cos Cob. His presence was vital to the colony, says art historian Susan G. Larkin:

&quot;Twachtman&#x27;s temperament—by turns gregarious and introspective, restless and serene—was a major factor in preventing the Cos Cob art colony from becoming a backwater of nostalgic complacency. Ironically, his lack of commercial success contributed to his artistic independence, freeing him from the temptation of producing salable pictures according to a proven formula. His art, conversation, and teaching fueled the creative fires of his friends and students in Cos Cob.&quot;

In addition to his oil paintings, Twachtman produced drawings in pastel. He taught painting at the Art Students League from 1889 until his death in 1902. Twachtman was close friends with Julian Alden Weir and the two often painted together.

In Connecticut his painting style shifted again, this time to a highly personal impressionist technique. Twachtman painted many landscapes of his farm and garden in Greenwich, often depicting the snow-covered landscape. He executed dozens of paintings of a small waterfall on his property, capturing the scene in different seasons and times of day. In the summers of 1900–1902, Twachtman visited Gloucester, Massachusetts, another center of artistic activity in the era, and produced a series of vibrant scenes that anticipated a more modernist style yet to gain prominence in American art.
Twachtman died of a brain aneurysm on August 8, 1902, aged 49, at Addison Gilbert Hospital in Gloucester, Massachusetts. His works are in many museum collections including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City; the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.; and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.

==See also==
*Art Students League
*Ten American Painters
*Society of American Artists

==References==
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==
* https://www.jhtwachtman.org/ *</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1342683" start="0" end="20" title="John Henry Twachtman" label="John Henry Twachtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="98" end="111" title="impressionism" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477787" start="234" end="256" title="American Impressionism" label="American Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971798" start="348" end="355" title="Ten American Painters" label="The Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="577" end="593" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q660767" start="662" end="676" title="Frank Duveneck" label="Frank Duveneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q414052" start="840" end="870" title="Academy of Fine Arts, Munich" label="Academy of Fine Arts in Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="891" end="897" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q265820" start="916" end="937" title="William Merritt Chase" label="William Merritt Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1034" end="1040" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="1065" end="1072" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q337480" start="1248" end="1263" title="Académie Julian" label="Académie Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786363" start="1344" end="1352" title="tonalism" label="tonalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="1522" end="1548" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970522" start="1615" end="1636" title="Cincinnati Art Museum" label="Cincinnati Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="1713" end="1722" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284220" start="1774" end="1791" title="Julian Alden Weir" label="Julian Alden Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="1828" end="1838" title="art colony" label="art colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173827" start="1842" end="1849" title="Cos Cob Art Colony" label="Cos Cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q189085" start="2480" end="2486" title="pastel" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="2514" end="2533" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284220" start="2602" end="2619" title="Julian Alden Weir" label="Julian Alden Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="3053" end="3078" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="3268" end="3282" title="brain aneurysm" label="brain aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="3424" end="3450" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="3471" end="3494" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q49133" start="3522" end="3549" title="Museum of Fine Arts, Boston" label="Museum of Fine Arts, Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="3566" end="3585" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971798" start="3587" end="3608" title="Ten American Painters" label="Ten American Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q570182" start="3610" end="3637" title="Society of American Artists" label="Society of American Artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383644" wikidata="Q1548262" url="?curid=383644" title="Large cardinal">
<text>In the mathematical field of set theory, a large cardinal property is a certain kind of property of transfinite cardinal numbers. Cardinals with such properties are, as the name suggests, generally very &quot;large&quot; (for example, bigger than the least α such that α=ωα). The proposition that such cardinals exist cannot be proved in the most common axiomatization of set theory, namely ZFC, and such propositions can be viewed as ways of measuring how &quot;much&quot;, beyond ZFC, one needs to assume to be able to prove certain desired results. In other words, they can be seen, in Dana Scott&#x27;s phrase, as quantifying the fact &quot;that if you want more you have to assume more&quot;.

There is a rough convention that results provable from ZFC alone may be stated without hypotheses, but that if the proof requires other assumptions (such as the existence of large cardinals), these should be stated. Whether this is simply a linguistic convention, or something more, is a controversial point among distinct philosophical schools (see Motivations and epistemic status below).

A  is an axiom stating that there exists a cardinal (or perhaps many of them) with some specified large cardinal property.

Most working set theorists believe that the large cardinal axioms that are currently being considered are consistent with ZFC. These axioms are strong enough to imply the consistency of ZFC. This has the consequence (via Gödel&#x27;s second incompleteness theorem) that their consistency with ZFC cannot be proven in ZFC (assuming ZFC is consistent).

There is no generally agreed precise definition of what a large cardinal property is, though essentially everyone agrees that those in the list of large cardinal properties are large cardinal properties.

==Partial definition==
A necessary condition for a property of cardinal numbers to be a &quot;large cardinal property&quot; is that the existence of such a cardinal is not known to be inconsistent with ZF and that such a cardinal &quot;Κ&quot; would be an uncountable initial ordinal for which &quot;L&quot;&quot;Κ&quot; is a model of ZFC. If ZFC is consistent, then ZFC does &quot;not&quot; imply that any such large cardinals exist.

==Hierarchy of consistency strength==
A remarkable observation about large cardinal axioms is that they appear to occur in strict linear order by consistency strength. That is, no exception is known to the following: Given two large cardinal axioms &quot;A&quot;1 and &quot;A&quot;2, exactly one of three things happens:
#Unless ZFC is inconsistent, ZFC+&quot;A&quot;1 is consistent if and only if ZFC+&quot;A&quot;2 is consistent;
#ZFC+&quot;A&quot;1 proves that ZFC+&quot;A&quot;2 is consistent; or
#ZFC+&quot;A&quot;2 proves that ZFC+&quot;A&quot;1 is consistent.
These are mutually exclusive, unless one of the theories in question is actually inconsistent.

In case 1, we say that &quot;A&quot;1 and &quot;A&quot;2 are equiconsistent. In case 2, we say that &quot;A&quot;1 is consistency-wise stronger than &quot;A&quot;2 (vice versa for case 3). If &quot;A&quot;2 is stronger than &quot;A&quot;1, then ZFC+&quot;A&quot;1 cannot prove ZFC+&quot;A&quot;2 is consistent, even with the additional hypothesis that ZFC+&quot;A&quot;1 is itself consistent (provided of course that it really is). This follows from Gödel&#x27;s second incompleteness theorem.

The observation that large cardinal axioms are linearly ordered by consistency strength is just that, an observation, not a theorem. (Without an accepted definition of large cardinal property, it is not subject to proof in the ordinary sense.) Also, it is not known in every case which of the three cases holds. Saharon Shelah has asked, &quot;[i]s there some theorem explaining this, or is our vision just more uniform than we realize?&quot; Woodin, however, deduces this from the Ω-conjecture, the main unsolved problem of his Ω-logic. It is also noteworthy that many combinatorial statements are exactly equiconsistent with some large cardinal rather than, say, being intermediate between them.

The order of consistency strength is not necessarily the same as the order of the size of the smallest witness to a large cardinal axiom. For example, the existence of a huge cardinal is much stronger, in terms of consistency strength, than the existence of a supercompact cardinal, but assuming both exist, the first huge is smaller than the first supercompact.

==Motivations and epistemic status==
Large cardinals are understood in the context of the von Neumann universe V, which is built up by transfinitely iterating the powerset operation, which collects together all subsets of a given set. Typically, models in which large cardinal axioms &quot;fail&quot; can be seen in some natural way as submodels of those in which the axioms hold. For example, if there is an inaccessible cardinal, then &quot;cutting the universe off&quot; at the height of the first such cardinal yields a universe in which there is no inaccessible cardinal. Or if there is a measurable cardinal, then iterating the &quot;definable&quot; powerset operation rather than the full one yields Gödel&#x27;s constructible universe, L, which does not satisfy the statement &quot;there is a measurable cardinal&quot; (even though it contains the measurable cardinal as an ordinal).

Thus, from a certain point of view held by many set theorists (especially those inspired by the tradition of the Cabal), large cardinal axioms &quot;say&quot; that we are considering all the sets we&#x27;re &quot;supposed&quot; to be considering, whereas their negations are &quot;restrictive&quot; and say that we&#x27;re considering only some of those sets. Moreover the consequences of large cardinal axioms seem to fall into natural patterns (see Maddy, &quot;Believing the Axioms, II&quot;). For these reasons, such set theorists tend to consider large cardinal axioms to have a preferred status among extensions of ZFC, one not shared by axioms of less clear motivation (such as Martin&#x27;s axiom) or others that they consider intuitively unlikely (such as V = L). The hardcore realists in this group would state, more simply, that large cardinal axioms are &quot;true&quot;.

This point of view is by no means universal among set theorists. Some formalists would assert that standard set theory is by definition the study of the consequences of ZFC, and while they might not be opposed in principle to studying the consequences of other systems, they see no reason to single out large cardinals as preferred. There are also realists who deny that ontological maximalism is a proper motivation, and even believe that large cardinal axioms are false. And finally, there are some who deny that the negations of large cardinal axioms &quot;are&quot; restrictive, pointing out that (for example) there can be a transitive set model in L that believes there exists a measurable cardinal, even though L itself does not satisfy that proposition.

==See also==
* List of large cardinal properties

==Notes==
==References==
* 
*
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Large Cardinals and Determinacy&quot; at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="29" end="39" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548262" start="43" end="66" title="Large cardinal" label="large cardinal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069891" start="100" end="111" title="Transfinite number" label="transfinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="112" end="127" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q792542" start="354" end="368" title="axiomatization" label="axiomatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="391" end="394" title="ZFC" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49823" start="589" end="599" title="Dana Scott" label="Dana Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1049" end="1081" title="#Motivations and epistemic status" label="Motivations and epistemic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548262" start="1093" end="1093" title="Large cardinal" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="1321" end="1331" title="consistent" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="1436" end="1478" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s second incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077782" start="1706" end="1739" title="list of large cardinal properties" label="list of large cardinal properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="1974" end="1976" title="ZFC" label="ZF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777107" start="2066" end="2092" title="constructible universe" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot;&amp;quot;Κ&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="2122" end="2132" title="consistent" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="2338" end="2350" title="linear order" label="linear order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384443" start="2354" end="2374" title="consistency strength" label="consistency strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384443" start="2932" end="2946" title="Equiconsistency" label="equiconsistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="3321" end="3363" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s second incompleteness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s second incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q448592" start="3678" end="3692" title="Saharon Shelah" label="Saharon Shelah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389897" start="3809" end="3815" title="W. Hugh Woodin" label="Woodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084001" start="3848" end="3860" title="Ω-conjecture" label="Ω-conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084001" start="3895" end="3902" title="Ω-logic" label="Ω-logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929680" start="4235" end="4248" title="huge cardinal" label="huge cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643154" start="4325" end="4346" title="supercompact cardinal" label="supercompact cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q77887" start="4519" end="4539" title="von Neumann universe" label="von Neumann universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q840810" start="4564" end="4587" title="transfinite induction" label="transfinitely iterating"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="4592" end="4600" title="powerset" label="powerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="4640" end="4646" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="4675" end="4681" title="Model theory" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331373" start="4838" end="4859" title="inaccessible cardinal" label="inaccessible cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q597663" start="4953" end="4961" title="universe (mathematics)" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q925445" start="5023" end="5042" title="measurable cardinal" label="measurable cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777107" start="5136" end="5171" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s constructible universe" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s constructible universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015190" start="5435" end="5440" title="Cabal (set theory)" label="Cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622185" start="6007" end="6026" title="Martin&amp;#x27;s axiom" label="Martin&amp;#x27;s axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151112" start="6087" end="6092" title="V=L" label="V = L"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6108" end="6116" title="Philosophy of mathematics#Mathematical realism" label="realists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6277" end="6287" title="Philosophy of mathematics#Formalism" label="formalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611745" start="6578" end="6600" title="ontological maximalism" label="ontological maximalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q671944" start="6837" end="6851" title="transitive set" label="transitive set"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077782" start="6985" end="7018" title="List of large cardinal properties" label="List of large cardinal properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="7129" end="7164" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383648" wikidata="Q23140" url="?curid=383648" title="Warwickshire">
<text>Warwickshire (; abbreviated Warks) is a ceremonial county in the West Midlands of England. It is bordered by Staffordshire and Leicestershire to the north, Northamptonshire to the east, Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire to the south, and Worcestershire and the West Midlands county to the west. The largest settlement is Nuneaton and the county town is Warwick.

The county is largely rural; it has an area of and a population of 571,010. After Nuneaton (88,813), the largest settlements are Rugby (78,125), Leamington Spa (50,923), Warwick (36,665), Bedworth (31,090) and Stratford-upon-Avon (30,495). For local government purposes, Warwickshire is a non-metropolitan county with five districts. The county historically included the city of Coventry and the area to its west, including Sutton Coldfield, Solihull and a significant part of Birmingham, including the city centre.

Warwickshire is a flat, lowland county, but its far south contains part of the Cotswolds AONB. The River Avon, a major tributary of the Severn, flows through the south of the county.

The region was part of Roman Britain and later the Roman road called Watling Street became the boundary between the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Mercia and the Danelaw. The county was relatively settled during the rest of the Middle Ages and Early Modern period; Coventry developed as a major centre of the textiles trade. The playwright William Shakespeare was born in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1564, living much of his life there, and the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 was planned near Snitterfield. During the Industrial Revolution, the Warwickshire coalfield was exploited and Coventry and the west of the county became manufacturing centres; Leamington Spa developed as a tourist resort at the same time. The Victorian novelist Mary Ann Evans, better known as George Eliot, was born just outside Nuneaton in 1819.

==Geography==
Warwickshire is bordered by Leicestershire to the northeast, Staffordshire to the northwest, Worcestershire and the West Midlands to the west, Northamptonshire to the east and southeast, Gloucestershire to the southwest and Oxfordshire to the south. The northern tip of the county is only from the Derbyshire border. An average-sized English county covering an area of , it runs some north to south.

The majority of Warwickshire&#x27;s population live in the north and centre of the county. The market towns of northern and eastern Warwickshire were industrialised in the 19th century, and include Atherstone, Bedworth, Coleshill, Nuneaton, and Rugby. Major industries included coal mining, textiles, engineering and cement production, but heavy industry is in decline, being replaced by distribution centres, light to medium industry and services. Of the northern and eastern towns, Nuneaton and Rugby (as the birthplace of rugby football) are best known outside of Warwickshire. The prosperous towns of central and western Warwickshire, including Leamington Spa, Warwick, Stratford-upon-Avon, Kenilworth, Alcester, Southam and Wellesbourne, harbour tourism, gaming and services as major employment sectors.

The north of the county, bordering Staffordshire and Leicestershire, is mildly undulating countryside (rising to 178m / 581 ft near Hartshill) and the northernmost village, No Man&#x27;s Heath, is only south of the Peak District National Park&#x27;s southernmost point.

The south of the county is largely rural and sparsely populated, and includes a very small area of the Cotswolds, at the border with northeast Gloucestershire. The plain between the outlying Cotswolds and the Edgehill escarpment is known as the Vale of Red Horse. The only town in the south of Warwickshire is Shipston-on-Stour. The highest point in the county, at , is Ebrington Hill, again on the border with Gloucestershire, at the county&#x27;s southwest extremity.

There are no cities in Warwickshire since both Coventry and Birmingham were incorporated into the West Midlands county in 1974 and are now metropolitan authorities in themselves. According to the 2011 United Kingdom census, the largest towns (+20,000 pop.) in Warwickshire were: Nuneaton (pop. 81,900), Rugby (70,600), Leamington Spa (49,500), Bedworth (32,500), Warwick (30,100), Stratford (25,500) and Kenilworth (22,400)

=== Arden and Felden ===
Much of western Warwickshire, including the area now forming part of Coventry, Solihull and Birmingham, was covered by the ancient Forest of Arden (most of which was cut down to provide fuel for industrialisation). Thus the names of a number of places in the central-western part of Warwickshire end with the phrase &quot;-in-Arden&quot;, such as Henley-in-Arden, Hampton-in-Arden and Tanworth-in-Arden. The remaining area, not part of the forest, was called the Felden – from &quot; -&quot; and is now an undulating and agricultural landscape, through which the rivers Avon and Leam flow.

===Historic county boundaries===
Areas historically part of Warwickshire include Coventry, Solihull, Sutton Coldfield, and some of Birmingham including the city centre, Aston, Castle Bromwich, Digbeth, Edgbaston, Erdington, Hodge Hill, Ladywood, Nechells, Saltley, Shard End, Sheldon, Small Heath and Sparkbrook. These areas also became part of the metropolitan county of West Midlands (and Sutton Coldfield became part of Birmingham) following local government re-organisation in 1974.

In 1986 the West Midlands County Council was abolished and Birmingham, Coventry, and Solihull became effective unitary authorities. However, the West Midlands county name has not been altogether abolished, and still exists for ceremonial purposes. Since 2016, it has been used as part of the West Midlands Combined Authority, with powers over transport, economic development and regeneration. Some organisations, such as Warwickshire County Cricket Club, which is based in Edgbaston, in Birmingham, observe the historic county boundaries.

The flag of the historic county was registered in October 2016. It is a design of a bear and ragged staff on a red field, which is long associated with the county.

Coventry is effectively in the centre of the Warwickshire area, and still has strong ties with the county. Coventry and Warwickshire are sometimes treated as a single area and share a single Chamber of Commerce, Local Enterprise Partnership and BBC Local Radio Station (BBC Coventry &amp; Warwickshire).

Coventry was administered separately from the rest of Warwickshire between 1451 and 1842. It formed the County of the City of Coventry, a county corporate from 1451. In 1842 the county corporate of Coventry was abolished and remerged with the rest of Warwickshire.

The town of Tamworth was historically divided between Warwickshire and Staffordshire, but since 1888 has been fully in Staffordshire.

===Green belt===

Warwickshire contains a large expanse of green belt area, surrounding the West Midlands and Coventry conurbations, and was first drawn up from the 1950s. All the county&#x27;s districts contain some portion of the belt.

== Places of interest ==


*Anne Hathaway&#x27;s Cottage
*Arbury Hall
*Battle of Edgehill
*The Belfry
*Brinklow Castle
*British Motor Museum
*Burton Dassett Hills
*Caldecotte Park
*Charlecote Park
*Charlecote Water Mill
*Chesterton Windmill
*Compton Verney House
*Compton Wynyates
*Coombe Abbey
*Coombe Country Park
*Coughton Court
*Coventry Canal
*Draycote Water
*Grand Union Canal
*Guy Fawkes House
*Hartshill Hayes Country Park
*Hatton Country World
*Jephson Gardens
*Kenilworth Castle
*King Edward VI School
*Kingsbury Water Park
*Ladywalk Reserve
*Lunt Roman Fort
*Lord Leycester Hospital
*Lowsonford
*Mary Arden&#x27;s House
*Midland Air Museum
*Newbold Quarry Park
*Nuneaton Museum &amp; Art Gallery
*Oxford Canal
*Ragley Hall
*River Avon
*Rollright Stones
*Royal Pump Rooms
*Royal Shakespeare Theatre
*Rugby Art Gallery and Museum
*Rugby School
*Ryton Pools Country Park
*Shakespeare&#x27;s Birthplace
*Shakespeare&#x27;s New Place
*St. Nicholas&#x27; Park
*Swift Valley Nature Reserve
*The Forest Hermitage
*University of Warwick
*Warwick Castle
*Warwick School
*Webb Ellis Rugby Football Museum
*Wellesbourne Wartime Museum
== Economy ==
Warwickshire has a strong and growing economy with the automotive industry being a major contributor. In the north, BMW&#x27;s Hams Hall plant employs over 1,000 people, while Jaguar Land Rover and Aston Martin Lagonda have headquarters, including a giant advanced production creation centre, at Gaydon in the south.

Warwickshire is also establishing a growing reputation as a global hub of the video game industry. One of Britain&#x27;s oldest still-running game studios, Codemasters, has operated out of Southam for decades; the greater &quot;Silicon Spa&quot; area, including Southam, Royal Leamington Spa and Warwick, is now home to dozens of game studios which employ a combined total of over 2,000 highly skilled people, equating to more than 10% of the UK&#x27;s games development workforce.

Increasingly the region is establishing itself as one of the leading areas in battery technology with major developments announced in 2021 that include a £130 million UK Battery Industrialisation Centre (UKBIC) based in Coventry.

Tourism is also a key area of employment with country parks, rural areas and historic towns across the county. It generates a total business turnover of over £1 billion to the local economy and supports almost 20,000 jobs.

== Settlements ==

Main Warwickshire towns and villages, with a population of at least 5,000:

* Nuneaton (88,813)
* Rugby (78,117)
* Leamington Spa (50,923)
* Warwick (36,665)
* Bedworth (31,332)
* Stratford-upon-Avon (30,055)
* Kenilworth (22,538)
* Atherstone (11,259)
* Whitnash (10,489)
* Polesworth (9,913)
* Southam (8,114)
* Kingsbury (7,562)
* Wellesbourne (7,283)
* Coleshill (6,900)
* Bidford-on-Avon (6,818)
* Alcester (6,421)
* Bulkington (6,080)
* Studley (6,040)
* Shipston-on-Stour (5,849)
==History==


Warwickshire came into being as a division of the kingdom of Mercia in the early 11th century. The first reference to Warwickshire was in 1001, as &quot;Wæringscīr,&quot; named after Warwick. The prefix &quot;wara-&quot; is the genitive plural of the Old English noun &quot;waru&quot;, which means &quot;those that care for, watch, guard, protect, or defend&quot;. It was used as an endonym by both Goths and Jutes. The suffix &quot;-wick&quot; is an Old English cognate (&quot;-wic&quot;) for the Latin word for village, &quot;vicus&quot;. Near Warwick are the villages of Long Itchington and Bishop&#x27;s Itchington along the River Itchen.

During the Middle Ages Warwickshire was dominated by Coventry, at the time one of the most important cities in England because of its prominence in the textiles trade. Warwickshire played a key part in the English Civil War, with the Battle of Edgehill and other skirmishes taking place in the county. During the Industrial Revolution Warwickshire became one of Britain&#x27;s foremost industrial counties, with the large industrial cities of Birmingham and Coventry within its boundaries.

===Boundary changes===

*1844: The Counties (Detached Parts) Act transferred a township to, and two parishes from, the county.
*1888: Those parts of the town of Tamworth lying in Warwickshire were ceded to Staffordshire.
*1891: Harborne became part of the County Borough of Birmingham and thus was transferred from Staffordshire to Warwickshire by the Local Government Board&#x27;s Provisional Order Confirmation (No. 13) Act 1891 (54 &amp; 55 Vict. c. clxi) (local act).
*1891: The district of Balsall Heath, which had originally constituted the most northerly part of the Parish of King&#x27;s Norton in Worcestershire, was added to the County Borough of Birmingham, and therefore Warwickshire, on 1 October 1891.
*1909: Quinton was formally removed from Worcestershire and incorporated into the County Borough of Birmingham, then in Warwickshire, on 9 November 1909.
*1911: The Urban District of Handsworth, in Staffordshire, and the Rural District of Yardley along with the greater part of the Urban District of King&#x27;s Norton and Northfield, both in Worcestershire, were absorbed into Birmingham, and thus Warwickshire, as part of the &quot;Greater Birmingham Scheme&quot; on 9 November 1911.
*1928: Perry Barr Urban District was ceded to Birmingham from Staffordshire.
*1931: The boundaries between Gloucestershire, Warwickshire, and Worcestershire were adjusted by the Provisional Order Confirmation (Gloucestershire, Warwickshire and Worcestershire) Act which transferred 26 parishes between the three counties, largely to eliminate exclaves. The town of Shipston-on-Stour was gained from Worcestershire and several villages, including Long Marston and Welford-on-Avon, from Gloucestershire, while the parish of Ipsley was ceded from Alcester Rural District to Redditch Urban District in Worcestershire.
*1969: Matchborough was ceded to Worcestershire as part of the new town development of Redditch.
*1974: Under The Local Government Act 1972, Birmingham, Coventry, Solihull and Sutton Coldfield were ceded to the new West Midlands county, with Sutton Coldfield becoming part of Birmingham.

==Local government==

Like most English shire counties, Warwickshire has a two-tier local government of a county council, and five districts each having a district or borough council. These districts are: North Warwickshire, Nuneaton and Bedworth, Rugby, Stratford, and Warwick (see map). The county and district councils are responsible for providing different services.

Atherstone is the headquarters of the North Warwickshire district, Nuneaton is headquarters of the Nuneaton and Bedworth District and Leamington Spa is the headquarters of the Warwick district.

Warwickshire County Council, based in Warwick is elected every four years. The last election was the held on 6 May 2021 and resulted in a Conservative majority. The county council operates a cabinet-style council. The county council is made of 57 councillors, who decide upon the budget and appoints the council leader. The council leader selects 8 councillors and together they form the cabinet. The Leader assigns portfolios on which cabinet members make decisions. Key decisions are made by the whole cabinet while others are made only by the portfolio holders for relevant areas.

In addition many small towns and villages have their own town council or parish council as the most local tier of local government.

Warwickshire is policed by the Warwickshire Police. The force is governed by the elected Warwickshire Police and Crime Commissioner.

===Proposed local government reorganisation===
In August 2020 Warwickshire County Council put forward proposals for the five district and borough councils in the county to be abolished and replaced with a single county-wide unitary authority. This prompted a backlash from the district and borough councils who commissioned their own report, which argued in favour of Warwickshire being split into two unitary authorities, one for the north of the county, covering the current districts of North Warwickshire, Nuneaton and Bedworth and Rugby, and one for the south of the county, covering Warwick and Stratford districts. In September 2020, it was agreed that both proposals would be sent for consideration to the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government.

==Education==

In the state sector, children start school in the school year in which they turn five. They stay at primary school for seven years (although this varies even within the county, as some people have previously gone for four years and then spent another four years at a &#x27;middle school&#x27;) until they are eleven. Warwickshire is one of 36 local authorities in England to still maintain the grammar school system in two districts: Stratford-on-Avon and Rugby. In the final year of primary school, children are given the opportunity of sitting the 11-plus exam to compete for a place at one of the 5 grammar schools: Stratford-upon-Avon Grammar School for Girls; King Edward VI School, a boys&#x27; school from year 7–11 with a mixed Sixth-Form; Lawrence Sheriff Grammar School for Boys; Rugby High School for Girls and Alcester Grammar School (mixed). The Warwickshire 11+ selection test consists of two papers, each containing a mixture of verbal reasoning, numerical reasoning and non-verbal reasoning multiple-choice questions.

Warwickshire contains four colleges of further education: North Warwickshire &amp; Hinckley College, King Edward VI Sixth Form College (K.E.G.S) in Nuneaton, Stratford-upon-Avon College and the Warwickshire College Group an institution made up of six main separate colleges that have merged (Leamington Centre, Rugby Centre, Moreton Morrell Centre, Pershore College, Henley-in-Arden Centre and the Trident Centre in Warwick).

There are also six independent senior schools within the county, namely: Rugby School, Warwick School, Princethorpe College, Kingsley School, Arnold Lodge School (both in Leamington Spa), and the King&#x27;s High School For Girls (in Warwick).

A number of the Warwickshire grammar and independent schools have historical significance. King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon still uses 13th century school buildings and is the likely school of William Shakespeare, Rugby School was founded in 1567 and Warwick School was founded , which makes it the oldest surviving boys&#x27; school in the country. Rugby School is one of nine schools that were defined as the &quot;great&quot; English public schools by the Public Schools Act 1868, and is a member of the Rugby Group. Rugby School, Princethorpe College and Warwick School are HMC schools, with the Headmaster from each school attending the Headmasters&#x27; and Headmistresses&#x27; Conference.

There are no universities per se in Warwickshire, though the University of Warwick forms part of the border with Warwickshire on the southern edge of the city of Coventry. Some areas of the University of Warwick are within the boundaries of Warwickshire including Lakeside Village and Warwick Business School The university has a small campus near Wellesbourne which houses the Warwick Horticultural Research Centre and an Innovation Centre.

==Transport==
===Roads===
Several major motorways run through Warwickshire; these are:

*The M40 motorway, which connects London to Birmingham, runs through the centre of the county; it serves Leamington Spa, Warwick and Stratford.
*The M6 motorway, which connects North West England and the West Midlands to the M1 motorway (and then on to London), runs through the north of Warwickshire; it serves Rugby, Nuneaton and Bedworth on its way to Birmingham.
*The M69 Coventry to Leicester motorway serves Nuneaton.
*Other motorways pass briefly through Warwickshire including the M45 (a short spur south of Rugby connecting to the M1), the southern end of the M6 Toll and the M42; it passes through the county at several points.

Other major trunk routes in Warwickshire include:
* A45 takes a route through Birmingham, Coventry and Rugby, then east into Northamptonshire
* A46 connects the M40 to the M6 via Warwick, Kenilworth and Coventry 
* A452 Leamington to Birmingham route
* A5 passes through Atherstone and then east of Nuneaton, and then east of Rugby, it marks the county boundary with Leicestershire. 
* A444 goes through Nuneaton and Bedworth.

===Railway===


====Main line routes====

Two main railway lines pass through Warwickshire:

* The Chiltern Main Line takes the former Great Western Railway route from London Marylebone to . It passes through the centre of Warwickshire on a route similar to the M40 motorway and has stations at , , , and . Services are provided by Chiltern Railways and West Midlands Trains (Birmingham to Leamington only). There are also two branches off the Chiltern line: the Leamington to Coventry and Leamington-Stratford lines.
* The West Coast Main Line (WCML) runs through Warwickshire. At , the WCML splits into two parts: one runs west through to Coventry and Birmingham, and the other the Trent Valley Line runs north-west towards , North West England and Scotland. This section has stations at , and (northbound services only). There is one branch off the WCML from Nuneaton to Coventry, with there are stations at , and .

====Other lines====
Other railway lines in Warwickshire include:

* Birmingham-Nuneaton section of the Birmingham to Peterborough Line, which continues east of Nuneaton towards Leicester and Peterborough. Nuneaton has direct services to Birmingham and Leicester on this line; there are two intermediate stations at and Coleshill in the extreme north-west of the county.
* North Warwickshire Line from Birmingham to . This line used to continue southwards to Cheltenham, but is now a dead-end branch. There is an intermediate station on this line at and at several small villages. Stratford also has direct rail services to London via the branch line to Warwick.

Between 1965 and 2018, the only major town in Warwickshire without a station was Kenilworth. The Leamington to Coventry line passes through the town, but the station was closed as part of the Beeching cuts. Kenilworth railway station was rebuilt and opened in April 2018, with an hourly service to Coventry and to Leamington provided by West Midlands Trains.

====High Speed 2====
The new High Speed 2 (HS2) line is a long-distance route that is being constructed through Warwickshire; however, there will be no stations in the county. It will pass south of Southam, then between Kenilworth and Coventry, before running into the West Midlands towards Birmingham.

===Air===
Coventry Airport is located in the Warwickshire village of Baginton.

===Canals and waterways===
Canals and navigable waterways in Warwickshire include:
*The Coventry Canal, which runs through the north of the county from Coventry through Bedworth, Nuneaton, Atherstone and Polesworth, and then onwards to Tamworth.
*The Ashby-de-la-Zouch Canal passes briefly through Warwickshire from a junction with the Coventry Canal at Bedworth.
*The Oxford Canal runs from near Coventry, then eastwards around Rugby and through the rural south of the county towards Oxford.
*The Grand Union Canal runs through Leamington and Warwick, then onwards to Birmingham.
**The restored Saltisford Canal Arm is close to the centre of Warwick and is now a short branch of the Grand Union Canal. The arm is the remains of the original terminus of the Warwick and Birmingham Canal; it dates back to 1799. 
*The Stratford-upon-Avon Canal runs from the Grand Union west of Warwick to Stratford, where it joins the Avon.
*The River Avon runs through Warwickshire on a south-west to north-east axis, running through Stratford, Warwick and Rugby. It is navigable for from the River Severn at Tewkesbury to Alveston weir just east of Stratford-upon-Avon, making it the only navigable river in Warwickshire. There have been proposals to extend the Avon navigation to Warwick. However, as of 2019, these plans look unlikely to proceed.

==Media==
===Television===
The county is covered by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central from its studios in Birmingham. Television signals are received from either the Lark Stoke or Sutton Coldfield TV transmitters.

===Radio===
BBC Local Radio for the county is served by BBC CWR which broadcast from its studios in Coventry. However, the North Warwickshire area is served by BBC Radio WM. County-wide commercial radio stations are Capital Mid-Counties, Hits Radio Coventry &amp; Warwickshire, Fresh (Coventry &amp; Warwickshire), Heart West Midlands and Greatest Hits Radio Midlands.

==Sport ==

=== Cycling ===
Warwickshire&#x27;s rural roads, canal towpaths and historic towns are increasingly popular with cycling enthusiasts. Its reputation as a major cycling destination has been bolstered in recent years having hosted a stage of the Women&#x27;s Tour since 2016 and the Men&#x27;s Tour of Britain in 2018 and 2019.

In 2022, St Nicholas Park in Warwick hosted the &quot;Elite Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s Road Race&quot; as part of the Commonwealth Games that took place in Birmingham.

===Association football===
Warwickshire has no Football League clubs. As of the 2022–23 season, the highest-placed team is Leamington, who play in the National League North, the sixth tier of English football. A level below, in the Southern Football League Premier Division Central, are Nuneaton Borough and Stratford Town. Other clubs include Rugby Town, Bedworth United, Southam United, Racing Club Warwick, Coleshill Town, Atherstone Town and Nuneaton Griff; all of these are affiliated to the Birmingham FA.

Aston Villa, a Premier League team, and Football League clubs Birmingham City and Coventry City are located within the historic boundaries of Warwickshire; National League club Solihull Moors and Southern League Division One Central club Sutton Coldfield Town are also sited in this area.

=== Parkrun ===
There are six Saturday morning 5 km parkruns in Warwickshire for all ages and abilities: Leamington, Stratford upon Avon, Rugby, Bedworth, Southam and Kingsbury. There are also three Sunday 2 km junior events at Stratford upon Avon, Rugby and Warwick.

===Cricket===
Warwickshire County Cricket Club play at Edgbaston Cricket Ground, Birmingham, which was historically part of Warwickshire. Notable English players for the side have been Eric Hollies, M.J.K. Smith, Bob Willis, Dennis Amiss, Jonathan Trott, Ian Bell, Moeen Ali and Chris Woakes. Overseas players have included Alvin Kallicharran, Rohan Kanhai, Brian Lara, Allan Donald and Shaun Pollock. In 2014, the club partly severed its links to the county by renaming its Twenty20 side the &quot;Birmingham Bears&quot;, much to the chagrin of many supporters.

Other grounds in modern-day Warwickshire which have hosted first-class cricket matches are:
*Griff and Coton Ground, Nuneaton – 26 matches (most recently 1980)
*Arlington Avenue, Leamington Spa – 4 matches (most recently 1910)
*Swan&#x27;s Nest Lane, Stratford-upon-Avon – 3 matches (most recently 2005)
*Weddington Road, Nuneaton – 3 matches (most recently 1914)

===Gaelic sports===
The Warwickshire County Board of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) (or Warwickshire GAA) is one of the county boards outside Ireland and is responsible for Gaelic games in Warwickshire. The county board is also responsible for the Warwickshire inter-county teams. They play their home games at Páirc na hÉireann.

===Polo===
The Dallas Burston Polo Club is a six-pitch polo club located near Southam.

===Water polo===
Warwick Water Polo club play in the Midland League, and train in Warwick, Banbury and Coventry.

==Freedom of the county==
In March 2014 the freedom of the county was bestowed on the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers. The honour was officially bestowed following a parade through Warwick on 6 June 2014.

==People==

Warwickshire was the birthplace of William Shakespeare from Stratford-upon-Avon. Road signs at the county boundary describe Warwickshire as &quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s County&quot;. The county has produced figures such as Aleister Crowley (from Leamington Spa), George Eliot and Ken Loach (from Nuneaton), Rupert Brooke (from Rugby), and Michael Drayton (from Hartshill). The poet Philip Larkin lived in Warwick (born in nearby Coventry). Folk musician Nick Drake lived and died in Tanworth-in-Arden. Frank Whittle the inventor of the jet engine was born in Coventry and was closely associated with Warwickshire, growing up in Leamington Spa, and carrying out much of his work at Rugby.

==See also==
*List of Lord Lieutenants of Warwickshire
*List of High Sheriffs for Warwickshire
*Custos Rotulorum of Warwickshire – List of Keepers of the Rolls
*Warwickshire (UK Parliament constituency) – List of MPs for Warwickshire constituency
*2007 Atherstone fire
*Warwickshire College
*W. W. Quatremain

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Warwickshire County Council
* Warwickshire Geological Conservation Group (WGCG)
* The Manor of Hunningham
* Images of Warwickshire at the English Heritage Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="0" end="12" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="28" end="33" title="Warwickshire" label="Warks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="40" end="57" title="Ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q48038" start="65" end="78" title="West Midlands (region)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="109" end="122" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="127" end="141" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="156" end="172" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="186" end="197" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="202" end="217" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="236" end="250" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="259" end="279" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands county"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="319" end="327" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="336" end="347" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="351" end="358" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="490" end="495" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="506" end="520" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="549" end="557" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="571" end="590" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="605" end="621" title="Local government in England" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="650" end="673" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="706" end="718" title="Historic counties of England" label="historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="740" end="748" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q868196" start="785" end="801" title="Royal Town of Sutton Coldfield" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q397343" start="803" end="811" title="Solihull" label="Solihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="838" end="848" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916646" start="864" end="875" title="Birmingham city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="957" end="966" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="967" end="971" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="AONB"/>
<link wikidata="Q19709" start="977" end="987" title="River Avon, Warwickshire" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="1014" end="1020" title="River Severn" label="Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1085" end="1098" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="1131" end="1145" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="1178" end="1189" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="1201" end="1207" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="1216" end="1223" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1394" end="1413" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="1426" end="1445" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="1494" end="1508" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697096" start="1534" end="1546" title="Snitterfield" label="Snitterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971223" start="1586" end="1608" title="Warwickshire Coalfield" label="Warwickshire coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="1811" end="1823" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="1908" end="1922" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="1941" end="1954" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="1973" end="1987" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="1996" end="2009" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="2023" end="2039" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="2067" end="2082" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="2104" end="2115" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="2178" end="2188" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q747778" start="2479" end="2489" title="Atherstone" label="Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="2491" end="2499" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108196" start="2501" end="2510" title="Coleshill, Warwickshire" label="Coleshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="2512" end="2520" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="2526" end="2531" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864839" start="2559" end="2570" title="UK Coal" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="2572" end="2580" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2582" end="2593" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="2598" end="2604" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="2806" end="2820" title="rugby football" label="rugby football"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="2930" end="2944" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="2946" end="2953" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="2955" end="2974" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="2976" end="2986" title="Kenilworth" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012025" start="2988" end="2996" title="Alcester" label="Alcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560184" start="2998" end="3005" title="Southam" label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861086" start="3010" end="3022" title="Wellesbourne" label="Wellesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675266" start="3223" end="3232" title="Hartshill" label="Hartshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044410" start="3264" end="3283" title="No Man&amp;#x27;s Heath, Warwickshire" label="No Man&amp;#x27;s Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="3306" end="3333" title="Peak District National Park" label="Peak District National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="3465" end="3474" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337661" start="3571" end="3579" title="Edge Hill, Warwickshire" label="Edgehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909568" start="3607" end="3624" title="Vale of Red Horse" label="Vale of Red Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="3635" end="3639" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q530736" start="3672" end="3689" title="Shipston-on-Stour" label="Shipston-on-Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216010" start="3732" end="3746" title="Ebrington Hill" label="Ebrington Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="3880" end="3888" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="3893" end="3903" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="4029" end="4055" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787912" start="4414" end="4429" title="Forest of Arden" label="Forest of Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734845" start="4630" end="4645" title="Henley-in-Arden" label="Henley-in-Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612062" start="4647" end="4663" title="Hampton-in-Arden" label="Hampton-in-Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783543" start="4668" end="4685" title="Tanworth-in-Arden" label="Tanworth-in-Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="4913" end="4930" title="Historic counties of England" label="historically part"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="4955" end="4963" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q397343" start="4965" end="4973" title="Solihull" label="Solihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q868196" start="4975" end="4991" title="Sutton Coldfield" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="5005" end="5015" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916646" start="5030" end="5041" title="Birmingham city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q649838" start="5043" end="5048" title="Aston" label="Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776329" start="5050" end="5065" title="Castle Bromwich" label="Castle Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275561" start="5067" end="5074" title="Digbeth" label="Digbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047556" start="5076" end="5085" title="Edgbaston" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385291" start="5087" end="5096" title="Erdington" label="Erdington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876041" start="5098" end="5108" title="Hodge Hill" label="Hodge Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470824" start="5110" end="5118" title="Ladywood" label="Ladywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985460" start="5120" end="5128" title="Nechells" label="Nechells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406147" start="5130" end="5137" title="Saltley" label="Saltley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489455" start="5139" end="5148" title="Shard End" label="Shard End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493450" start="5150" end="5157" title="Sheldon, Warwickshire" label="Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542788" start="5159" end="5170" title="Small Heath" label="Small Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593284" start="5175" end="5185" title="Sparkbrook" label="Sparkbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q769628" start="5223" end="5242" title="metropolitan county" label="metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="5246" end="5259" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="5319" end="5359" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="local government re-organisation in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985936" start="5374" end="5402" title="West Midlands County Council" label="West Midlands County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="5473" end="5492" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="5589" end="5608" title="Ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061625" start="5654" end="5686" title="West Midlands Combined Authority" label="West Midlands Combined Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="5783" end="5815" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047556" start="5835" end="5844" title="Edgbaston" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="5873" end="5888" title="Historic counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804387" start="5906" end="5933" title="Flag of Warwickshire" label="flag of the historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q67182697" start="5986" end="6007" title="Bear and Ragged Staff" label="bear and ragged staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="6067" end="6075" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="6258" end="6277" title="Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664362" start="6279" end="6307" title="Local enterprise partnership" label="Local Enterprise Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834803" start="6337" end="6368" title="BBC Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire" label="BBC Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="6372" end="6380" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177936" start="6476" end="6506" title="County of the City of Coventry" label="County of the City of Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998917" start="6510" end="6526" title="county corporate" label="county corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q704864" start="6650" end="6658" title="Tamworth, Staffordshire" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="6709" end="6722" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734873" start="6832" end="6842" title="Green belt (United Kingdom)" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292186" start="6865" end="6878" title="West Midlands conurbation" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179126" start="6883" end="6891" title="Coventry/Bedworth Urban Area" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902137" start="7040" end="7068" title="Anne Hathaway&amp;#x27;s Cottage" label="Anne Hathaway&amp;#x27;s Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784952" start="7070" end="7081" title="Arbury Hall" label="Arbury Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478525" start="7083" end="7101" title="Battle of Edgehill" label="Battle of Edgehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770934" start="7103" end="7113" title="The Belfry" label="The Belfry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968429" start="7115" end="7130" title="Brinklow Castle" label="Brinklow Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738949" start="7132" end="7152" title="British Motor Museum" label="British Motor Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000842" start="7154" end="7174" title="Burton Dassett Hills" label="Burton Dassett Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018992" start="7176" end="7191" title="Caldecotte Park" label="Caldecotte Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074613" start="7193" end="7208" title="Charlecote Park" label="Charlecote Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17551855" start="7210" end="7231" title="Charlecote Water Mill" label="Charlecote Water Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q665560" start="7233" end="7252" title="Chesterton Windmill" label="Chesterton Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157178" start="7254" end="7274" title="Compton Verney House" label="Compton Verney House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157180" start="7276" end="7292" title="Compton Wynyates" label="Compton Wynyates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113583" start="7294" end="7306" title="Coombe Abbey" label="Coombe Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113583" start="7308" end="7327" title="Coombe Abbey" label="Coombe Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176083" start="7329" end="7343" title="Coughton Court" label="Coughton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138056" start="7345" end="7359" title="Coventry Canal" label="Coventry Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715180" start="7361" end="7375" title="Draycote Water" label="Draycote Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="7377" end="7394" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041276" start="7396" end="7412" title="Dunchurch" label="Guy Fawkes House"/>
<link wikidata="Q123914257" start="7414" end="7442" title="Hartshill Hayes Country Park" label="Hartshill Hayes Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7444" end="7464" title="Hatton Country World" label="Hatton Country World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743112" start="7466" end="7481" title="Jephson Gardens" label="Jephson Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="7483" end="7500" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411533" start="7502" end="7523" title="King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon" label="King Edward VI School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413168" start="7525" end="7545" title="Kingsbury Water Park" label="Kingsbury Water Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241236" start="7547" end="7563" title="Ladywalk Reserve" label="Ladywalk Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061402" start="7565" end="7580" title="Lunt Roman Fort" label="Lunt Roman Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679506" start="7582" end="7605" title="Lord Leycester Hospital" label="Lord Leycester Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694188" start="7607" end="7617" title="Lowsonford" label="Lowsonford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415454" start="7619" end="7642" title="Mary Arden&amp;#x27;s House" label="Mary Arden&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842303" start="7644" end="7662" title="Midland Air Museum" label="Midland Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061637" start="7664" end="7683" title="Newbold Quarry Park" label="Newbold Quarry Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069802" start="7685" end="7718" title="Nuneaton Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery" label="Nuneaton Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q238725" start="7720" end="7732" title="Oxford Canal" label="Oxford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283125" start="7734" end="7745" title="Ragley Hall" label="Ragley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19709" start="7747" end="7757" title="River Avon, Warwickshire" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361310" start="7759" end="7775" title="Rollright Stones" label="Rollright Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374745" start="7777" end="7793" title="Royal Pump Rooms" label="Royal Pump Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="7795" end="7820" title="Royal Shakespeare Theatre" label="Royal Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378151" start="7822" end="7850" title="Rugby Art Gallery and Museum" label="Rugby Art Gallery and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="7852" end="7864" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385466" start="7866" end="7890" title="Ryton Pools Country Park" label="Ryton Pools Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770409" start="7892" end="7921" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Birthplace" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Birthplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q471946" start="7923" end="7951" title="New Place" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s New Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590810" start="7953" end="7976" title="St Nicholas&amp;#x27; Park, Warwick" label="St. Nicholas&amp;#x27; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q86338678" start="7978" end="8005" title="Swift Valley Nature Reserve" label="Swift Valley Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8007" end="8027" title="The Forest Hermitage" label="The Forest Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="8029" end="8050" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q941276" start="8052" end="8066" title="Warwick Castle" label="Warwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971186" start="8068" end="8082" title="Warwick School" label="Warwick School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978648" start="8084" end="8116" title="Webb Ellis Rugby Football Museum" label="Webb Ellis Rugby Football Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915273" start="8118" end="8145" title="Wellesbourne Wartime Museum" label="Wellesbourne Wartime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="8556" end="8575" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23901" start="8634" end="8645" title="Codemasters" label="Codemasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560184" start="8667" end="8674" title="Southam" label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101364" start="8706" end="8717" title="List of places with &amp;#x27;Silicon&amp;#x27; names" label="Silicon Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="8749" end="8769" title="Royal Leamington Spa" label="Royal Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="8774" end="8781" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="9513" end="9521" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="9533" end="9538" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="9550" end="9564" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="9576" end="9583" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="9595" end="9603" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="9615" end="9634" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="9646" end="9656" title="Kenilworth" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q747778" start="9668" end="9678" title="Atherstone" label="Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368471" start="9690" end="9698" title="Whitnash" label="Whitnash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025422" start="9710" end="9720" title="Polesworth" label="Polesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560184" start="9731" end="9738" title="Southam" label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q519687" start="9749" end="9758" title="Kingsbury, Warwickshire" label="Kingsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861086" start="9769" end="9781" title="Wellesbourne" label="Wellesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108196" start="9792" end="9801" title="Coleshill, Warwickshire" label="Coleshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770280" start="9812" end="9827" title="Bidford-on-Avon" label="Bidford-on-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012025" start="9838" end="9846" title="Alcester" label="Alcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870168" start="9857" end="9867" title="Bulkington" label="Bulkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076557" start="9878" end="9885" title="Studley, Warwickshire" label="Studley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530736" start="9896" end="9913" title="Shipston-on-Stour" label="Shipston-on-Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="9997" end="10003" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="10119" end="10126" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="10164" end="10172" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="10173" end="10179" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="10187" end="10198" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="10199" end="10203" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="10319" end="10326" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="10335" end="10340" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="10387" end="10398" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="10399" end="10406" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="10434" end="10439" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="10482" end="10489" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122039" start="10510" end="10525" title="Long Itchington" label="Long Itchington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917427" start="10530" end="10554" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Itchington" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Itchington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337530" start="10565" end="10577" title="River Itchen, Warwickshire" label="River Itchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10591" end="10602" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="10633" end="10641" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="10786" end="10803" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478525" start="10814" end="10832" title="Battle of Edgehill" label="Battle of Edgehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="10893" end="10914" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="11023" end="11033" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="11038" end="11046" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11106" end="11135" title="Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844#Warwickshire" label="Counties (Detached Parts) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q704864" start="11232" end="11240" title="Tamworth, Staffordshire" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699290" start="11299" end="11307" title="Harborne" label="Harborne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11423" end="11501" title="Local Government Board&amp;#x27;s Provisional Order Confirmation (No. 13) Act 1891" label="Local Government Board&amp;#x27;s Provisional Order Confirmation (No. 13) Act 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945391" start="11503" end="11520" title="54 &amp;amp; 55 Vict." label="54 &amp;amp; 55 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q4852528" start="11566" end="11579" title="Balsall Heath" label="Balsall Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856469" start="11655" end="11673" title="King&amp;#x27;s Norton" label="King&amp;#x27;s Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="11710" end="11738" title="County Borough of Birmingham" label="County Borough of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272470" start="11794" end="11801" title="Quinton, Birmingham" label="Quinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="11952" end="11966" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647672" start="11967" end="11980" title="Handsworth, West Midlands" label="of Handsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754946" start="12008" end="12022" title="Rural District" label="Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049282" start="12023" end="12033" title="Yardley, Birmingham" label="of Yardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411033" start="12069" end="12120" title="Urban District of King&amp;#x27;s Norton and Northfield" label="Urban District of King&amp;#x27;s Norton and Northfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169723" start="12280" end="12290" title="Perry Barr" label="Perry Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="12291" end="12305" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975490" start="12616" end="12624" title="List of county exclaves in England and Wales 1844 - 1974" label="exclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q530736" start="12638" end="12655" title="Shipston-on-Stour" label="Shipston-on-Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345106" start="12719" end="12731" title="Long Marston, Warwickshire" label="Long Marston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980974" start="12736" end="12751" title="Welford-on-Avon" label="Welford-on-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="12758" end="12773" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283529" start="12795" end="12801" title="Ipsley" label="Ipsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012025" start="12817" end="12825" title="Alcester" label="Alcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q865716" start="12844" end="12852" title="Redditch" label="Redditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283529" start="12894" end="12906" title="Matchborough" label="Matchborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270157" start="12950" end="12958" title="New towns in the United Kingdom" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="13001" end="13026" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="13040" end="13048" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q397343" start="13050" end="13058" title="Solihull" label="Solihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q868196" start="13063" end="13079" title="Sutton Coldfield" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="13102" end="13122" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands county"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="13260" end="13276" title="Local government in England" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="13282" end="13296" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="13307" end="13316" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000897" start="13381" end="13399" title="North Warwickshire" label="North Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q920466" start="13401" end="13422" title="Nuneaton and Bedworth" label="Nuneaton and Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q894091" start="13424" end="13429" title="Borough of Rugby" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693076" start="13431" end="13440" title="Stratford-on-Avon (district)" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q611294" start="13446" end="13453" title="Warwick District" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q747778" start="13549" end="13559" title="Atherstone" label="Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="13616" end="13624" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="13683" end="13697" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066348" start="13744" end="13771" title="Warwickshire County Council" label="Warwickshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="13782" end="13789" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105540680" start="13828" end="13863" title="2021 Warwickshire County Council election" label="election was the held on 6 May 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="13935" end="13956" title="cabinet-style council" label="cabinet-style council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="14386" end="14398" title="town council" label="town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="14402" end="14416" title="Parish councils in England" label="parish council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971239" start="14493" end="14512" title="Warwickshire Police" label="Warwickshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993994" start="14551" end="14593" title="Warwickshire Police and Crime Commissioner" label="Warwickshire Police and Crime Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="14820" end="14837" title="unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781526" start="15310" end="15374" title="Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government" label="Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621897" start="15732" end="15752" title="List of grammar schools in England" label="36 local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="15786" end="15800" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359785" start="15942" end="15949" title="eleven-plus exam" label="11-plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621934" start="16011" end="16055" title="Stratford-upon-Avon Grammar School for Girls" label="Stratford-upon-Avon Grammar School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411533" start="16057" end="16078" title="King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon" label="King Edward VI School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504589" start="16140" end="16180" title="Lawrence Sheriff School" label="Lawrence Sheriff Grammar School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378189" start="16182" end="16209" title="Rugby High School for Girls" label="Rugby High School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713005" start="16214" end="16237" title="Alcester Grammar School" label="Alcester Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262543" start="16485" end="16526" title="North Warwickshire and Hinckley College" label="North Warwickshire &amp;amp; Hinckley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621933" start="16585" end="16612" title="Stratford-upon-Avon College" label="Stratford-upon-Avon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403895" start="16621" end="16647" title="WCG (college)" label="Warwickshire College Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="16927" end="16939" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971186" start="16941" end="16955" title="Warwick School" label="Warwick School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244919" start="16957" end="16977" title="Princethorpe College" label="Princethorpe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413342" start="16979" end="16994" title="Kingsley School" label="Kingsley School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795148" start="16996" end="17015" title="Arnold Lodge School" label="Arnold Lodge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="17025" end="17039" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744456" start="17046" end="17083" title="the King&amp;#x27;s High School For Girls" label="the King&amp;#x27;s High School For Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="17088" end="17095" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411533" start="17190" end="17232" title="King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon" label="King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="17302" end="17321" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="17323" end="17335" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971186" start="17360" end="17374" title="Warwick School" label="Warwick School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="17459" end="17471" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257577" start="17568" end="17591" title="Public Schools Act 1868" label="Public Schools Act 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378183" start="17616" end="17627" title="Rugby Group" label="Rugby Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="17629" end="17641" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244919" start="17643" end="17663" title="Princethorpe College" label="Princethorpe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971186" start="17668" end="17682" title="Warwick School" label="Warwick School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689840" start="17687" end="17690" title="Headmasters&amp;#x27; and Headmistresses&amp;#x27; Conference" label="HMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689840" start="17751" end="17804" title="Headmasters&amp;#x27; and Headmistresses&amp;#x27; Conference" label="Headmasters&amp;#x27; and Headmistresses&amp;#x27; Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="17868" end="17889" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="18290" end="18298" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541030" start="18343" end="18355" title="M40 motorway" label="M40 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="18372" end="18378" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="18382" end="18392" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="18487" end="18498" title="M6 motorway" label="M6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="18515" end="18533" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="18563" end="18574" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736452" start="18710" end="18713" title="M69 motorway" label="M69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880991" start="18827" end="18830" title="M45 motorway" label="M45"/>
<link wikidata="Q458051" start="18907" end="18914" title="M6 Toll" label="M6 Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328487" start="18923" end="18926" title="M42 motorway" label="M42"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649334" start="19029" end="19032" title="A45 road" label="A45"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649340" start="19121" end="19124" title="A46 road" label="A46"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649329" start="19192" end="19196" title="A452 road" label="A452"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295978" start="19230" end="19232" title="A5 road (Great Britain)" label="A5"/>
<link wikidata="Q747778" start="19248" end="19258" title="Atherstone" label="Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q287874" start="19504" end="19522" title="Chiltern Main Line" label="Chiltern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="19540" end="19561" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q649419" start="19573" end="19590" title="Marylebone station" label="London Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q567000" start="19737" end="19754" title="Chiltern Railways" label="Chiltern Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052868" start="19759" end="19779" title="West Midlands Trains" label="West Midlands Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179135" start="19868" end="19890" title="Coventry to Leamington Line" label="Leamington to Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509418" start="19895" end="19915" title="Leamington to Stratford Line" label="Leamington-Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="19929" end="19949" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058701" start="20046" end="20054" title="Coventry railway station" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q683063" start="20059" end="20069" title="Birmingham New Street railway station" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838471" start="20089" end="20106" title="Trent Valley Line" label="Trent Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="20156" end="20164" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179137" start="20267" end="20287" title="Coventry to Nuneaton Line" label="Nuneaton to Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307646" start="20428" end="20459" title="Birmingham to Peterborough Line" label="Birmingham to Peterborough Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399620" start="20502" end="20511" title="Leicester railway station" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="20516" end="20528" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144669" start="20644" end="20653" title="Coleshill Parkway railway station" label="Coleshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916867" start="20697" end="20720" title="North Warwickshire Line" label="North Warwickshire Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="20783" end="20793" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="21069" end="21079" title="Kenilworth" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="21180" end="21193" title="Beeching cuts" label="Beeching cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389304" start="21195" end="21221" title="Kenilworth railway station" label="Kenilworth railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052868" start="21325" end="21345" title="West Midlands Trains" label="West Midlands Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="21377" end="21389" title="High Speed 2" label="High Speed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560184" start="21546" end="21553" title="Southam" label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431133" start="21662" end="21678" title="Coventry Airport" label="Coventry Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021921" start="21721" end="21729" title="Baginton" label="Baginton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="21759" end="21764" title="Canal" label="Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138056" start="21820" end="21834" title="Coventry Canal" label="Coventry Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="21884" end="21892" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="21901" end="21909" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="21911" end="21919" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q747778" start="21921" end="21931" title="Atherstone" label="Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025422" start="21936" end="21946" title="Polesworth" label="Polesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q704864" start="21968" end="21976" title="Tamworth, Staffordshire" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804706" start="21983" end="22006" title="Ashby-de-la-Zouch Canal" label="Ashby-de-la-Zouch Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="22086" end="22094" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238725" start="22101" end="22113" title="Oxford Canal" label="Oxford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="22217" end="22223" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="22230" end="22247" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406143" start="22328" end="22348" title="Saltisford Canal Arm" label="Saltisford Canal Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621930" start="22549" end="22574" title="Stratford-upon-Avon Canal" label="Stratford-upon-Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19709" start="22661" end="22671" title="River Avon, Warwickshire" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="22809" end="22821" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000717" start="22825" end="22835" title="Tewkesbury" label="Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738007" start="22839" end="22847" title="Alveston, Warwickshire" label="Alveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066997" start="22848" end="22852" title="weir" label="weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835013" start="23119" end="23136" title="BBC West Midlands" label="BBC West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="23141" end="23152" title="ITV Central" label="ITV Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="23173" end="23183" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650235" start="23247" end="23263" title="Sutton Coldfield transmitting station" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q795546" start="23294" end="23309" title="BBC Local Radio" label="BBC Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834803" start="23338" end="23345" title="BBC CWR" label="BBC CWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="23382" end="23390" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000897" start="23405" end="23423" title="North Warwickshire" label="North Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835005" start="23442" end="23454" title="BBC Radio WM" label="BBC Radio WM"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750540" start="23498" end="23518" title="Capital Mid-Counties" label="Capital Mid-Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500030" start="23520" end="23558" title="Hits Radio Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire" label="Hits Radio Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612089" start="23560" end="23595" title="Fresh (Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire)" label="Fresh (Coventry &amp;amp; Warwickshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129029" start="23597" end="23616" title="Heart West Midlands" label="Heart West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854100" start="23621" end="23649" title="Greatest Hits Radio Midlands" label="Greatest Hits Radio Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="24110" end="24128" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="24208" end="24223" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944694" start="24284" end="24294" title="Leamington F.C." label="Leamington"/>
<link wikidata="Q59041" start="24312" end="24333" title="National League North" label="National League North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="24393" end="24417" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18524" start="24448" end="24464" title="Nuneaton Borough F.C." label="Nuneaton Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621995" start="24469" end="24483" title="Stratford Town F.C." label="Stratford Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378249" start="24505" end="24515" title="Rugby Town F.C." label="Rugby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879475" start="24517" end="24532" title="Bedworth United F.C." label="Bedworth United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569081" start="24534" end="24548" title="Southam United F.C." label="Southam United"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414876" start="24550" end="24569" title="Racing Club Warwick F.C." label="Racing Club Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144671" start="24571" end="24585" title="Coleshill Town F.C." label="Coleshill Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813581" start="24587" end="24602" title="Atherstone Town F.C." label="Atherstone Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069800" start="24607" end="24621" title="Nuneaton Griff F.C." label="Nuneaton Griff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916678" start="24658" end="24671" title="Birmingham County Football Association" label="Birmingham FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="24674" end="24685" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="24689" end="24703" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="24736" end="24751" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="24756" end="24769" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975959" start="24851" end="24865" title="Solihull Moors F.C." label="Solihull Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18493" start="24912" end="24933" title="Sutton Coldfield Town F.C." label="Sutton Coldfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="25247" end="25279" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284346" start="25288" end="25312" title="Edgbaston Cricket Ground" label="Edgbaston Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749265" start="25418" end="25430" title="Eric Hollies" label="Eric Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526191" start="25432" end="25444" title="M.J.K. Smith" label="M.J.K. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907874" start="25446" end="25456" title="Bob Willis" label="Bob Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258145" start="25458" end="25470" title="Dennis Amiss" label="Dennis Amiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529861" start="25472" end="25486" title="Jonathan Trott" label="Jonathan Trott"/>
<link wikidata="Q767692" start="25488" end="25496" title="Ian Bell" label="Ian Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890053" start="25498" end="25507" title="Moeen Ali" label="Moeen Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108508" start="25512" end="25524" title="Chris Woakes" label="Chris Woakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738141" start="25557" end="25575" title="Alvin Kallicharran" label="Alvin Kallicharran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048102" start="25577" end="25589" title="Rohan Kanhai" label="Rohan Kanhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q202877" start="25591" end="25601" title="Brian Lara" label="Brian Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345532" start="25603" end="25615" title="Allan Donald" label="Allan Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q12454494" start="25620" end="25633" title="Shaun Pollock" label="Shaun Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="25708" end="25716" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916612" start="25732" end="25748" title="Birmingham Bears" label="Birmingham Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="25856" end="25883" title="First-class cricket" label="first-class cricket matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608754" start="25890" end="25912" title="Griff and Coton Ground" label="Griff and Coton Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="25914" end="25922" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242165" start="25958" end="25974" title="Leamington Cricket Club Ground" label="Arlington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="25976" end="25990" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621932" start="26025" end="26046" title="Stratford-upon-Avon Cricket Club Ground" label="Swan&amp;#x27;s Nest Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="26048" end="26067" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069801" start="26102" end="26117" title="Nuneaton Cricket Club Ground" label="Weddington Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="26119" end="26127" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="26219" end="26246" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756873" start="26289" end="26302" title="GAA county" label="county boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="26311" end="26318" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447366" start="26342" end="26354" title="Gaelic games" label="Gaelic games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264021" start="26480" end="26497" title="Páirc na hÉireann, West Midlands" label="Páirc na hÉireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993076" start="26515" end="26539" title="Dallas Burston Polo Club" label="Dallas Burston Polo Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="26555" end="26559" title="polo (sport)" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560184" start="26578" end="26585" title="Southam" label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="26788" end="26815" title="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="26879" end="26886" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="26951" end="26970" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="26976" end="26995" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="27135" end="27151" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="27158" end="27172" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="27175" end="27187" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55238" start="27192" end="27201" title="Ken Loach" label="Ken Loach"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="27208" end="27216" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="27219" end="27232" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="27239" end="27244" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q138540" start="27251" end="27266" title="Michael Drayton" label="Michael Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675266" start="27273" end="27282" title="Hartshill" label="Hartshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="27294" end="27307" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="27366" end="27376" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783543" start="27395" end="27412" title="Tanworth-in-Arden" label="Tanworth-in-Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="27414" end="27427" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679684" start="27615" end="27655" title="Lord Lieutenant of Warwickshire" label="List of Lord Lieutenants of Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756935" start="27657" end="27695" title="High Sheriff of Warwickshire" label="List of High Sheriffs for Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196576" start="27697" end="27729" title="Custos Rotulorum of Warwickshire" label="Custos Rotulorum of Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971218" start="27762" end="27803" title="Warwickshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Warwickshire (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607980" start="27849" end="27869" title="2007 Atherstone fire" label="2007 Atherstone fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403895" start="27871" end="27891" title="Warwickshire College" label="Warwickshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946055" start="27893" end="27909" title="W. W. Quatremain" label="W. W. Quatremain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732227" start="28095" end="28119" title="English Heritage Archive" label="English Heritage Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383652" wikidata="Q2007184" url="?curid=383652" title="Telluric current">
<text>A telluric current (), or Earth current, is an electric current that flows underground or through the sea, resulting from natural and human-induced causes. These currents have extremely low frequency and traverse large areas near or at Earth&#x27;s surface. Earth&#x27;s crust and mantle are host to telluric currents, with around 32 mechanisms generating them, primarily geomagnetically induced currents caused by changes in Earth&#x27;s magnetic field due to solar wind interactions with the magnetosphere or solar radiation&#x27;s effects on the ionosphere. These currents exhibit diurnal patterns, flowing towards the Sun during the day and towards the geomagnetic poles at night.

Both telluric and magnetotelluric methods exploit these currents for subsurface exploration, aiding in activities like geothermal and mineral exploration, petroleum prospecting, fault zone mapping, groundwater assessment, and the study of tectonic plate boundaries. The phenomenon has also captured the imagination of authors, finding its way into fiction. In Umberto Eco&#x27;s &quot;Foucault&#x27;s Pendulum&quot;, the search for a mystic center of the Earth connects to telluric currents, while Thomas Pynchon&#x27;s &quot;Mason &amp; Dixon&quot; incorporates them as enigmatic communication conduits alongside Hollow Earth theories. 

==Description==
Telluric currents are phenomena observed in the Earth&#x27;s crust and mantle. In September 1862, an experiment to specifically address Earth currents was carried out in the Munich Alps (Lamont, 1862). Including minor processes, there are at least 32 different mechanisms which cause telluric currents. The strongest are primarily geomagnetically induced currents, which are induced by changes in the outer part of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, which are usually caused by interactions between the solar wind and the magnetosphere or solar radiation effects on the ionosphere. Telluric currents flow in the surface layers of the Earth. The electric potential on the Earth&#x27;s surface can be measured at different points, enabling the calculation of the magnitudes and directions of the telluric currents and hence the Earth&#x27;s conductance. These currents are known to have characteristics wherein the general direction of flow is towards the Sun. Telluric currents continuously move between the sunlit and shadowed sides of the Earth, toward the equator on the side of the Earth facing the Sun (that is, during the day), and toward the poles on the night side of the planet.

Both telluric and magnetotelluric methods are used for exploring the structure beneath the Earth&#x27;s surface (such as in industrial prospecting). For mineral exploration the targets are any subsurface structures with a distinguishable resistance in comparison to its surroundings. Uses include geothermal exploration, mining exploration, petroleum exploration, mapping of fault zones, ground water exploration and monitoring, investigation of magma chambers, and investigation of boundaries of tectonic plates. Earth batteries tap a useful low voltage current from telluric currents and were used for telegraph systems as far back as the 1840s.

In industrial prospecting activity that uses the telluric current method, electrodes are properly located on the ground to sense the voltage difference between locations caused by the oscillatory telluric currents. It is recognized that a low frequency window (LFW) exists when telluric currents pass through the Earth&#x27;s substrata. In the frequencies of the LFW, the Earth acts as a conductor.

==In fiction==
The main plot of the 1988 novel &quot;Foucault&#x27;s Pendulum&quot; by Umberto Eco revolves around conspiracy theorists who believe that they are searching for the (Latin for &quot;The Navel of the World&quot;), the mystic &quot;Center of The Earth&quot; which is supposed to be a certain point from where a person could control the energies and shapes of the Earth, thus reforming it at will. The novel takes this even further by suggesting that (in the view of the conspiratorialists) monuments like the Eiffel Tower are nothing more than giant antennas related to these energies.

Telluric currents, along what are effectively ley lines, are discovered to be a means of mysterious communication in Thomas Pynchon&#x27;s 1997 novel &quot;Mason &amp; Dixon&quot; and are associated with the book&#x27;s Chinese-Jesuit subplot. As with Eco, cited above, Pynchon also reflects upon Hollow Earth theories in this work.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* MTNet, Scientists engaged in the study of the Earth using electromagnetic methods, principally the magnetotelluric technique (magnetotellurics).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2007184" start="2" end="18" title="Telluric current" label="telluric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007184" start="26" end="39" title="Telluric current" label="Earth current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="47" end="63" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q741979" start="176" end="199" title="extremely low frequency" label="extremely low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="236" end="241" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="258" end="276" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q101949" start="281" end="287" title="Earth’s mantle" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280612" start="372" end="403" title="geomagnetically induced current" label="geomagnetically induced current"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="426" end="453" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="461" end="471" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="494" end="507" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="511" end="526" title="solar irradiance" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="549" end="559" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="622" end="625" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q348567" start="657" end="673" title="geomagnetic pole" label="geomagnetic pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413106" start="704" end="719" title="magnetotellurics" label="magnetotelluric"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="805" end="815" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="820" end="839" title="mining engineering" label="mineral exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="884" end="895" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="925" end="939" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="1046" end="1057" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q437791" start="1071" end="1095" title="Foucault&amp;#x27;s Pendulum" label="Foucault&amp;#x27;s Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="1184" end="1198" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536968" start="1212" end="1229" title="Mason &amp;amp; Dixon" label="Mason &amp;amp; Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="1300" end="1312" title="Hollow Earth" label="Hollow Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="1402" end="1407" title="Crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="1412" end="1418" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280612" start="1672" end="1703" title="geomagnetically induced current" label="geomagnetically induced current"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="1760" end="1787" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="1842" end="1852" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="1861" end="1874" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="1909" end="1919" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="2178" end="2189" title="Electrical conductance" label="conductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413106" start="2545" end="2560" title="Magnetotellurics" label="magnetotelluric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2680" end="2687" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548582" start="2824" end="2834" title="Geothermal exploration" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="2848" end="2854" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2868" end="2877" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="2973" end="2978" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="3024" end="3039" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327149" start="3041" end="3056" title="Earth battery" label="Earth batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="3131" end="3140" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="3190" end="3201" title="prospecting" label="prospecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="3250" end="3259" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="3309" end="3327" title="voltage difference" label="voltage difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="3360" end="3371" title="oscillatory" label="oscillatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455881" start="3415" end="3435" title="low frequency window" label="low frequency window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664027" start="3489" end="3511" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s substrata" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s substrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="3564" end="3573" title="Electrical conduction" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q437791" start="3629" end="3653" title="Foucault&amp;#x27;s Pendulum" label="Foucault&amp;#x27;s Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="3663" end="3674" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421259" start="3773" end="3795" title="Axis mundi" label="The Navel of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="4098" end="4110" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="4139" end="4147" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542294" start="4222" end="4231" title="ley lines" label="ley lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536968" start="4332" end="4349" title="Mason &amp;amp; Dixon" label="Mason &amp;amp; Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="4473" end="4485" title="Hollow Earth" label="Hollow Earth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383663" wikidata="Q332988" url="?curid=383663" title="Defection">
<text>In politics, a defector is a person who gives up allegiance to one state in exchange for allegiance to another, changing sides in a way which is considered illegitimate by the first state. More broadly, defection involves abandoning a person, cause, or doctrine to which one is bound by some tie, as of allegiance or duty.

This term is also applied, often pejoratively, to anyone who switches loyalty to another religion, sports team, political party, or other rival faction. In that sense, the defector is often considered a traitor by their original side.

==International politics==
The physical act of defection is usually in a manner which violates the laws of the nation or political entity from which the person is seeking to depart. By contrast, mere changes in citizenship, or working with allied militia, usually do not violate any law(s).

For example, in the 1950s, East Germans were increasingly prohibited from traveling to the western Federal Republic of Germany where they were automatically regarded as citizens according to Exclusive mandate. The Berlin Wall (1961) and fortifications along the Inner German border (1952 onward) were erected by the Communist German Democratic Republic to enforce the policy. When people tried to &quot;defect&quot; from the GDR they were to be shot on sight. Several hundred people were killed along that border in their Republikflucht attempt. Official crossings did exist, but permissions to leave temporarily or permanently were seldom granted. On the other hand, the GDR citizenship of some &quot;inconvenient&quot; East Germans was revoked, and they had to leave their home on short notice against their will. Others, like singer Wolf Biermann, were prohibited from returning to the GDR.

During the Cold War, the many people illegally emigrating from the Soviet Union or Eastern Bloc to the West were called defectors. Westerners defected to the Eastern Bloc as well, often to avoid prosecution as spies. Some of the more famous cases were British spy Kim Philby, who defected to the USSR to avoid exposure as a KGB mole, and 22 Allied POWs (one Briton and twenty-one Americans) who declined repatriation after the Korean War, electing to remain in China.

When an individual leaves their country and provides information to a foreign intelligence service, they are considered a HUMINT source defector. In some cases, defectors remain in the country or with the political entity they were against, functioning as a defector in place. Intelligence services are always concerned when debriefing defectors with the possibility of a fake defection.

Entire militaries can defect and choose not to follow orders from a state&#x27;s leaders. During the Arab Spring protests, militaries in Egypt and Tunisia refused orders to fire upon protesters or use other methods to disperse them. The decision to defect can be driven by the desire to prevent insubordination: if a military leader judges that lower officers will disobey orders to fire upon protesters, they could be more likely to defect.

==Notable defectors==

=== Artists ===

* Paquito D&#x27;Rivera, Cuban saxophonist and clarinetist, who defected to the United States in 1980.
* Mikhail Baryshnikov, Soviet (Russian) dancer, who defected to Canada in 1974, while in Toronto, touring with the Kirov Ballet. He later moved to the United States.
* Natalia Makarova, Soviet (Russian) dancer, who defected while in London in 1970.
* Georgi Markov, Bulgarian author, who defected in 1968, eventually settling in London, England, later assassinated.
* Rudolf Nureyev, Soviet (Russian) dancer, who defected while in Paris touring with the Kirov Ballet in 1961.
* George Balanchine, Georgian choreographer, who defected to the Weimar Republic in 1924.
* Arturo Sandoval, Cuban trumpeter, pianist, and composer, who defected to the United States in 1990.
* Jan Sobota, Czech fine bookbinder, who defected to Switzerland in 1982, and settled in the United States in 1984.

===Athletes===

* Guillermo Rigondeaux, Cuban professional boxer, who defected to the United States in 2009.
* Aroldis Chapman, Cuban baseball pitcher, who defected to Andorra in 2009 before signing a Major League Baseball contract in 2010.
* Ernst Degner, East German Motorcycle racer, who defected to West Germany in 1961
* José Fernández, Cuban baseball player, who defected to the United States in 2008.
* Lutz Eigendorf, an East German football player for BFC Dynamo who defected to West Germany in 1979. 
* Orlando Hernandez, Cuban baseball pitcher, who defected to the United States in 1997.
* Nadia Comăneci, Romanian Olympic gymnast, who defected to the United States in 1989. 
* Martina Navratilova, Czechoslovak tennis player, who defected to the United States in 1975.
* Alexander Mogilny, Soviet (Russian) ice hockey forward, who defected to the United States in 1988. He was the first Soviet player to defect to play in the NHL.
* Béla Károlyi and his wife Márta Károlyi, Romanian gymnastics coaches (of Nadia Comăneci and Mary Lou Retton among others), who defected to the United States in 1981.
* Osvaldo Alonso, Cuban soccer player, who defected to the United States in 2007.
* José Abreu, Cuban baseball player, who defected to the United States in 2013.
* Kimia Alizadeh, Iranian taekwondo martial artist, who defected to the Netherlands in 2020.
* César Prieto, Cuban baseball player, who defected to the United States in 2021.
* Krystsina Tsimanouskaya, Belarus sprinter, who defected to Poland in 2021.

===Military===

*Larry Allen Abshier, the first of six American soldiers to defect to North Korea between the years 1962–1982. He died in 1983 from a heart attack while residing in Pyongyang.
* Benedict Arnold‚ a colonial general who during the American Revolutionary War defected to the British Army.
* Riad al-Asaad, founder of the Free Syrian Army and the entire Tlass Family during the Syrian civil war.
* Viktor Belenko, a Soviet Air Force lieutenant who flew a MiG-25 fighter to Japan in 1976 and gained political asylum in the United States.
* James Joseph Dresnok, a US Army private who defected to North Korea by sneaking across the Demilitarized Zone in 1962. He would live the remainder of his life in the DPRK until his death in 2016.
* Igor Gouzenko, a Soviet cipher clerk who defected to Canada and released information regarding Soviet espionage activities in western society. Credited as one of the triggering factors for the beginning of the Cold War.
* No Kum-Sok (later Kenneth Rowe) is known for having been a lieutenant in the North Korean Air Force during the Korean War who defected to South Korea. On September 21, 1953, he flew his MiG-15 to the Kimpo Air Base in South Korea, claiming that he wanted to get away from the &quot;red deceit&quot; and is often associated with Operation Moolah.
* , former Russian military pilot-navigator of the Mi-8AMTSh military transport helicopter. During the Russian-Ukrainian War, on August 9, 2023, he flew across the front line to the Ukrainian side as part of the special Operation Synytsia, prepared by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry.
* Genrikh Lyushkov, the NKVD chief in the Russian Far East, defected to Manchukuo in 1938 under the Great Purge and then cooperated with the Imperial Japanese Army.
*Ivan Mazepa, Ukrainian Hetman of Zaporizhian Host from 1687–1708 who defected from the Russian Empire to the Swedish Empire during the Battle of Poltava of the Great Northern War.
* Lee Harvey Oswald, the later assassin of President John F. Kennedy had claimed defection to the Soviet Union in October 1959 but was ultimately refused citizenship and returned to the United States in 1962.
* Ion Mihai Pacepa, a Romanian Securitate general who defected to the United States from the Socialist Republic of Romania in 1978.
* Matiur Rahman, a Pakistani/Bangladeshi pilot who in 1971 attempted to defect with a T-33 along with confidential Pakistani war plans to India to join the Bangladesh Liberation War. However his plan was foiled by Flt.Lt Rashid Minhas who crashed the plane after a brief struggle for control over the aircraft. The plane crashed some 50 Kilometres from the border.
* Leamsy Salazar, former lieutenant colonel of Bolivarian Navy of Venezuela and head of security detail for Hugo Chávez, defected to United States in December 2014.
* Heng Samrin, a top-brass military figure in Democratic Kampuchea defected to Vietnam during the Khmer Rouge purges of the Eastern Zone after considering the fate of So Phim, his superior in command.
* Travis King, a US Army private who defected to North Korea, possibly to avoid facing a dishonorable discharge and legal charges, in 2023. North Korea would later return him to American custody.

===Politics===
* Guy Burgess, British diplomat and member of the Cambridge Five, defected to the Soviet Union in 1951.
* Donald Maclean, British diplomat and member of the Cambridge Five, defected to the Soviet Union in 1951.
* Kim Philby, British intelligence officer and member of the Cambridge Five, defected to the Soviet Union in 1963.
* Viktor Suvorov (born 1947), Russian writer and former Soviet military intelligence officer who defected to the United Kingdom in 1978.
* Thae Yong-ho, a former North Korean diplomat for Britain. At an unknown date Thae defected from North Korea for his family, because he &quot;didn&#x27;t want his children, who were used to life of freedom, to suffer life of oppression&quot;. Being one of North Korea&#x27;s elite, for the nation he was the highest profile defection since No Kum-sok (above) in 1953. He was elected to the South Korean National Assembly in 2020 for the United Future Party, representing the Gangnam A district of Seoul.
* Vladimir Petrov - Soviet diplomat who defected to Australia in 1954.

===Others===
* Viktor Korchnoi, Russian chess Grandmaster, defected in Amsterdam in 1976.
* Walter Polovchak, minor, defected to the United States in 1980 at 12. He and his parents moved to the United States from Soviet Ukraine in 1980 but later that year his parents decided to move back to Ukraine. He did not wish to return with them and was the subject of a five-year struggle to stay permanently. He won the right to permanent sanctuary in 1985 upon turning 18.
* The crew of oil tanker Tuapse, held hostage in 1954 by the government of Taiwan during the White Terror. An unusual case of forced defection, where the crew were forced to defect to the United States to secure their release. Those who refused were subjected to various forms of torture, while those who subsequently retracted their defection and returned to the Soviet Union were sentenced for treason but later pardoned. All surviving crew were released in 1988.
* , in order to defect from Russia in 2021, swam from Kunashir Island to Hokkaido, a distance of about 20 kilometers, in 23 hours.
* Yeonmi Park is a North Korean defector and activist whose family fled from North Korea to China in 2007

==See also==
* Apostasy
* Desertion
* Dissident
* Eastern Bloc emigration and defection
**List of Soviet and Eastern Bloc defectors
**List of baseball players who defected from Cuba
**North Korean defectors
**Nevozvrashchentsy
* List of Cold War pilot defections
* List of Western Bloc defectors
**Martin and Mitchell defection
**List of American and British defectors in the Korean War
**South Korean defectors
* List of Iranian defectors
* List of Syrian defectors
*Prisoner&#x27;s dilemma
* Religious disaffiliation
* Treason
* Turncoat

==References==
==Further reading==
* Brook-Shepherd, Gordon. &quot;The storm petrels: the first Soviet defectors, 1928-1938&quot;. HarperCollins, 1977).
* Hänni, Adrian, and Miguel Grossmann. &quot;Death to traitors? The pursuit of intelligence defectors from the Soviet Union to the Putin era.&quot; &quot;Intelligence and National Security&quot; (2020): 1-21.
* Krasnov, Vladislav. &quot;Soviet defectors: The KGB wanted list&quot; (Hoover Press, 2018).
* Riehle, Kevin P. &quot;The Defector Balance Sheet: Westbound Versus Eastbound Intelligence Defectors from 1945 to 1965.&quot; &quot;International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence&quot; 33.1 (2020): 68-96.
* Riehle, Kevin P. &quot;Early Cold War evolution of British and US defector policy and practice&quot;. &quot;Cold War History&quot; 19.3 (2019): 343-361. online free
* About Oleg Penkovsky.
* Scott, Erik R. (2023). &quot;Defectors: How the Illicit Flight of Soviet Citizens Built the Borders of the Cold War World&quot;. Oxford University Press. .
* Tromly, Benjamin. &quot;Ambivalent heroes: Russian defectors and American power in the early Cold War&quot;. &quot;Intelligence and National Security&quot; 33.5 (2018): 642-658.

==External links==
* Famous Defectors - slideshow by &quot;Life magazine&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="3" end="11" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q332988" start="15" end="23" title="Defection" label="defector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721121" start="49" end="59" title="allegiance" label="allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q332988" start="203" end="212" title="Defection" label="defection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743028" start="413" end="421" title="Religious disaffiliation" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12973014" start="423" end="434" title="sports team" label="sports team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="436" end="451" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="527" end="534" title="traitor" label="traitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="771" end="782" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="879" end="890" title="East German" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="951" end="978" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648299" start="1043" end="1060" title="Exclusive mandate" label="Exclusive mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="1066" end="1077" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="1114" end="1133" title="Inner German border" label="Inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1178" end="1204" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853028" start="1335" end="1364" title="List of deaths at the Berlin Wall" label="were killed along that border"/>
<link wikidata="Q695699" start="1374" end="1388" title="Republikflucht" label="Republikflucht"/>
<link wikidata="Q323063" start="1688" end="1701" title="Wolf Biermann" label="Wolf Biermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1758" end="1766" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1814" end="1826" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1830" end="1842" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1846" end="1854" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q296313" start="2011" end="2021" title="Kim Philby" label="Kim Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="2071" end="2074" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561428" start="2085" end="2099" title="List of American and British defectors in the Korean War" label="22 Allied POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2174" end="2184" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2338" end="2360" title="Clandestine HUMINT#Defector" label="HUMINT source defector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2474" end="2491" title="Clandestine HUMINT#Defector in place" label="defector in place"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013086" start="2588" end="2602" title="fake defection" label="fake defection"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="2706" end="2717" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q527853" start="3090" end="3111" title="Paquito D&amp;#x27;Rivera" label="Paquito D&amp;#x27;Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q295420" start="3193" end="3212" title="Mikhail Baryshnikov" label="Mikhail Baryshnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="3214" end="3220" title="Soviet people" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3255" end="3261" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3280" end="3287" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="3306" end="3318" title="Kirov Ballet" label="Kirov Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3342" end="3355" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q267796" start="3359" end="3375" title="Natalia Makarova" label="Natalia Makarova"/>
<link wikidata="Q312925" start="3442" end="3455" title="Georgi Markov" label="Georgi Markov"/>
<link wikidata="Q84217" start="3559" end="3573" title="Rudolf Nureyev" label="Rudolf Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3622" end="3627" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="3645" end="3657" title="Kirov Ballet" label="Kirov Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="3669" end="3686" title="George Balanchine" label="George Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="3697" end="3710" title="choreography" label="choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="3732" end="3747" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q345501" start="3759" end="3774" title="Arturo Sandoval" label="Arturo Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647978" start="3861" end="3871" title="Jan Sobota" label="Jan Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="Q590082" start="3994" end="4014" title="Guillermo Rigondeaux" label="Guillermo Rigondeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="4022" end="4040" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133513" start="4087" end="4102" title="Aroldis Chapman" label="Aroldis Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="4110" end="4126" title="baseball pitcher" label="baseball pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="4177" end="4198" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q68857" start="4219" end="4231" title="Ernst Degner" label="Ernst Degner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="4245" end="4261" title="Motorcycle racer" label="Motorcycle racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12808506" start="4302" end="4316" title="José Fernández (right-handed pitcher)" label="José Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="4324" end="4339" title="baseball player" label="baseball player"/>
<link wikidata="Q523440" start="4386" end="4400" title="Lutz Eigendorf" label="Lutz Eigendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321337" start="4417" end="4432" title="football player" label="football player"/>
<link wikidata="Q159930" start="4437" end="4447" title="BFC Dynamo" label="BFC Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4464" end="4476" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q129443" start="4489" end="4506" title="Orlando Hernandez" label="Orlando Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="4514" end="4530" title="baseball pitcher" label="baseball pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q33228" start="4577" end="4591" title="Nadia Comăneci" label="Nadia Comăneci"/>
<link wikidata="Q54545" start="4665" end="4684" title="Martina Navratilova" label="Martina Navratilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q505507" start="4759" end="4776" title="Alexander Mogilny" label="Alexander Mogilny"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="4795" end="4805" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="4914" end="4917" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290841" start="4921" end="4933" title="Béla Károlyi" label="Béla Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273156" start="4947" end="4960" title="Márta Károlyi" label="Márta Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4962" end="4969" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="4971" end="4981" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33228" start="4994" end="5008" title="Nadia Comăneci" label="Nadia Comăneci"/>
<link wikidata="Q235975" start="5013" end="5028" title="Mary Lou Retton" label="Mary Lou Retton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436078" start="5089" end="5103" title="Osvaldo Alonso" label="Osvaldo Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321337" start="5111" end="5124" title="soccer player" label="soccer player"/>
<link wikidata="Q9013791" start="5171" end="5181" title="José Abreu (first baseman)" label="José Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19949645" start="5251" end="5265" title="Kimia Alizadeh" label="Kimia Alizadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="5275" end="5299" title="Taekwondo" label="taekwondo martial artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107210057" start="5344" end="5356" title="César Prieto" label="César Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q31030630" start="5426" end="5449" title="Krystsina Tsimanouskaya" label="Krystsina Tsimanouskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489872" start="5519" end="5538" title="Larry Allen Abshier" label="Larry Allen Abshier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="5683" end="5692" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="5696" end="5711" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5747" end="5773" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5790" end="5802" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q714040" start="5806" end="5819" title="Riad al-Asaad" label="Riad al-Asaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q858819" start="5836" end="5852" title="Free Syrian Army" label="Free Syrian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="5892" end="5908" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q504070" start="5912" end="5926" title="Viktor Belenko" label="Viktor Belenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="5930" end="5946" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q199570" start="5969" end="5975" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25" label="MiG-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="6012" end="6028" title="political asylum" label="political asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q32258" start="6053" end="6073" title="James Joseph Dresnok" label="James Joseph Dresnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6077" end="6084" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="6109" end="6120" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q351335" start="6251" end="6264" title="Igor Gouzenko" label="Igor Gouzenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="6275" end="6281" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q497141" start="6473" end="6483" title="No Kum-Sok" label="No Kum-Sok"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="6532" end="6542" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q698296" start="6550" end="6572" title="North Korean Air Force" label="North Korean Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="6584" end="6594" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="6611" end="6622" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="6659" end="6665" title="MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q482493" start="6673" end="6687" title="Kimpo Air Base" label="Kimpo Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770800" start="6801" end="6817" title="Operation Moolah" label="Operation Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q122233551" start="7039" end="7057" title="Operation Synytsia" label="Operation Synytsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q141951" start="7142" end="7158" title="Genrikh Lyushkov" label="Genrikh Lyushkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="7164" end="7168" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="7182" end="7198" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="7212" end="7221" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="7240" end="7251" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="7281" end="7303" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165419" start="7306" end="7317" title="Ivan Mazepa" label="Ivan Mazepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="7319" end="7328" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157109" start="7329" end="7355" title="Hetman of Zaporizhian Host" label="Hetman of Zaporizhian Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7393" end="7407" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="7415" end="7429" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152486" start="7441" end="7458" title="Battle of Poltava" label="Battle of Poltava"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="7466" end="7484" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="7488" end="7505" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="7517" end="7554" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassin of President John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7584" end="7596" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q462990" start="7697" end="7713" title="Ion Mihai Pacepa" label="Ion Mihai Pacepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="7717" end="7724" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="7726" end="7736" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="7788" end="7817" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="Socialist Republic of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787619" start="7829" end="7842" title="Matiur Rahman (military pilot)" label="Matiur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="7983" end="8008" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695671" start="8048" end="8061" title="Rashid Minhas" label="Rashid Minhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894623" start="8194" end="8208" title="Leamsy Salazar" label="Leamsy Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="8217" end="8235" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568832" start="8239" end="8267" title="Bolivarian Navy of Venezuela" label="Bolivarian Navy of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445033" start="8280" end="8295" title="security detail" label="security detail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="8300" end="8311" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q379197" start="8359" end="8370" title="Heng Samrin" label="Heng Samrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="8403" end="8423" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="8436" end="8443" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="8455" end="8466" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487246" start="8524" end="8531" title="So Phim" label="So Phim"/>
<link wikidata="Q120742332" start="8560" end="8571" title="Travis King" label="Travis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q918668" start="8772" end="8783" title="Guy Burgess" label="Guy Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q656544" start="8820" end="8834" title="Cambridge Five" label="Cambridge Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q523120" start="8876" end="8890" title="Donald Maclean (spy)" label="Donald Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q296313" start="8983" end="8993" title="Kim Philby" label="Kim Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="9098" end="9112" title="Viktor Suvorov" label="Viktor Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q26299233" start="9235" end="9247" title="Thae Yong-ho" label="Thae Yong-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="9258" end="9269" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9624" end="9635" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494162" start="9637" end="9654" title="National Assembly (South Korea)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24000518" start="9658" end="9662" title="2020 South Korean legislative election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q85412437" start="9671" end="9690" title="United Future Party" label="United Future Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="9731" end="9736" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360751" start="9740" end="9755" title="Vladimir Petrov (diplomat)" label="Vladimir Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212889" start="9825" end="9840" title="Viktor Korchnoi" label="Viktor Korchnoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965854" start="9902" end="9918" title="Walter Polovchak" label="Walter Polovchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="10023" end="10037" title="Ukraine SSR" label="Soviet Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188883" start="10291" end="10308" title="Capture of the Tuapse" label="oil tanker Tuapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="10352" end="10358" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995467" start="10370" end="10382" title="White Terror (Taiwan)" label="White Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q847285" start="10797" end="10812" title="Kunashir Island" label="Kunashir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="10816" end="10824" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q18437771" start="10876" end="10887" title="Yeonmi Park" label="Yeonmi Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q491090" start="10893" end="10914" title="North Korean defectors" label="North Korean defector"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="10996" end="11004" title="Apostasy" label="Apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="11007" end="11016" title="Desertion" label="Desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="11019" end="11028" title="Dissident" label="Dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q28241" start="11031" end="11068" title="Eastern Bloc emigration and defection" label="Eastern Bloc emigration and defection"/>
<link wikidata="Q28467" start="11071" end="11112" title="List of Soviet and Eastern Bloc defectors" label="List of Soviet and Eastern Bloc defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792099" start="11115" end="11162" title="List of baseball players who defected from Cuba" label="List of baseball players who defected from Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q491090" start="11165" end="11187" title="North Korean defectors" label="North Korean defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28241" start="11190" end="11207" title="Nevozvrashchentsy" label="Nevozvrashchentsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434650" start="11210" end="11243" title="List of Cold War pilot defections" label="List of Cold War pilot defections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604011" start="11246" end="11276" title="List of Western Bloc defectors" label="List of Western Bloc defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776962" start="11279" end="11308" title="Martin and Mitchell defection" label="Martin and Mitchell defection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561428" start="11311" end="11367" title="List of American and British defectors in the Korean War" label="List of American and British defectors in the Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11636446" start="11370" end="11392" title="South Korean defectors" label="South Korean defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777811" start="11395" end="11420" title="List of Iranian defectors" label="List of Iranian defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598907" start="11423" end="11447" title="List of Syrian defectors" label="List of Syrian defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693" start="11449" end="11472" title="Prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="Prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743028" start="11475" end="11499" title="Religious disaffiliation" label="Religious disaffiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="11502" end="11509" title="Treason" label="Treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415358" start="11512" end="11520" title="Turncoat" label="Turncoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q138420" start="12375" end="12389" title="Oleg Penkovsky" label="Oleg Penkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="12789" end="12802" title="Life magazine" label="Life magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383668" wikidata="Q19996" url="?curid=383668" title="Live in Texas (Linkin Park album)">
<text>Live in Texas is the first live album and the second DVD by American rock band Linkin Park, released on November 18, 2003 through Warner Records. The band&#x27;s main setlist includes songs from their studio albums &quot;Hybrid Theory&quot; and &quot;Meteora&quot;, as well as one song from their remix album &quot;Reanimation&quot;. The live album peaked at #23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and it has sold 1.1 million copies in the United States. The audio version of the concert includes 12 out of the 17 tracks.

==Background==
The DVD comes with a bonus CD that features twelve of the songs from the DVD. The other five live tracks can be found on the &quot;LP Underground 3.0&quot; CD. The audio on the CD is mixed differently from the audio on the DVD. The DVD/CD comes in two versions: a CD case and, although harder to find, a DVD case. &quot;Live in Texas&quot; was awarded Gold certification in 2003 by the RIAA, only 29 days after the release of album, and Platinum certification in 2007.

The concert footage was shot on August 2 and August 3 during the Summer Sanitarium Tour 2003 at Reliant Stadium in Houston, Texas, and Texas Stadium in Irving, Texas. The video footage is made up of the audio from the Dallas show and video from both the Houston and Dallas shows; because of this the band had to wear the same clothes on two shows.

Lars Ulrich also makes a quick, surprise appearance dressed up as a Hulk-fisted bunny man during &quot;From the Inside&quot;.

The audio versions of &quot;From the Inside&quot; and &quot;Runaway&quot; were released as the b-sides of the &quot;From the Inside&quot; single. When &quot;Lying from You&quot; was released as a single, the footage from &quot;Live in Texas&quot; was used as the song&#x27;s music video with the studio version dubbed over.

==Reception==
Johnny Loftus of AllMusic gave the album a mixed review, saying &quot;their cool professionalism makes &quot;Live in Texas&quot; sound somewhat sterile,&quot; as well as saying the band &quot;seems lost inside its own sound.&quot; Nevertheless, he also says that the album &quot;will likely serve as a [the fans&#x27;] memento of the tour.&quot;

==Track listing==

=== CD ===
==== Enhanced CD Extras ====

* Website toolkit
* Merchandise
* Screensaver
* Web links

=== DVD ===
==Personnel==
;Linkin Park
* Chester Bennington – vocals
* Rob Bourdon – drums
* Brad Delson – lead guitar
* Joe Hahn – turntables, sampling, programming
* Dave &quot;Phoenix&quot; Farrell – bass
* Mike Shinoda – vocals; rhythm guitar , keyboard 
;CD production
*Produced and mixed by: Josh Abraham
*Engineered by: Ryan Williams
*ProTools engineer: Brandon Belsky
*Mixed at Pulse Recordings, Los Angeles, California

;DVD production
*Director: Kimo Proudfoot
*DVD producer: Matt Caltabiano
*Director of photography: Jim Hawkinson
*Edited by: Kevin McCullough

;Production team
*Worldwide representation: Rob McDermott for The Firm
*Additional representation by: Ryan Saullo and Ryan DeMarti
*Booking agent: Mike Arfin for Artist Group International
*Legal: Danny Hayes for Davis, Shapiro, Lewit, Montone &amp; Hayes
*Business manager: Michael Oppenheim and Jonathan Schwartz for Gudvi, Sussman and Oppenheim
*Worldwide licensing and merchandising: Bandmerch
*Creative direction: Mike Shinoda and the Flem
*Art direction and design: The Flem
*Digipak design: The Flem
*Booklet design: Lawrence Azerrad Design
*Digipak photography: Gret Watermann
*Recorded live August 2, 2003 at Reliant Stadium in Houston, TX and August 3, 2003, at Texas Stadium in Irving, TX on Metallica&#x27;s Summer Sanitarium Tour
*Mobile audio recording:
**Live recording engineer: Joel Singer with Effanel Music
**Assistant recording engineer: Hardi Kamsani with Effanel Music
*Mobile recording equipment provided by: Effanel Music
*DVD producer: David May
*DVD mastered by: Gateway Mastering
*DVD production director: Penny Marciano
*DVD graphics coordinator: Raena Winscott
*DVD graphics design: Sean Donnelly and Kimo Proudfoot
*Authoring: Wamo
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==





==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Live in Texas&quot; on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="69" end="73" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="79" end="90" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="130" end="144" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q19862" start="221" end="234" title="Hybrid Theory" label="Hybrid Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19858" start="251" end="258" title="Meteora (album)" label="Meteora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866" start="315" end="326" title="Reanimation (Linkin Park album)" label="Reanimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="370" end="395" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="541" end="544" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="564" end="566" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="923" end="927" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1072" end="1099" title="Summer Sanitarium Tour#Bands on the bill 2003" label="Summer Sanitarium Tour 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="1103" end="1118" title="NRG Stadium" label="Reliant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1122" end="1136" title="Houston" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q601596" start="1142" end="1155" title="Texas Stadium" label="Texas Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51690" start="1159" end="1172" title="Irving, Texas" label="Irving, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106193" start="1356" end="1367" title="Lars Ulrich" label="Lars Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q20005" start="1459" end="1474" title="From the Inside (Linkin Park song)" label="From the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q19993" start="1543" end="1550" title="Runaway (Linkin Park song)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19977" start="1640" end="1654" title="Lying from You" label="Lying from You"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1839" end="1847" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19198" start="2329" end="2347" title="Chester Bennington" label="Chester Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q19205" start="2359" end="2370" title="Rob Bourdon" label="Rob Bourdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19199" start="2381" end="2392" title="Brad Delson" label="Brad Delson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19200" start="2409" end="2417" title="Joe Hahn" label="Joe Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19202" start="2456" end="2488" title="Dave Farrell" label="Dave &amp;quot;Phoenix&amp;quot; Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19201" start="2498" end="2510" title="Mike Shinoda" label="Mike Shinoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q580507" start="2586" end="2598" title="Josh Abraham" label="Josh Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2692" end="2715" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815360" start="2744" end="2758" title="Kimo Proudfoot" label="Kimo Proudfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995005" start="2816" end="2829" title="James Hawkinson" label="Jim Hawkinson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383670" wikidata="Q17071146" url="?curid=383670" title="Net Book Agreement">
<text>The Net Book Agreement (NBA) was a fixed book price agreement in the United Kingdom and Ireland between The Publishers Association and booksellers which set the prices at which books were to be sold to the public. The agreement was concerned solely with price maintenance. It operated in the UK from 1900 until the 1990s when it was abandoned by some large bookshop chains and was then ruled illegal. It also operated in Ireland until shortly before its final demise.

== History ==
It came into effect on 1 January 1900 and involved retailers selling books at agreed prices. Any bookseller who sold a book at less than the agreed price would no longer be supplied by the publisher in question. In 1905, &quot;The Times&quot; tried but failed to challenge the agreement by setting up a low-cost book borrowing club.

In 1905, following The Education Act, The Publishers Association introduced the practice of deeming school books &#x27;non-net&#x27; allowing schools discounts that were not available on other books. There were also agreements in place to allow public libraries to receive discounts of up to 5% on the net books they purchased.

In 1962 the Net Book Agreement was examined by the Restrictive Practices Court, which decided that the NBA was of benefit to the industry, since it enabled publishers to subsidise the printing of the works of important but less widely read authors using money from bestsellers.

In 1991 the large bookshop chain Dillons, followed by Waterstones, began to offer some books at a discount.

As the agreement did not cover books that were damaged (or second hand), shops that wished to sell &quot;new&quot; books below cover price for any reason (for example to get rid of obsolete stock or titles that were not otherwise selling) adopted a simple strategy which meant that they were still sticking to the terms of the agreement: they deliberately defaced or damaged the book(s). The two methods most commonly used were to either use a hole punch to punch a hole in the cover of the book or to use a marker pen to mark the edge of the pages. The marker pen method was the most common as it took the least effort.

== Dissolution of the NBA ==
The Publishers Association applied the NBA in the Republic of Ireland until 1992, after the Competition Act 1991 came into force. In June 1994 Ireland&#x27;s Competition Authority refused to license the NBA, on the grounds that UK publishers&#x27; market share was high enough for the NPA to distort competition in Ireland.

In the UK in August 1994 the Director General of the Office of Fair Trading decided that the Restrictive Practices Court should review the agreement. In September 1995 several major publishers (including HarperCollins and Random House) withdrew, and in September 1996 the Booksellers Association decided to take no part in the case. In March 1997 the Restrictive Practices Court ruled that the Net Book Agreement was against the public interest and therefore illegal. The adoption of this new procurement discipline by academic libraries
since the demise of the NBA is the focus of &quot;Managing suppliers for collection development: the UK higher education perspective.&quot;
The collapse of the Agreement strengthened large bookstore chains and reduced book prices. It also paved the way for the large supermarket chains to take a chunk of the book business, typically offering a small number of best-selling titles at deeply discounted prices. As of 2009, 500 independent bookshops had closed since the demise of the agreement. An early example of the changes in the book publishing markets following the termination of the agreement was the entry of the US-owned booksellers Borders into the British high street, following their purchase of Books Etc, but the failure of the changes was demonstrated by the rapid bankruptcy of Borders, as the supermarkets rapidly dominated the market with loss-leading price discounting, wiping out the competition.

However, market concentration and a demise of independent bookshops also took place in economies such as Germany and France where a fixed book price agreement is still in place. The loss in business was smaller than predicted by many commentators. The number of titles published in the UK briefly increased when the NBA was dissolved in 1997; the volume of books sold in the UK increased temporarily by about 30% compared to 1995, but the retail prices collapsed.

== See also ==
* &quot;United States v. Apple Inc.&quot;, a book price-fixing conspiracy, which also involved collusion between publishers and was also ruled illegal

==References==
==External links==
*Politics and the NBA
*Collapse of Net Book Agreement `within months&#x27; collapse&#x27; - UK ...
*The Economist: Blood on the Bookshelves</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17071146" start="4" end="22" title="Net Book Agreement" label="Net Book Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q998711" start="35" end="61" title="fixed book price agreement" label="fixed book price agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="69" end="83" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="88" end="95" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758707" start="104" end="130" title="The Publishers Association" label="The Publishers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q998426" start="135" end="145" title="bookseller" label="bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="177" end="181" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="710" end="719" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340872" start="836" end="853" title="Education Act 1902" label="The Education Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316327" start="1197" end="1224" title="Restrictive Practices Court" label="Restrictive Practices Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276955" start="1458" end="1465" title="Dillons Booksellers" label="Dillons"/>
<link wikidata="Q151779" start="1479" end="1490" title="Waterstones" label="Waterstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q183413" start="1978" end="1988" title="hole punch" label="hole punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q493615" start="2042" end="2052" title="marker pen" label="marker pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758707" start="2185" end="2211" title="The Publishers Association" label="The Publishers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156318" start="2343" end="2364" title="Competition Authority (Ireland)" label="Competition Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079218" start="2563" end="2585" title="Office of Fair Trading" label="Office of Fair Trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="2714" end="2727" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="2732" end="2744" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2782" end="2805" title="Booksellers Association" label="Booksellers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="3315" end="3326" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017407" start="3474" end="3495" title="independent bookstore" label="independent bookshops"/>
<link wikidata="Q893430" start="3690" end="3697" title="Borders (retailer)" label="Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q893430" start="3756" end="3765" title="Books Etc" label="Books Etc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148671" start="4454" end="4481" title="United States v. Apple (2012)" label="United States v. Apple Inc."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383675" wikidata="Q2734081" url="?curid=383675" title="Carbohydrate metabolism">
<text>Carbohydrate metabolism is the whole of the biochemical processes responsible for the metabolic formation, breakdown, and interconversion of carbohydrates in living organisms.

Carbohydrates are central to many essential metabolic pathways. Plants synthesize carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and water through photosynthesis, allowing them to store energy absorbed from sunlight internally. When animals and fungi consume plants, they use cellular respiration to break down these stored carbohydrates to make energy available to cells. Both animals and plants temporarily store the released energy in the form of high-energy molecules, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP), for use in various cellular processes.

Humans can consume a variety of carbohydrates, digestion breaks down complex carbohydrates into simple monomers (monosaccharides): glucose, fructose, mannose and galactose. After resorption in the gut, the monosaccharides are transported, through the portal vein, to the liver, where all non-glucose monosacharids (fructose, galactose) are transformed into glucose as well. Glucose (blood sugar) is distributed to cells in the tissues, where it is broken down via cellular respiration, or stored as glycogen. In cellular (aerobic) respiration, glucose and oxygen are metabolized to release energy, with carbon dioxide and water as endproducts.

==Metabolic pathways==
=== Glycolysis ===
Glycolysis is the process of breaking down a glucose molecule into two pyruvate molecules, while storing energy released during this process as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). Nearly all organisms that break down glucose utilize glycolysis. Glucose regulation and product use are the primary categories in which these pathways differ between organisms. In some tissues and organisms, glycolysis is the sole method of energy production. This pathway is common to both anaerobic and aerobic respiration.

Glycolysis consists of ten steps, split into two phases. During the first phase, it requires the breakdown of two ATP molecules. During the second phase, chemical energy from the intermediates is transferred into ATP and NADH. The breakdown of one molecule of glucose results in two molecules of pyruvate, which can be further oxidized to access more energy in later processes.

Glycolysis can be regulated at different steps of the process through feedback regulation. The step that is regulated the most is the third step. This regulation is to ensure that the body is not over-producing pyruvate molecules. The regulation also allows for the storage of glucose molecules into fatty acids. There are various enzymes that are used throughout glycolysis. The enzymes upregulate, downregulate, and feedback regulate the process.

=== Gluconeogenesis ===
Gluconeogenesis (GNG) is a metabolic pathway that results in the generation of glucose from certain non-carbohydrate carbon substrates. It is a ubiquitous process, present in plants, animals, fungi, bacteria, and other microorganisms. In vertebrates, gluconeogenesis occurs mainly in the liver and, to a lesser extent, in the cortex of the kidneys. It is one of two primary mechanisms – the other being degradation of glycogen (glycogenolysis) – used by humans and many other animals to maintain blood sugar levels, avoiding low levels (hypoglycemia). In ruminants, because dietary carbohydrates tend to be metabolized by rumen organisms, gluconeogenesis occurs regardless of fasting, low-carbohydrate diets, exercise, etc. In many other animals, the process occurs during periods of fasting, starvation, low-carbohydrate diets, or intense exercise.

In humans, substrates for gluconeogenesis may come from any non-carbohydrate sources that can be converted to pyruvate or intermediates of glycolysis (see figure). For the breakdown of proteins, these substrates include glucogenic amino acids (although not ketogenic amino acids); from breakdown of lipids (such as triglycerides), they include glycerol, odd-chain fatty acids (although not even-chain fatty acids, see below); and from other parts of metabolism they include lactate from the Cori cycle. Under conditions of prolonged fasting, acetone derived from ketone bodies can also serve as a substrate, providing a pathway from fatty acids to glucose. Although most gluconeogenesis occurs in the liver, the relative contribution of gluconeogenesis by the kidney is increased in diabetes and prolonged fasting.

The gluconeogenesis pathway is highly endergonic until it is coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP or guanosine triphosphate (GTP), effectively making the process exergonic. For example, the pathway leading from pyruvate to glucose-6-phosphate requires 4 molecules of ATP and 2 molecules of GTP to proceed spontaneously. These ATPs are supplied from fatty acid catabolism via beta oxidation.

=== Glycogenolysis ===
Glycogenolysis refers to the breakdown of glycogen. In the liver, muscles, and the kidney, this process occurs to provide glucose when necessary. A single glucose molecule is cleaved from a branch of glycogen, and is transformed into glucose-1-phosphate during this process. This molecule can then be converted to glucose-6-phosphate, an intermediate in the glycolysis pathway.

Glucose-6-phosphate can then progress through glycolysis. Glycolysis only requires the input of one molecule of ATP when the glucose originates in glycogen. Alternatively, glucose-6-phosphate can be converted back into glucose in the liver and the kidneys, allowing it to raise blood glucose levels if necessary.

Glucagon in the liver stimulates glycogenolysis when the blood glucose is lowered, known as hypoglycemia. The glycogen in the liver can function as a backup source of glucose between meals. Liver glycogen mainly serves the central nervous system. Adrenaline stimulates the breakdown of glycogen in the skeletal muscle during exercise. In the muscles, glycogen ensures a rapidly accessible energy source for movement.

=== Glycogenesis ===
Glycogenesis refers to the process of synthesizing glycogen. In humans, glucose can be converted to glycogen via this process. Glycogen is a highly branched structure, consisting of the core protein Glycogenin, surrounded by branches of glucose units, linked together. The branching of glycogen increases its solubility, and allows for a higher number of glucose molecules to be accessible for breakdown at the same time. Glycogenesis occurs primarily in the liver, skeletal muscles, and kidney. The Glycogenesis pathway consumes energy, like most synthetic pathways, because an ATP and a UTP are consumed for each molecule of glucose introduced.

=== Pentose phosphate pathway ===
The pentose phosphate pathway is an alternative method of oxidizing glucose. It occurs in the liver, adipose tissue, adrenal cortex, testis, mammary glands, phagocytes, and red blood cells. It produces products that are used in other cell processes, while reducing NADP to NADPH. This pathway is regulated through changes in the activity of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.

=== Fructose metabolism ===
Fructose must undergo certain extra steps in order to enter the glycolysis pathway. Enzymes located in certain tissues can add a phosphate group to fructose. This phosphorylation creates fructose-6-phosphate, an intermediate in the glycolysis pathway that can be broken down directly in those tissues. This pathway occurs in the muscles, adipose tissue, and kidney. In the liver, enzymes produce fructose-1-phosphate, which enters the glycolysis pathway and is later cleaved into glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone phosphate.

=== Galactose metabolism ===
Lactose, or milk sugar, consists of one molecule of glucose and one molecule of galactose. After separation from glucose, galactose travels to the liver for conversion to glucose. Galactokinase uses one molecule of ATP to phosphorylate galactose. The phosphorylated galactose is then converted to glucose-1-phosphate, and then eventually glucose-6-phosphate, which can be broken down in glycolysis.

==Energy production==
Many steps of carbohydrate metabolism allow the cells to access energy and store it more transiently in ATP. The cofactors NAD+ and FAD are sometimes reduced during this process to form NADH and FADH2, which drive the creation of ATP in other processes. A molecule of NADH can produce 1.5–2.5 molecules of ATP, whereas a molecule of FADH2 yields 1.5 molecules of ATP.

Typically, the complete breakdown of one molecule of glucose by aerobic respiration (i.e. involving glycolysis, the citric-acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, the last providing the most energy) is usually about 30–32 molecules of ATP. Oxidation of one gram of carbohydrate yields approximately 4 kcal of energy.

==Hormonal regulation==
Glucoregulation is the maintenance of steady levels of glucose in the body.

Hormones released from the pancreas regulate the overall metabolism of glucose. Insulin and glucagon are the primary hormones involved in maintaining a steady level of glucose in the blood, and the release of each is controlled by the amount of nutrients currently available. The amount of insulin released in the blood and sensitivity of the cells to the insulin both determine the amount of glucose that cells break down. Increased levels of glucagon activates the enzymes that catalyze glycogenolysis, and inhibits the enzymes that catalyze glycogenesis. Conversely, glycogenesis is enhanced and glycogenolysis inhibited when there are high levels of insulin in the blood.

The level of circulatory glucose (known informally as &quot;blood sugar&quot;), as well as the detection of nutrients in the Duodenum is the most important factor determining the amount of glucagon or insulin produced. The release of glucagon is precipitated by low levels of blood glucose, whereas high levels of blood glucose stimulates cells to produce insulin. Because the level of circulatory glucose is largely determined by the intake of dietary carbohydrates, diet controls major aspects of metabolism via insulin. In humans, insulin is made by beta cells in the pancreas, fat is stored in adipose tissue cells, and glycogen is both stored and released as needed by liver cells. Regardless of insulin levels, no glucose is released to the blood from internal glycogen stores from muscle cells.

== Carbohydrates as storage ==
Carbohydrates are typically stored as long polymers of glucose molecules with glycosidic bonds for structural support (e.g. chitin, cellulose) or for energy storage (e.g. glycogen, starch). However, the strong affinity of most carbohydrates for water makes storage of large quantities of carbohydrates inefficient due to the large molecular weight of the solvated water-carbohydrate complex. In most organisms, excess carbohydrates are regularly catabolised to form acetyl-CoA, which is a feed stock for the fatty acid synthesis pathway; fatty acids, triglycerides, and other lipids are commonly used for long-term energy storage. The hydrophobic character of lipids makes them a much more compact form of energy storage than hydrophilic carbohydrates. Gluconeogenesis permits glucose to be synthesized from various sources, including lipids.

In some animals (such as termites) and some microorganisms (such as protists and bacteria), cellulose can be disassembled during digestion and absorbed as glucose.

==Human diseases==
* Diabetes mellitus
* Lactose intolerance
* Fructose malabsorption
* Galactosemia
* Glycogen storage disease

== See also ==
* Inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism 
* Hitting the wall (glycogen depletion) 
* Second wind (increased ATP from fatty acids after glycogen depletion)

==References==
==External links==
* BBC - GCSE Bitesize - Biology | Humans | Glucoregulation
* Sugar4Kids</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2734081" start="0" end="23" title="Carbohydrate metabolism" label="Carbohydrate metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="44" end="55" title="biochemistry" label="biochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q184681" start="96" end="105" title="anabolism" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="107" end="116" title="catabolism" label="breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="141" end="153" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="158" end="164" title="life" label="living"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="165" end="173" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68685" start="221" end="238" title="metabolic pathway" label="metabolic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="241" end="246" title="Plant" label="Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="278" end="292" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="297" end="302" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="311" end="325" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="397" end="403" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="409" end="414" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="440" end="460" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="645" end="667" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="762" end="771" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="818" end="825" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133516" start="828" end="842" title="monosaccharide" label="monosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="846" end="853" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="855" end="863" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q10809118" start="865" end="872" title="mannose" label="mannose"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589593" start="877" end="886" title="galactose" label="galactose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="894" end="904" title="resorption (digestion)" label="resorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="912" end="915" title="human digestive system" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q464543" start="966" end="977" title="portal vein" label="portal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="1098" end="1109" title="blood sugar" label="blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="1179" end="1199" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="1214" end="1222" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1271" end="1277" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1337" end="1342" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="1402" end="1412" title="Glycolysis" label="Glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="1473" end="1481" title="pyruvate" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="1546" end="1568" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="1579" end="1612" title="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide" label="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q224527" start="2715" end="2725" title="upregulate" label="upregulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q224527" start="2727" end="2739" title="downregulate" label="downregulate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2745" end="2762" title="feedback regulate" label="feedback regulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="2801" end="2816" title="Gluconeogenesis" label="Gluconeogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68685" start="2828" end="2845" title="metabolic pathway" label="metabolic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="2880" end="2887" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="2905" end="2917" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="3089" end="3094" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307492" start="3127" end="3133" title="renal cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="3141" end="3147" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="3219" end="3227" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="3229" end="3243" title="glycogenolysis" label="glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="3297" end="3314" title="blood sugar level" label="blood sugar level"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="3338" end="3350" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="3356" end="3364" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="3423" end="3428" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="3585" end="3592" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="3594" end="3604" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570280" start="3606" end="3627" title="low-carbohydrate diet" label="low-carbohydrate diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="3641" end="3649" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="3791" end="3801" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="3837" end="3844" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740849" start="3872" end="3893" title="glucogenic amino acid" label="glucogenic amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527698" start="3909" end="3929" title="ketogenic amino acid" label="ketogenic amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="3951" end="3956" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="3967" end="3979" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="3996" end="4004" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="4102" end="4112" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="4126" end="4133" title="lactic acid" label="lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q828890" start="4143" end="4153" title="Cori cycle" label="Cori cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="4194" end="4201" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q746183" start="4215" end="4228" title="ketone bodies" label="ketone bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q989604" start="4506" end="4516" title="endergonic" label="endergonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392227" start="4565" end="4587" title="guanosine triphosphate" label="guanosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q897010" start="4626" end="4635" title="exergonic" label="exergonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="4675" end="4683" title="pyruvate" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q74566546" start="4687" end="4706" title="glucose-6-phosphate" label="glucose-6-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14860867" start="4813" end="4834" title="Fatty acid metabolism" label="fatty acid catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q97261657" start="4839" end="4853" title="beta oxidation" label="beta oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="4879" end="4893" title="Glycogenolysis" label="Glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q418865" start="5113" end="5132" title="Glucose 1-phosphate" label="glucose-1-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q74566546" start="5193" end="5212" title="Glucose 6-phosphate" label="glucose-6-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458208" start="5217" end="5229" title="Reaction intermediate" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170617" start="5572" end="5580" title="Glucagon" label="Glucagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="5768" end="5776" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419957" start="6210" end="6220" title="Glycogenin" label="Glycogenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q827489" start="6697" end="6722" title="pentose phosphate pathway" label="pentose phosphate pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="6794" end="6808" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="6810" end="6824" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="6826" end="6832" title="testis" label="testis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="6834" end="6848" title="mammary glands" label="mammary glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="6850" end="6860" title="phagocytes" label="phagocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="6866" end="6881" title="red blood cells" label="red blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="8562" end="8579" title="citric-acid cycle" label="citric-acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="8584" end="8609" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q582668" start="8757" end="8763" title="Chemical energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="8867" end="8874" title="Hormone" label="Hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="8894" end="8902" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8947" end="8954" title="Insulin" label="Insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170617" start="8959" end="8967" title="glucagon" label="glucagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="10115" end="10123" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="10142" end="10156" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422553" start="10456" end="10471" title="glycosidic bond" label="glycosidic bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q161219" start="10502" end="10508" title="chitin" label="chitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="10510" end="10519" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="10549" end="10557" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="10559" end="10565" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="10844" end="10854" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q900209" start="10886" end="10906" title="fatty acid synthesis" label="fatty acid synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="10916" end="10927" title="fatty acids" label="fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="10929" end="10942" title="triglycerides" label="triglycerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="10954" end="10960" title="lipids" label="lipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="11131" end="11146" title="Gluconeogenesis" label="Gluconeogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="11247" end="11254" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="11290" end="11297" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="11303" end="11311" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="11408" end="11425" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219223" start="11428" end="11447" title="Lactose intolerance" label="Lactose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671489" start="11450" end="11472" title="Fructose malabsorption" label="Fructose malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q774483" start="11475" end="11487" title="Galactosemia" label="Galactosemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421738" start="11490" end="11514" title="Glycogen storage disease" label="Glycogen storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013981" start="11533" end="11573" title="Inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism" label="Inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567709" start="11577" end="11593" title="Hitting the wall" label="Hitting the wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476344" start="11618" end="11629" title="Second wind" label="Second wind"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383680" wikidata="Q1661183" url="?curid=383680" title="Index register">
<text>An index register in a computer&#x27;s CPU is a processor register (or an assigned memory location) used for pointing to operand addresses during the run of a program. It is useful for stepping through strings and arrays. It can also be used for holding loop iterations and counters. In some architectures it is used for read/writing blocks of memory. Depending on the architecture it may be a dedicated index register or a general-purpose register. Some instruction sets allow more than one index register to be used; in that case additional instruction fields may specify which index registers to use.

Generally, the contents of an index register is added to (in some cases subtracted from) an &quot;immediate&quot; address (that can be part of the instruction itself or held in another register) to form the &quot;effective&quot; address of the actual data (operand). Special instructions are typically provided to test the index register and, if the test fails, increments the index register by an immediate constant and branches, typically to the start of the loop. While normally processors that allow an instruction to specify multiple index registers add the contents together, IBM had a line of computers in which the contents were or&#x27;d together.

Index registers have proved useful for doing vector/array operations and in commercial data processing for navigating from field to field within records. In both uses index registers substantially reduced the amount of memory used and increased execution speed.

==History==
In early computers without any form of indirect addressing, array operations had to be performed by modifying the instruction address, which required several additional program steps and used up more computer memory, a scarce resource in computer installations of the early era (as well as in early microcomputers two decades later).

Index registers, commonly known as B-lines in early British computers, as B-registers on some machines and as X-registers on others, were first used in the British Manchester Mark 1 computer, in 1949. In general, index registers became a standard part of computers during the technology&#x27;s second generation, roughly 1954–1966. Most machines in the IBM 700/7000 mainframe series had them, starting with the IBM 704 in 1954, though they were optional on some smaller machines such as the IBM 650 and IBM 1401.

Early &quot;small machines&quot; with index registers include the AN/USQ-17, around 1960, and the 9 series of real-time computers from Scientific Data Systems, from the early 1960s.

The 1962 UNIVAC 1107 has 15 X-registers, four of which were also A-registers.

The 1964 GE-635 has 8 dedicated X-registers; however, it also allows indexing by the instruction counter or by either half of the A or Q register.

The Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-6, introduced in 1964, and the IBM System/360, announced in 1964, do not include dedicated index registers; instead, they have general-purpose registers (called &quot;accumulators&quot; in the PDP-6) that can contain either numerical values or addresses. The memory address of an operand is, in the PDP-6, the sum of the contents of a general-purpose register and an 18-bit offset and, on the System/360, the sum of the contents of two general-purpose registers and a 12-bit offset. The compatible PDP-10 line of successors to the PDP-6, and the IBM System/370 and later compatible successors to the System/360, including the current z/Architecture, work in the same fashion.

The 1969 Data General Nova and successor Eclipse, and 1970 DEC PDP-11, minicomputers also provided general-purpose registers (called &quot;accumulators&quot; in the Nova and Eclipse), rather than separate accumulators and index registers, as did their Eclipse MV and VAX 32-bit superminicomputer successors. In the PDP-11 and VAX, any register could be used when calculating the memory address of an operand; in the Nova, Eclipse, and Eclipse MV, only registers 2 and 3 could be used.

The 1971 CDC STAR-100 has a register file of 256 64-bit registers, 9 of which are reserved. Unlike most computers, the STAR-100 instructions only have register fields and operand fields, so the registers serve more as pointer registers than as traditional index registers.

While the 1972 Intel 8008 allowed indirect addressing via register pairs, the first microprocessor with a true index register appears to have been the 1974 Motorola 6800.

In 1975, the 8-bit MOS Technology 6502 processor had two index registers &#x27;X&#x27; and &#x27;Y&#x27;.

In 1978, the Intel 8086, the first x86 processor, had eight 16-bit registers, referred to as &quot;general-purpose&quot;, all of which can be used as integer data registers in most operations; four of them, &#x27;SI&#x27; (source index), &#x27;DI&#x27; (destination index), &#x27;BX&#x27; (base), and &#x27;BP&#x27; (base pointer), can also be used when computing the memory address of an operand, which is the sum of one of those registers and a displacement, or the sum of one of &#x27;BX&#x27; or &#x27;BP&quot;, one of &#x27;SI&#x27; or &#x27;DI&#x27;, and a displacement. The 1979 Intel 8088, and the 16-bit Intel 80186, Intel 80188, and Intel 80286 successors work the same. In 1985, the i386, a 32-bit successor to those processors, introducing the IA-32 32-bit version of the x86 architecture, extended the eight 16-bit registers to 32 bits, with &quot;E&quot; added to the beginning of the register name; in IA-32, the memory address of an operand is the sum of one of those eight registers, one of seven of those registers (the stack pointer is not allowed as the second register here) multiplied by 1, 2, 4, or 8, and a displacement. The Advanced Micro Devices Opteron, the first model of which was released in 2003, introduced x86-64, the 64-bit version of the x86 instruction set; in x86-64, the general-purpose registers were extended to 64 bits, and eight additional general-purpose registers were added; the memory address of an operand is the sum of two of those 16 registers and a displacement.

The reduced instruction set computing (RISC) instruction sets introduced in the 1980s and 1990s all provide general-purpose registers that can contain either numerical values or address values. In most of those instruction sets, there are 32 general-purpose registers (in some of those instruction sets, the value of one of those registers is hardwired to zero) could be used to calculate the operand address; they did not have dedicated index registers. In the 32-bit version of the ARM architecture, first developed in 1985, there are 16 registers designated as &quot;general-purpose registers&quot;, but only 13 of them can be used for all purposes, with register R15 containing the program counter. The memory address of a load or store instruction is the sum of any of the 16 registers and either a displacement or another of the registers with the exception of R15 (possibly shifted left for scaling). In the 64-bit version of the ARM architecture, there are 31 64-bit general-purpose registers plus a stack pointer and a zero register; the memory address of a load or store instruction is the sum of any of the 31 registers and either a displacement or another of the registers.

==Examples==
Here is a simple example of index register use in assembly language pseudo-code that sums a 100 entry array of 4-byte words:

 Clear_accumulator
 Load_index 400,index2 //load 4*array size into index register 2 (index2)
 loop_start : Add_word_to_accumulator array_start,index2 //Add to AC the word at the address (array_start + index2)
 Branch_and_decrement_if_index_not_zero loop_start,4,index2 //loop decrementing by 4 until index register is zero

==See also==
*For loop

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1661183" start="3" end="17" title="Index register" label="index register"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="39" end="42" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="48" end="66" title="processor register" label="processor register"/>
<link wikidata="Q719375" start="121" end="128" title="operand" label="operand"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="202" end="209" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="214" end="220" title="Array data structure" label="arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="292" end="305" title="Instruction set architecture" label="architectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="455" end="470" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="1308" end="1314" title="Array data structure" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="1315" end="1320" title="Array data structure" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1577" end="1596" title="Addressing mode#Memory indirect" label="indirect addressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165944" start="1638" end="1647" title="self-modifying code" label="modifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2029" end="2036" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="2037" end="2054" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="2167" end="2184" title="History of computing hardware" label="second generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="2226" end="2238" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="IBM 700/7000"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="2239" end="2248" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="2284" end="2291" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q628643" start="2364" end="2371" title="IBM 650" label="IBM 650"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066933" start="2376" end="2384" title="IBM 1401" label="IBM 1401"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632322" start="2453" end="2462" title="AN/USQ-17" label="AN/USQ-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908562" start="2485" end="2493" title="SDS 9 Series" label="9 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="2497" end="2515" title="real-time computing" label="real-time computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475808" start="2522" end="2545" title="Scientific Data Systems" label="Scientific Data Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467589" start="2579" end="2590" title="UNIVAC 1107" label="UNIVAC 1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513122" start="2658" end="2664" title="GE-635" label="GE-635"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="2801" end="2830" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755264" start="2837" end="2842" title="PDP-6" label="PDP-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="2872" end="2886" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="2968" end="2992" title="general-purpose register" label="general-purpose register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="3339" end="3345" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="3387" end="3401" title="IBM System/370" label="IBM System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062893" start="3475" end="3489" title="z/Architecture" label="z/Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134229" start="3527" end="3544" title="Data General Nova" label="Data General Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227175" start="3559" end="3566" title="Data General Eclipse" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="3581" end="3587" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="3589" end="3601" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702951" start="3770" end="3780" title="Data General Eclipse MV/8000" label="Eclipse MV"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="3785" end="3788" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q205450" start="3796" end="3813" title="superminicomputer" label="superminicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648629" start="4013" end="4025" title="CDC STAR-100" label="CDC STAR-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q319509" start="4293" end="4303" title="Intel 8008" label="Intel 8008"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="4362" end="4376" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126648" start="4434" end="4447" title="Motorola 6800" label="Motorola 6800"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="4469" end="4488" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="4570" end="4580" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="4592" end="4595" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="5143" end="5153" title="Intel 8088" label="Intel 8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="5170" end="5181" title="Intel 80186" label="Intel 80186"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="5183" end="5194" title="Intel 80188" label="Intel 80188"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="5200" end="5211" title="Intel 80286" label="Intel 80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="5251" end="5255" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="5313" end="5318" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="5706" end="5728" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q295060" start="5729" end="5736" title="Opteron" label="Opteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="5796" end="5802" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="6075" end="6108" title="reduced instruction set computing" label="reduced instruction set computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="6555" end="6571" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="6757" end="6772" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q838119" start="7735" end="7743" title="For loop" label="For loop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383681" wikidata="Q547659" url="?curid=383681" title="Ramsey, Cambridgeshire">
<text>Ramsey is a market town and civil parish in the Huntingdonshire district of Cambridgeshire, England. The town is about north of Huntingdon. Ramsey parish includes the settlements of Ramsey Forty Foot, Ramsey Heights, Ramsey Mereside, Ramsey Hollow and Ramsey St Mary&#x27;s.

The town grew up around Ramsey Abbey, an important Benedictine monastery. In the order of precedence for abbots in Parliament, Ramsey was third after Glastonbury and St Albans.
The town manor is built on the site of (and using materials from) the ancient Abbey and is the seat of the Lords de Ramsey, major landowners in Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire. The remains of the Abbey are now home to part of the town&#x27;s secondary school. Abbey College, Ramsey resulted from the amalgamation of the previous two secondary schools, Ailwyn School and Ramsey Abbey School.

==History==

Besides a Palaeolithic axe discovered in Victoria Road and seen as a chance glacial find, there is no record of prehistoric finds from the town. Roman remains are limited to stray finds of pottery. Early and Middle Saxon Ramsey remains elusive.

==Abbey==
For the later Anglo-Saxon period, documentary evidence for the foundation of the 10th-century Benedictine abbey at Ramsey has been recently substantiated by the archaeological evidence for activity associated with the pre-Conquest monastery. Tradition has it that Ailwyn, foster brother of King Edgar, founded a hermitage at Ramsey. It received a series of substantial grants of land by King Edgar who confirmed all the privileges in 975, including the banlieue.

The abbey experienced the transition to Norman rule without difficulty and in the 11th century, it underwent a period of rebuilding. In the civil war between King Stephen and Empress Matilda the monastery was badly damaged and impoverished. Geoffrey de Mandeville expelled the monks in 1143 and used the buildings as a fortress. However, in the 13th and 14th centuries the house had a succession of wealthy abbots who undertook a series of costly building programmes. The Black Death brought prosperity to a temporary halt, and by the end of the 14th century, the house was financially decayed. The abbey recovered and continued to thrive until its dissolution in 1537.

At the dissolution the Crown granted the site of the monastery, its land and associated granges at Bodsey and Biggin to Richard Williams (alias Cromwell) who demolished the buildings and sold the materials. The properties remained with the Williams/Cromwell family until 1676.

==Town==
The early history of the town is obscure. The Domesday Book of 1086 does not mention Ramsey. This may be either because it was part of Bury or because it belonged to the abbey that, at that time, enjoyed royal privileges.

Throughout the Middle Ages Ramsey remained a small market town serving the abbey and never developed into a borough. The original settlement probably developed outside the abbey, along Hollow Lane. By 1200 the town had grown enough to be granted a weekly market held at the junction of High Street with the Great Whyte and, later, an annual fair held at the green by the church. During the Middle Ages, the Great Whyte was a navigable canal that ran along what is now the road. It was culverted by 1854 with a brick tunnel, giving the town its characteristic wide main street.
Properties along Great Whyte appear to represent the secondary (post-Mediæval) development of the town. Archaeological excavations have shown that this area was wet during the mediæval period due to the presence of the fen. A fire occurred at Little Whyte in 1636 which destroyed some 15 tenements. A second fire in 1731 destroyed a great part of the High Street.
In 1774 Lord Orford visited Ramsey during his voyage around the Fens.

By the time of the estate map, the village had expanded along the Great Whyte and along the western end of the High Street by progressive infilling of plots. Later editions of the OS Maps up to the 1970s present a similar picture. Since the 1970s progressive increase in the size of the population has prompted development around the town and along Bury Road. The limits of the town of Ramsey and the village of Bury to the south are not clearly defined, with modern housing estates spreading across the urban boundary.

The mediæval economy was dominated by garden produce, cloth trade and alehouse keeping. Fisheries also played an important part in the fen economy, along with livestock. Throughout the Middle Ages, the waterways of the fenland formed commercial transport routes that ran through the heart of the region. Enclosure of land was piecemeal and prompted by the abbey.

After the dispersal of the estates of the abbey into lay hands in the second half of the 16th century, enclosure at Ramsey and neighbouring parishes gathered momentum. Systematic drainage of the Great Level from the 17th century increased the area for hay and pasture which was progressively divided and allotted. The remaining common lands were enclosed by Act of Parliament in 1801.

On the evening of 31 January 1941, the German spy Josef Jakobs parachuted into the Ramsey area, landing near Dovehouse Farm. Jakobs broke his ankle during his descent and was unable to move from his landing site. The next morning at around 8:30 a.m. Jakobs fired his pistol into the air to attract attention. Two local farmers (Charles Baldock and Harry Coulson) were passing by, heard the shots, and found Jakobs lying on the ground under his camouflage parachute. The farmers summoned the local Home Guard, who took charge of Jakobs. The German spy was caught wearing his flying suit and carrying British currency, forged papers, a radio, and a German sausage. Jakobs became the last person to be executed at the Tower of London.

==Governance==
As a civil parish, Ramsey has a town council. It is elected by eligible residents of the parish who have registered on the electoral roll. The town council has 17 elected councillors and a parish clerk. In 2011 Ramsey became the first town council in the UK to be controlled by the UK Independence Party, In the 2015 election UKIP lost overall control of the council to independent councillors.

Ramsey was in the historic and administrative county of Huntingdonshire until 1965. From 1965 the town was part of the new administrative county of Huntingdon and Peterborough. Then in 1974, as a result of the Local Government Act 1972, Ramsey was made part of the county of Cambridgeshire.

The second tier of local government is Huntingdonshire District Council which is a non-metropolitan district of Cambridgeshire and has its headquarters in Huntingdon. Ramsey forms one of District Council&#x27;s 29 district wards and elects three of its 52 councillors. District councillors serve for four year terms following elections to Huntingdonshire District Council.

For Ramsey the highest tier of local government is Cambridgeshire County Council. Ramsey is an electoral division and is represented on the county council by one councillor.

Ramsey is in the parliamentary constituency of North West Cambridgeshire.

==Demography==
===Population===
From 1801 to 1901 the population of Ramsey was recorded every ten years in the United Kingdom Census. In that time the population ranged between 1,894 (in 1801) and 4,823 (in 1901).

From 1901 a census was taken every ten years, with the exception of 1941 due to the Second World War.

In 2011, the parish covered an area of and the population density of Ramsey in 2011 was 345.2 persons per square mile (133.3 per square kilometre).

==Economy==
A weekly market was probably held by 1200. The grant was confirmed by Henry III in 1267 who also granted a fair on the vigil and feast of the Translation of St Benedict and for two days following. The bulk of the trade was dominated by garden produce.

Fisheries also played an important part in the fen economy. The abbey cartulary contains references to detailed arrangements concerning the granting of fisheries and fishing rights around Ramsey Mere and Whittlesey Mere, with rents being often paid in eels.

Livestock and in particular cattle was also an important element of the local economy. Portions of fen were reclaimed for both arable and pasture throughout the Middle Ages and later periods. Meadow and pasture were regulated by common rights. There are accounts of disputes between the major abbeys of Ramsey, Thorney and Ely about profits and limits of their commons.

Among the occupations there were weavers and fullers with others who were connected with the cloth trade. There were also tanners. The most prosperous trade was that of alehouse keeping which suggests that Ramsey had facilities for travellers. The market had lost its prominence in the 18th century to St Ives, and by 1881 &#x27;St Ives has drained our market of cattle, and only a few pigs are now its staple&#x27;, and survived as a pleasure market selling trinkets.

There is a Post Office in Ramsey.

In the 19th century, Ramsey had its own gas company, run by Edmund Broadberry, one of the Broadberry dynasty of gas engineers.

Abbey Renewables erected a 225KW wind turbine at Ramsey in 1993, one of the first in the UK. It was replaced with a 1.8MW turbine in 2008. In 2011 Abbey applied to Huntingdonshire District Council for permission to add a further four turbines to create a five-turbine wind farm capable of powering more than 5,000 homes.

==Transport==
Ramsey is served by local buses, having regular and direct routes to St Ives, Huntingdon and Peterborough as well as from nearby villages.

There is no longer a railway station at Ramsey. From 1863 a Great Northern Railway branch line linked a terminus in Ramsey with the East Coast Main Line. The London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) ended passenger services on the line in 1947. British Railways ended freight services and closed the branch line in 1973. From 1889 a Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway branch line also terminated in Ramsey, providing the town with a second railway terminus. The LNER closed the station and the branch line in 1930.

==Culture and community==
Ramsey Rural Museum is in 17th-century farm buildings on Wood Lane. It is a small museum dedicated to the history of rural Fenland life.

Original historical documents relating to Ramsey, including the original church parish registers, local government records, maps, photographs, and records of Ramsey manor (held by the Fellowes family, Lords de Ramsey), are held by Cambridgeshire Archives and Local Studies at the County Record Office in Huntingdon.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia. Television signals are received from the Sandy Heath TV transmitter. Local radio stations are BBC Radio Cambridgeshire, Heart East, Greatest Hits Radio East, Star Radio and HCR FM, a community based radio station. &quot;The Hunts Post&quot; is the town&#x27;s local weekly newspaper. 

==Events==

The custom of ringing a pancake bell on Pancake Day was revived in 1891.

Every year, over the August Bank Holiday weekend, the town is home to 1940s Ramsey, one of Britain&#x27;s biggest living history events. The event was held at RAF Upwood until 2011 and is now held at The Camp, Wood Lane. It raises funds for several local charities and is dedicated to recreating the sights and sounds of the 1940s. It features living history re-enactors, period dancing, food, exhibitions and trade stands.

==Churches==
===Church of England===

The Church of England parish church of St Thomas à Becket was built late in the 12th century as part of Ramsey Abbey, possibly the &quot;hospitium&quot;. It was converted into a parish church early in the 13th century. The church was remodelled in the 14th and 16th centuries, and the west tower was built in 1672. The church is a Grade I listed building.

===Salem Baptist Church===
Salem Baptist Church was built in High Street in 1857.

===Great Whyte Baptist Church===
Great Whyte Baptist Church was built in 1894.

===Ramsey Methodist Church===
Ramsey Methodist Church in High Street is a Gothic Revival building completed in 1899.

==Sport and recreation==
Ramsey has a King George&#x27;s Field in memory of King George V. The local football club, Ramsey Town F.C., plays in the Peterborough and District Football League.

==See also==
*Ramsey Heights nature reserve

==References==

==Sources==

==External links==

*Ramsey Town Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q547659" start="0" end="6" title="Ramsey, Cambridgeshire" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="28" end="40" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23330" start="48" end="63" title="Huntingdonshire" label="Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="76" end="90" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q685640" start="128" end="138" title="Huntingdon" label="Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290216" start="182" end="199" title="Ramsey Forty Foot" label="Ramsey Forty Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290221" start="201" end="215" title="Ramsey Heights" label="Ramsey Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303911" start="217" end="232" title="Ramsey Mereside" label="Ramsey Mereside"/>
<link wikidata="Q547659" start="234" end="247" title="Ramsey Hollow" label="Ramsey Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290247" start="252" end="273" title="Ramsey St Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="Ramsey St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480691" start="300" end="312" title="Ramsey Abbey" label="Ramsey Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="426" end="437" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q334377" start="442" end="451" title="St Albans Abbey" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862945" start="560" end="575" title="Baron de Ramsey" label="Lords de Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663983" start="713" end="734" title="Abbey College, Ramsey" label="Abbey College, Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="868" end="880" title="Prehistoric Britain#Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1003" end="1008" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="1073" end="1078" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1336" end="1344" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="1404" end="1414" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="1718" end="1768" title="The Anarchy" label="civil war between King Stephen and Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q936911" start="1819" end="1841" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2050" end="2061" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="2227" end="2238" title="Dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="2268" end="2277" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098590" start="2337" end="2344" title="Monastic grange" label="granges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655949" start="2359" end="2365" title="Fen Ditton" label="Biggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801889" start="2369" end="2402" title="Richard Williams (alias Cromwell)" label="Richard Williams (alias Cromwell)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="2582" end="2595" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="2774" end="2785" title="England in the Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="3244" end="3251" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625844" start="3708" end="3719" title="Lord Orford" label="Lord Orford"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="4596" end="4605" title="Enclosure" label="Enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="4984" end="4995" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847085" start="5002" end="5031" title="Inclosure Acts" label="enclosed by Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q88287" start="5092" end="5104" title="Josef Jakobs" label="Josef Jakobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q919431" start="5539" end="5549" title="Home Guard (United Kingdom)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="5757" end="5772" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="5822" end="5834" title="Parish councils in England" label="town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q702448" start="5913" end="5927" title="electoral roll" label="electoral roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="6072" end="6093" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560047" start="6217" end="6238" title="administrative county" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q364022" start="6334" end="6361" title="Huntingdon and Peterborough" label="Huntingdon and Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="6396" end="6421" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q73072657" start="6517" end="6549" title="Huntingdonshire District Council" label="Huntingdonshire District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="6561" end="6586" title="non-metropolitan district" label="non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="6692" end="6706" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="district wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994465" start="6804" end="6849" title="Huntingdonshire District Council elections" label="elections to Huntingdonshire District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025648" start="6903" end="6932" title="Cambridgeshire County Council" label="Cambridgeshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051617" start="7074" end="7099" title="North West Cambridgeshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North West Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058981" start="7213" end="7234" title="Census in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7401" end="7417" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="7651" end="7660" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7723" end="7749" title="Benedict of Nursia#Veneration" label="Translation of St Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="7881" end="7884" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784036" start="7904" end="7913" title="cartulary" label="cartulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586859" start="8029" end="8033" title="Mere (lake)" label="Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903306" start="8038" end="8053" title="Whittlesey Mere" label="Whittlesey Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="8086" end="8089" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729964" start="8404" end="8411" title="Thorney, Cambridgeshire" label="Thorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q209176" start="8416" end="8419" title="Ely, Cambridgeshire" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="8497" end="8503" title="weaver (occupation)" label="weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="8509" end="8516" title="Fulling" label="fullers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="8586" end="8592" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="8633" end="8641" title="alehouse" label="alehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="9130" end="9142" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="9365" end="9374" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q181811" start="9633" end="9655" title="Great Northern Railway (Great Britain)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290237" start="9677" end="9695" title="Ramsey North railway station" label="terminus in Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="9705" end="9725" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092839" start="9731" end="9763" title="London and North Eastern Railway" label="London and North Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="9817" end="9829" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599695" start="9905" end="9951" title="Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway" label="Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290213" start="10017" end="10040" title="Ramsey East railway station" label="second railway terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="10429" end="10434" title="Manor house" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025645" start="10495" end="10536" title="Cambridgeshire Archives and Local Studies" label="Cambridgeshire Archives and Local Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177943" start="10544" end="10564" title="County Record Office" label="County Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834810" start="10644" end="10652" title="BBC East" label="BBC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975048" start="10657" end="10667" title="ITV Anglia" label="ITV Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417277" start="10710" end="10721" title="Sandy Heath transmitting station" label="Sandy Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834912" start="10763" end="10787" title="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire" label="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066880" start="10789" end="10799" title="Heart East" label="Heart East"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853203" start="10801" end="10825" title="Greatest Hits Radio East" label="Greatest Hits Radio East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600841" start="10827" end="10837" title="Star Radio (Cambridge and Ely)" label="Star Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945114" start="10842" end="10848" title="Huntingdon Community Radio" label="HCR FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="11007" end="11018" title="Pancake Day" label="Pancake Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q355646" start="11155" end="11169" title="living history" label="living history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275648" start="11200" end="11210" title="RAF Upwood" label="RAF Upwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="11508" end="11539" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="11546" end="11561" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas à Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480691" start="11608" end="11620" title="Ramsey Abbey" label="Ramsey Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11641" end="11650" title="Hospitium#Medieval Hospitia" label="hospitium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11835" end="11858" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="11894" end="11901" title="Baptists Together" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="12061" end="12070" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="12098" end="12112" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="12223" end="12231" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290246" start="12258" end="12274" title="Ramsey Town F.C." label="Ramsey Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7178043" start="12289" end="12330" title="Peterborough and District Football League" label="Peterborough and District Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290220" start="12347" end="12376" title="Ramsey Heights nature reserve" label="Ramsey Heights nature reserve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383683" wikidata="Q63496" url="?curid=383683" title="Alois Kayser">
<text>Alois Kayser (March 29, 1877 in Lupstein, Alsace – October 21, 1944 in Chuuk) was a German-French Roman Catholic missionary who spent almost forty years on Nauru and wrote a Nauruan grammar (and possibly a Nauruan language dictionary). In 1943, he was deported along with Pierre Clivaz, a Swiss missionary, as well as most of the Nauruan population, by the Japanese to Micronesia, where he died.

In his honour, the government of Nauru named the technical school in the district Ewa after him.

==See also==
* Philip Delaporte

==External links==
* Review of Kayser&#x27;s grammar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63496" start="0" end="12" title="Alois Kayser" label="Alois Kayser"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528" start="32" end="40" title="Lupstein" label="Lupstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="42" end="48" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q221684" start="71" end="76" title="Chuuk State" label="Chuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="98" end="112" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="156" end="161" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="182" end="189" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="206" end="222" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="223" end="233" title="dictionary" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="285" title="Pierre Clivaz" label="Pierre Clivaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="357" end="362" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="369" end="379" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="430" end="435" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q274381" start="479" end="482" title="Ewa District, Nauru" label="Ewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931808" start="510" end="526" title="Philip Delaporte" label="Philip Delaporte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383687" wikidata="Q219203" url="?curid=383687" title="NEC">
<text>is a Japanese multinational information technology and electronics corporation, headquartered at the NEC Supertower in Minato, Tokyo, Japan. It provides IT and network solutions, including cloud computing, artificial intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT) platform, and telecommunications equipment and software to business enterprises, communications services providers and to government agencies. NEC has also been the largest PC vendor in Japan since the 1980s when it launched the PC-8000 series; it currently operates its domestic PC business in a joint venture with Lenovo.

NEC was the world&#x27;s fourth-largest PC manufacturer by 1990. Its semiconductors business unit was the world&#x27;s largest semiconductor company by annual revenue from 1985 to 1992, the second largest in 1995, one of the top three in 2000, and one of the top 10 in 2006. NEC spun off its semiconductor business to Renesas Electronics and Elpida Memory. Once Japan&#x27;s major electronics company, NEC has largely withdrawn from manufacturing since the beginning of the 21st century.

NEC was #463 on the 2017 Fortune 500 list. NEC is a member of the Sumitomo Group.

==History==
=== NEC===
Kunihiko Iwadare and Takeshiro Maeda established Nippon Electric Limited Partnership on August 31, 1898, by using facilities that they had bought from Miyoshi Electrical Manufacturing Company. Iwadare acted as the representative partner; Maeda handled company sales. Western Electric, which had an interest in the Japanese phone market, was represented by Walter Tenney Carleton. Carleton was also responsible for the renovation of the Miyoshi facilities. It was agreed that the partnership would be reorganized as a joint-stock company when the treaty would allow it. On July 17, 1899, the revised treaty between Japan and the United States went into effect. Nippon Electric Company, Limited was organized the same day as Western Electric Company to become the first Japanese joint-venture with foreign capital. Iwadare was named managing director. Ernest Clement and Carleton were named as directors. Maeda and Mototeru Fujii were assigned to be auditors. Iwadare, Maeda, and Carleton handled the overall management.

The company started with the production, sales, and maintenance of telephones and switches. NEC modernized the production facilities with the construction of the Mita Plant in 1901 at Mita Shikokumachi. It was completed in December 1902.

The Japanese Ministry of Communications adopted a new technology in 1903: the common battery switchboard supplied by NEC. The common battery switchboards powered the subscriber phone, eliminating the need for a permanent magnet generator in each subscriber&#x27;s phone. The switchboards were initially imported, but were manufactured locally by 1909.

NEC started exporting telephone sets to China in 1904. In 1905, Iwadare visited Western Electric in the U.S. to see their management and production control. On his return to Japan, he discontinued the &quot;oyakata&quot; system of sub-contracting and replaced it with a new system where managers and employees were all direct employees of the company. Inefficiency was also removed from the production process. The company paid higher salaries with incentives for efficiency. New accounting and cost controls were put in place, and time clocks was installed.

Between 1899 and 1907 the number of telephone subscribers in Japan rose from 35,000 to 95,000. NEC entered the China market in 1908 with the implementation of the telegraph treaty between Japan and China. They also entered the Korean market, setting up an office in Seoul in January 1908. During the period from 1907 to 1912 sales rose from 1.6 million yen to 2 million yen. The expansion of the Japanese phone service had been a key part of NEC&#x27;s success during this period.

The Ministry of Communications delayed a third expansion plan of the phone service in March 1913, despite having 120,000 potential telephone subscribers waiting for phone installations. NEC sales fell sixty percent between 1912 and 1915. During the interim, Iwadare started importing appliances, including electric fans, kitchen appliances, washing machines, and vacuum cleaners. Electric fans had never been seen in Japan before. The imports were intended to prop up company sales. In 1916, the government resumed the delayed telephone-expansion plan, adding 75,000 subscribers and 326,000 kilometers of new toll lines. Thanks to this third expansion plan, NEC expanded at a time when much of the rest of the Japanese industry contracted.

===1919 to 1938===
In 1919, NEC started its first association with Sumitomo, engaging Sumitomo Densen Seizosho to manufacture cables. As part of the venture, NEC provided cable manufacturing equipment to Sumitomo Densen. Rights to Western Electric&#x27;s duplex cable patents were also transferred to Sumitomo Densen.

The Great Kantō earthquake struck Japan in 1923. 140,000 people were killed and 3.4 million were left homeless. Four of NEC&#x27;s factories were destroyed, killing 105 of NEC&#x27;s engineers and workers. Thirteen of Tokyo&#x27;s telephone offices were destroyed by fire. Telephone and telegraph service was interrupted by damage to telephone cables. In response, the Ministry of Communications accelerated major programs to install automatic telephone switching systems and enter radio broadcasting. The first automatic switching systems were the Strowger-type model made by Automatic Telephone Manufacturing Co. (ATM) in the United Kingdom. NEC participated in the installation of the automatic switching systems, ultimately becoming the general sales agent for ATM. NEC developed its own Strowger-type automatic switching system in 1924, the first in Japan. One of the plants almost leveled during the Kanto earthquake, the Mita Plant, was chosen to support expanding production. A new three-story steel-reinforced concrete building was built, starting in 1925. It was modeled after the Western Electric Hawthorne Works.

NEC started its radio communications business in 1924. Japan&#x27;s first radio broadcaster, Radio Tokyo was founded in 1924 and started broadcasting in 1925. NEC imported the broadcasting equipment from Western Electric. The expansion of radio broadcasting into Osaka and Nagoya marked the emergence of radio as an Industry. NEC established a radio research unit in 1924. NEC started developing electron tubes in 1925. By 1930, they were manufacturing their first 500 W radio transmitter. They provided the Chinese Xinjing station with a 100 kW radio broadcasting system in 1934.

Photo-telegraphic equipment developed by NEC transmitted photos of the accession ceremony of Emperor Hirohito. The ceremony was held in Kyoto in 1928. The Newspapers Asahi Shimbun and Mainichi Shimbun were competing to cover the ceremony. The Asahi Shimbun was using a Siemens device. The Mainichi was planning to use French photo-telegraphic equipment. In the end, both papers acquired and used the NEC product, due to its faster transmission rate and higher picture quality.

In 1929 Nippon Electric provided Japan&#x27;s Ministry of Communications with the A-type switching system, the first of these systems to be developed in Japan. Nippon supplied Japan&#x27;s Ministry of Communications with nonloaded line carrier equipment for long-distance telephone channels in 1937.

===1938 to 1945===
World War II was described by the company as being the blackest days of its history. In 1938 the Mita and Tamagawa plants were placed under military control, with direct supervision by military officers. In 1939, Nippon Electric established a research laboratory in the Tamagawa plant. It became the first Japanese company to successfully test microwave multiplex communications. On December 22, 1941, the enemy property control law was passed. NEC shares owned by International Standard Electric Corporation (ISE), an ITT subsidiary, and Western Electric affiliate were seized. Capital and technical relations were abruptly severed. The &quot;Munitions Company Law&quot; was passed in October 1943, placing overall control of NEC plants under military jurisdiction. The Ueno plant was leveled by the military attack in March 1945. Fire bombings in April and May heavily damaged the Tamagawa Plant, reducing its capacity by forty percent. The Okayama Plant was totally destroyed by a bombing attack in June of the same year. At the end of the war, NEC&#x27;s production had been substantially reduced by damage to its facilities, and by material and personnel shortages.

===1945 to 1980===
After the war, production was slowly returned to civilian use. NEC re-opened its major plants by the end of January 1946. NEC began transistor research and development in 1950. It started exporting radio-broadcast equipment to Korea under the first major postwar contract in 1951. NEC received the Deming Prize for excellence in quality control in 1952. Computer research and development began in 1954. NEC produced the first crossbar switching system in Japan. It was installed at Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (currently Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation; NTT) in 1956. NEC began joint research and development with NTT of electronic switching systems the same year. NEC established Taiwan Telecommunication Company as their first postwar overseas joint venture in 1958. They completed the NEAC-1101 and NEAC-1102 computers in the same year. In September 1958, NEC built their first fully transistorized computer, the NEAC-2201, with parts made solely in Japan. One year later, they demonstrated it at the UNESCO AUTOMATH show in Paris. The company began integrated circuit research and development in 1960. In 1963 NEC started trading as American Depositary Receipts, with ten million shares being sold in the United States. Nippon Electric New York (now NEC America Inc.) was incorporated in the same year.

NEC supplied KDD with submarine cable systems for laying in the Pacific Ocean in 1964. They supplied short-haul 24 channel PCM carrier transmission equipment to NTT in 1965. NEC de Mexico, S. A. de C. V., NEC do Brasil, S. A., NEC Australia Pty. Ltd. were established between 1968 and 1969. NEC supplied Comsat Corporation with the SPADE satellite communications system in 1971. In 1972, Switzerland ordered a NEC satellite communications earth station. The same year, a small transportable satellite communications earth station was set up in China. Shares of NEC common stock were listed on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange in 1973. NEC also designed an automated broadcasting system for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation in the same year. NEC Electronics (Europe) GmbH was also established. In 1974, the ACOS series computer was introduced. The New Central Research Laboratories were completed in 1975. In 1977, Japan&#x27;s National Space Development Agency launched the NEC geostationary meteorological satellite, named Himawari.

During this period NEC introduced the concept of &quot;C&amp;C&quot;, the integration of computers and communications. NEC America Inc. opened a plant in Dallas, Texas to manufacture PABX and telephone systems in 1978. They also acquired Electronic Arrays, Inc. of California the same year to start semiconductor chip production in the United States.

===1980 to 2000===
In 1980, NEC created the first digital signal processor, the NEC μPD7720. NEC Semiconductors (UK) Ltd. was established in 1981, producing VLSIs and LSIs. NEC introduced the 8-bit PC-8800 series personal computer in 1981, followed by the 16-bit PC-9800 series in 1982. In 1983 NEC stock was listed on the Basel, Geneva, and Zurich, Switzerland exchanges. NEC quickly became the dominant leader of the Japanese PC industry, holding 80% market share. NEC changed its English company name to NEC Corporation the same year. NEC Information Systems, Inc. started manufacturing computers and related products in the United States in 1984. NEC also released the V-series processor the same year. In 1986, NEC delivered its SX-2 supercomputer to the Houston Advanced Research Center, The Woodlands, Texas. In the same year, the NEAX61 digital switching system went into service. In 1987, NEC Technologies (UK) Ltd. was established in the United Kingdom to manufacture VCRs, printers, and computer monitors and mobile telephones for Europe. Also that year, NEC licensed technology from Hudson Soft, a video game manufacturer, to create a video game console called the PC-Engine (later released in 1989 as the TurboGrafx-16 in the North American market). Its prototype 3D spec successor, the Tetsujin was originally set to be released in 1992, but the lack of completed games pushed the launch date about early 1993, which was planned debut in Japan. While the PC-Engine achieved a considerable following, it has been said that NEC held a much stronger influence on the video game industry through its role as a leading semiconductor manufacturer than through any of its direct video game products. NEC USA, Inc. was established in 1989 as a holding company for North American operations.

In 1983, NEC Brasil (pt), the Brazilian subsidiary of NEC, was forced to nationalize its corporate stock under orders of the Brazilian military government, whereby shareholder control of NEC Brasil was ceded to the private equity group Brasilinvest of Brazilian investment banker Mário Garnero. Since NEC Brasil&#x27;s foundation in 1968, it had become the major supplier of telecommunications equipment to the Brazilian government. In 1986, the then Minister of Communications Antônio Carlos Magalhães put NEC Brasil in financial difficulties by suspending all government contract payments to the company, whose main client was the federal government. With the subsidiary in crisis, the NEC Corporation in Japan sold NEC Brasil to Organizações Globo for only onemillion US dollars (US$1,000,000). Shortly thereafter, Magalhães resumed the government contracts and corresponding payments, and NEC Brazil became valued at over 350million US dollars (US$350,000,000). Suspicions regarding the NEC-Globo deal, which included among other things the unilateral breach of contract by Globo founder Roberto Marinho regarding the management of a regional television station in the Brazilian state of Bahia, took to the national stage only in 1992 during the first corruption charges against the impeached Brazilian president Fernando Collor de Mello. Organizações Globo subsequently sold their shares in NEC Brazil, which hit their all-time high during the state monopoly years, back to NEC Corporation in 1999 following the break-up and privatization of the Brazilian state-owned telephone monopoly Telebrás.

In 1990, the new head office building, known as the &quot;Super Tower&quot;, was completed in Shiba, Tokyo. Additionally, joint-venture agreements were established to manufacture and market digital electronic switching systems and LSIs in China. In 1993 NEC&#x27;s asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) switching system, the NEAX61 (Nippon Electronic Automatic Exchange) ATM Service Node, went into service in the United States. NEC Europe, Ltd. was established as a holding company for European operations the same year. The NEC C&amp;C Research Laboratories, NEC Europe, Ltd. were opened in Germany in 1994. NEC (China) Co, Ltd. was established as a holding company for Chinese operations in 1996. In 1997 NEC developed 4Gbit DRAM, and their semiconductor group was honored with one of the first Japan Quality Awards. In 1998, NEC opened the world&#x27;s most advanced semiconductor R&amp;D facility.


NEC had been the no. 1 personal computer vendor in Japan during the 1980s, but it faced increasing competition from Fujitsu, Seiko Epson and IBM Japan. Nevertheless, by the early 1990s, NEC was still the largest, having well over 50% market share in the Japanese market. Competition heated up later as rival Fujitsu started to aggressively market its computers, which were industry standard (x86) instead of NEC&#x27;s indigenous models.

In June 1994, NEC purchased the California-based Packard Bell company to produce desktop PCs in a common manufacturing plant for the North American market. As a result, NEC Technologies (USA) was merged with Packard Bell to create Packard Bell NEC Inc. By 1997, NEC&#x27;s share was reduced to about 35%.

In decades, NEC released a new console for its predecessor SuperGrafx, the Japan-only PC-FX, a 32-bit system with a tower-like design; it enjoyed a small but steady stream of games until 1998, when NEC finally abandoned the video games industry.

NEC also supplied rival Nintendo with the RISC-based CPU, V810 (same one used in the PC-FX) for the Virtual Boy and VR4300 CPU for the Nintendo 64, released in 1995–1996, and both SNK updated VR4300 CPU (64-bit MIPS III) on Hyper Neo Geo 64, as well as to former rival Sega with a version of its PowerVR 2 GPU for the Dreamcast, released in 1997–1998. After working the previous chipset on the system. NEC supplied Bandai&#x27;s WonderSwan handheld console, which was originally developed by Gunpei Yokoi, with the V30 MZ CPU. In the 2000s, NEC manufactured dynamic RAM process chips and produced for the GameCube GPU, Flipper, a graphics card development by ArtX.

NEC celebrated their 100th anniversary in 1999.

===2000 to present===
In 2000, NEC formed a joint-venture with Samsung SDI to manufacture OLED displays. NEC Electronics Corporation was separated from NEC in 2002 as a new semiconductor company. NEC Laboratories America, Inc. (NEC Labs) started in November 2002 as a merger of NEC Research Institute (NECI) and NEC USA&#x27;s Computer and Communications Research Laboratory (CCRL). NEC built the Earth Simulator Computer (ESC), the fastest supercomputer in the world from 2002 to 2004.

In 2003 NEC had a 20.8% market share in the personal computer market in Japan, slightly ahead of Fujitsu.

In 2004, NEC abandoned not only the OLED business, but the display business as a whole, by selling off their plasma display business and exiting from the joint-venture with Samsung SDI. Samsung bought all of the shares and related patents owned by NEC, incorporating Samsung OLED, which subsequently merged with Samsung Display.

In 2007, NEC and Nissan Co. Corp. started evaluating a joint venture to produce lithium ion batteries for hybrid and electric cars. The two companies established Automotive Energy Supply Corporation as a result.

On April 23, 2009, Renesas Technology Corp and NEC Electronics Corp struck a basic agreement to merge by around April 2010. On April 1, 2010, NEC Electronics and Renesas Technology merged forming Renesas Electronics which is set to be fourth largest semiconductor company according to iSuppli published data. By Q3 2010, NEC held a 19.8% market share in the PC market in Japan.

On January 27, 2011, NEC formed a joint venture with Chinese PC maker Lenovo, the fourth largest PC maker in the world. As part of the deal, the companies said in a statement they will establish a new company called Lenovo NEC Holdings B.V., which will be registered in the Netherlands. NEC will receive US$175 million from Lenovo through the issuance of Lenovo&#x27;s shares. Lenovo, through a unit, will own a 51% stake in the joint venture, while NEC will hold a 49% stake. In February 2011, &quot;Bloomberg News&quot; said the joint venture would allow Lenovo to expand in the field of servers, and NEC&#x27;s Masato Yamamoto said NEC would be able to grow in China.

On January 26, 2012, NEC Corporation announced that it would cut 10,000 jobs globally due to a big loss on NEC&#x27;s consolidated financial statement in line with the economic crisis in Europe and lagged in the development of smartphones in the domestic market compared to Apple and Samsung. Previously, in January 2009 NEC has cut about 20,000 jobs, mainly in sluggish semiconductor and liquid crystal display related businesses.

In 2013 NEC was the biggest PC server manufacturer in Japan, with a 23.6% share. In August 2014, NEC Corporation was commissioned to build a super-fast undersea data transmission cable linking the United States and Japan for a consortium of international companies consisting of China Mobile International, China Telecom Global, Global Transit, Google, KDDI and SingTel. The pipeline went online June 30, 2016. It exited from the smartphone market in 2015 by dissolving NEC Mobile Communications, bailing out the other participants in the smartphone joint-venture.

In April 2017, KEMET Corporation announced it would purchase a 61% controlling interest in NEC Tokin from NEC, making NEC Tokin its wholly owned subsidiary. Once the purchase completed, the company changed its name to &quot;Tokin Corporation&quot;.

In July 2018, NEC established its subsidiary, NEC X, in Silicon Valley, to fast-track technologies and business ideas selected from inside and outside NEC. NEC X created a corporate accelerator program that works with entrepreneurs, start-ups and existing companies to help them develop new products that leverage NEC&#x27;s emerging technologies.

In August 2018, Envision Energy struck an agreement with Nissan and NEC to acquire their automotive battery joint venture. In December 2018, NEC announced that it would acquire KMD, the largest Danish IT company, for $1.2 billion to strengthen its digital government business.

NEC sold its sixty-year-old lighting business in April 2019. As of September 2019, NEC is the largest supplier of AI surveillance technology in the world.

In the first half of 2020, NEC sold a majority stake in NEC Display Solutions, the professional display subsidiary, to Sharp Corporation and decided to gradually curtail the money-losing energy storage business throughout the decade.

Upon the suggested banning of Huawei&#x27;s 5G equipment led by the United States in 2020, being a diminished supplier, NEC was galvanized to ramp up its relatively small 5G network business to fill the void in the telecommunications equipment markets of the United States and the United Kingdom. NTT, the largest carrier in Japan, invested $596 million for a 4.8 percent stake in NEC to assist this move.

In December 2020, NEC acquired Swiss digital banking solution developer Avaloq for US$2.2 billion.

==Operations==
As of July 2018, NEC has 6 larger business segments—Public, Enterprise, Network Services, System Platform, Global, and Others. It has renamed its Telecom Carrier business to Network Service.

Principal subsidiaries of NEC include:
* NEC Corporation of America
* Netcracker Technology
* NEC Display Solutions of America (A Sharp-owned company as of July 2020)
* NEC Europe
* KMD
*Avaloq


==Products==

* NEC MobilePro – a handheld computer running Windows CE
* NEC Aspire hybrid small business phone system
* Electric vehicle batteries (Automotive Energy Supply Corporation, a joint-venture between Nissan, NEC Corporation and NEC TOKIN)
* NEC mobile phone (see NEC e616)
* NEC America MultiSync Monitors and Fax devices1
* NEC digital cinema projector
* NEC Home Electronics (USA), Inc. / NEC MultiSpeed laptop PCs, MultiSync series PC monitors and Data Projectors
*NEC Home Electronics (USA), Inc. / TV, Projection TV, VCRs and Home Audio (CD, Amplifiers, Receivers)
*NEC Technologies, Inc. / Versa series notebook PCs
* NEC Information Systems, Inc. POWERMATE desktop PCs
* NEC Information Systems, Inc. Valuestar / NEC POWERMATE hybrid computer
* NEC (Division unknown) Car Stereos and Keyless Entry Systems
* Game consoles:
** PC Engine (TurboGrafx-16 in the US) and all related hardware and successors; co-produced by Hudson Soft.
** PC-Engine GT (TurboExpress in the US)
** PC-Engine Duo (TurboDuo in the US)
** PC-FX
* Personal computers:
** PC-6000 series
** PC-6600 series
** PC-8000 series
** PC-8800 series
** PC-9800 series, also known as PC-98
* Microprocessors:
** NEC V20
** NEC V25

Defense products include:
* J/TPS-102 Self-propelled ground-based early warning 3D radar (JGSDF)
* Broadband multipurpose radio system (JGSDF)
* Advanced Combat Infantry Equipment System [ACIES] (JSDF) – Major subcontractor
* Howa rifle system (JSDF) – Major subcontractor as part of ACIES
Food

* Ren AI Pan

===Laptops===
* ProSpeed
* Versa pro type VB December 2016

=== Telephone &amp; Unified Communications Systems ===

* NEC SL2100
* Univerge Blue (UC Platform)
* Univerge SV9100
* Univerge SV9300
* Univerge SV9500
* InApps

===Supercomputers===

* 1983 Announced the SX-1 and SX-2 supercomputers
* 1989 Introduction of SX-3
* 1994 First announcement of SX-4
* 1999 Delivery of SX-5
* 2002 Introduced SX-6
* 2002 Installation of the Earth Simulator, the world&#x27;s fastest supercomputer from 2002 to 2004 reaching a speed of 35,600 gigaflops
* 2005 NEC SX-8 in production
* 2006 Announced the SX-8R
* 2007 Announced the SX-9
* 2011 First announcement of the NEC SX-9&#x27;s successor
* 2013 Announced the SX-ACE
* 2017 Announced the SX-Aurora TSUBASA computing platform that expands the horizons of supercomputing, Artificial Intelligence and Big Data analytics.

==Achievements==
Achievements of NEC include:
* the discovery of single-walled carbon nanotubes by Sumio Iijima
* the invention of the widely used MUX-scan design for test methodology (contrast with the IBM-developed level-sensitive scan design methodology)
* the world&#x27;s first demonstration of the one-qubit rotation gate in solid state devices.
* As for mobile phones, NEC pioneered key technologies like color displays, 3G support, dual screens and camera modules.
* Developed a facial recognition system able to detect and distinguish human faces through medical masks.
* Released the first home console video game system to use compact discs, being the first widely available product to use compact discs as a platform for interactive video entertainment outside of home computer use.

==Sponsorships==

NEC was the main (title) sponsor of the Davis Cup competition until 2002, when BNP Paribas took over the sponsorship.

NEC between 1982 and 2012 sponsored the NEC Cup, a Go tournament in Japan.

NEC between 1986 and 2003 sponsored the NEC Shun-Ei, a Go tournament for young players in Japan.

NEC sponsored the English football club Everton from 1985 to 1995. The 1995 FA Cup Final triumph was Everton&#x27;s final game of the decade-long NEC sponsorship, and Danka took over as sponsors.

NEC first time signed the deal to sponsor Sauber F1 Team from 2011 season until 2014 season.

Right after Sauber, NEC continue sponsored Sahara Force India F1 Team for 2015 season until its demise during 2018 season. Since then NEC has sponsored for their last time its successor Racing Point only in 2019 season.

In April 2013, NEC became the umbrella sponsor for PGA Tour Latinoamérica, a third-tier men&#x27;s professional golf tour.

==Sports teams==
These started as works teams, but over the years came to include professional players:
* NEC Red Rockets (women&#x27;s volleyball)
* NEC Green Rockets (men&#x27;s rugby union)

NEC also used to own Montedio Yamagata of the football (soccer) J. League, but just sponsors them along with other local companies.

The following team is defunct.
* NEC Blue Rockets (men&#x27;s volleyball)
==See also==
* List of computer system manufacturers
* TurboGrafx-16

==Footnotes==
==References==
*Mark Mason, &quot;Foreign Direct Investment and Japanese Economic Development, 1899–1931, Business and Economic History, Second Series, Volume Sixteen, 1987&quot;.
*NEC Corporation, &quot;NEC Corporation, The First 80 Years, 1984, &quot;.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="14" end="27" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="28" end="50" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="55" end="66" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621350" start="101" end="115" title="NEC Supertower" label="NEC Supertower"/>
<link wikidata="Q190088" start="119" end="132" title="Minato, Tokyo" label="Minato, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="134" end="139" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="189" end="204" title="cloud computing" label="cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="206" end="229" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="236" end="254" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="275" end="293" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="434" end="436" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869483" start="490" end="504" title="PC-8000 series" label="PC-8000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="558" end="571" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="577" end="583" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="655" end="668" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="904" end="923" title="Renesas Electronics" label="Renesas Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192687" start="928" end="941" title="Elpida Memory" label="Elpida Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q717318" start="1141" end="1155" title="Sumitomo Group" label="Sumitomo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156389" start="1181" end="1197" title="Kunihiko Iwadare" label="Kunihiko Iwadare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="1448" end="1464" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966275" start="1537" end="1559" title="Walter Tenney Carleton" label="Walter Tenney Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="1958" end="1971" title="joint-venture" label="joint-venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="2283" end="2289" title="switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322293" start="2453" end="2479" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications" label="Ministry of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="2533" end="2544" title="Telephone switchboard" label="switchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870934" start="2815" end="2829" title="History of the telephone" label="telephone sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156389" start="2857" end="2864" title="Kunihiko Iwadare" label="Iwadare"/>
<link wikidata="Q717318" start="4643" end="4651" title="Sumitomo Group" label="Sumitomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q274498" start="4899" end="4921" title="1923 Great Kantō earthquake" label="Great Kantō earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q354142" start="5444" end="5452" title="Strowger switch" label="Strowger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="5986" end="6002" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552649" start="6003" end="6018" title="Hawthorne Works" label="Hawthorne Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="6696" end="6712" title="Hirohito" label="Emperor Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="6739" end="6744" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q720503" start="6769" end="6782" title="Asahi Shimbun" label="Asahi Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136866" start="6787" end="6803" title="Mainichi Shimbun" label="Mainichi Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="6872" end="6879" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7401" end="7413" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q582418" start="7920" end="7923" title="ITT Corporation" label="ITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q489360" start="8890" end="8902" title="Deming Prize" label="Deming Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929149" start="9018" end="9033" title="crossbar switch" label="crossbar switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="9135" end="9177" title="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone" label="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="10909" end="10947" title="geostationary meteorological satellite" label="geostationary meteorological satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103808" start="10955" end="10963" title="Himawari (satellite)" label="Himawari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="11120" end="11133" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="11149" end="11153" title="PABX" label="PABX"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="11231" end="11241" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="11368" end="11392" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953439" start="11398" end="11409" title="NEC μPD7720" label="NEC μPD7720"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="11475" end="11479" title="Very-large-scale integration" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338888" start="11516" end="11523" title="NEC PC-8801" label="PC-8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q183505" start="11581" end="11588" title="NEC PC-9801" label="PC-9800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369202" start="11991" end="12009" title="NEC V20" label="V-series processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916354" start="12078" end="12110" title="Houston Advanced Research Center" label="Houston Advanced Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q982421" start="12112" end="12132" title="The Woodlands, Texas" label="The Woodlands, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q380616" start="12296" end="12299" title="VCR" label="VCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="12316" end="12332" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="12413" end="12424" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="12428" end="12438" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="12465" end="12483" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="12495" end="12504" title="PC-Engine" label="PC-Engine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13137" end="13139" title=":pt:NEC Brasil" label="pt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="13241" end="13270" title="Brazilian military government" label="Brazilian military government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957826" start="13352" end="13364" title="Brasilinvest" label="Brasilinvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764688" start="13396" end="13409" title="Mário Garnero" label="Mário Garnero"/>
<link wikidata="Q571064" start="13594" end="13618" title="Antônio Carlos Magalhães" label="Antônio Carlos Magalhães"/>
<link wikidata="Q614283" start="13848" end="13866" title="Organizações Globo" label="Organizações Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="13887" end="13897" title="United States dollar" label="US dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752623" start="14208" end="14223" title="Roberto Marinho" label="Roberto Marinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="14308" end="14313" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236503" start="14433" end="14457" title="Fernando Collor de Mello" label="Fernando Collor de Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381995" start="14708" end="14716" title="Telebrás" label="Telebrás"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621350" start="14777" end="14788" title="NEC Supertower" label="Super Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631862" start="14813" end="14825" title="Shiba, Tokyo" label="Shiba, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="15599" end="15606" title="R&amp;amp;D" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="15735" end="15742" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="15744" end="15755" title="Seiko Epson" label="Seiko Epson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="15760" end="15769" title="IBM Japan Ltd" label="IBM Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="16011" end="16014" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129996" start="16107" end="16119" title="Packard Bell" label="Packard Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q202375" start="16423" end="16433" title="PC Engine SuperGrafx" label="SuperGrafx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136902" start="16450" end="16455" title="PC-FX" label="PC-FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="16459" end="16465" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="16635" end="16643" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="16653" end="16657" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q164651" start="16711" end="16722" title="Virtual Boy" label="Virtual Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274735" start="16727" end="16733" title="R4300i" label="VR4300"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="16746" end="16757" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073880" start="16791" end="16794" title="SNK" label="SNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="16822" end="16826" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640834" start="16835" end="16851" title="Hyper Neo Geo 64" label="Hyper Neo Geo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q776616" start="16907" end="16914" title="PowerVR" label="PowerVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="16929" end="16938" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065792" start="17040" end="17050" title="WonderSwan" label="WonderSwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17126" end="17132" title="NEC V20#Variants and successors" label="V30 MZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="17216" end="17224" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q705328" start="17270" end="17274" title="ArtX" label="ArtX"/>
<link wikidata="Q21120876" start="17389" end="17400" title="Samsung SDI" label="Samsung SDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="17416" end="17420" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="17431" end="17446" title="NEC Electronics" label="NEC Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277662" start="17723" end="17738" title="Earth Simulator" label="Earth Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="17767" end="17780" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="18030" end="18044" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="18268" end="18274" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="18331" end="18342" title="lithium ion" label="lithium ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="18357" end="18363" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="18368" end="18380" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q787901" start="18413" end="18449" title="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation" label="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="18483" end="18501" title="Renesas Technology" label="Renesas Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="18660" end="18679" title="Renesas Electronics" label="Renesas Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="18913" end="18919" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="19344" end="19358" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="19433" end="19440" title="Server (computing)" label="servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19507" end="19512" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="20227" end="20253" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile International"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834296" start="20255" end="20275" title="China Telecom" label="China Telecom Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="20293" end="20299" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q971946" start="20301" end="20305" title="KDDI" label="KDDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="20310" end="20317" title="SingTel" label="SingTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953421" start="20418" end="20443" title="NEC Mobile Communications" label="NEC Mobile Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718513" start="20529" end="20546" title="KEMET Corporation" label="KEMET Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11234627" start="20605" end="20614" title="NEC Tokin" label="NEC Tokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="20820" end="20834" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="20982" end="20995" title="Entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910394" start="21129" end="21144" title="Envision Energy" label="Envision Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="21170" end="21176" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210064" start="21419" end="21427" title="lighting" label="lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953424" start="21603" end="21624" title="NEC Display Solutions" label="NEC Display Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="21666" end="21683" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837718" start="21734" end="21748" title="energy storage" label="energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="21812" end="21818" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="21826" end="21828" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780509" start="21997" end="22025" title="telecommunications equipment" label="telecommunications equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="22079" end="22082" title="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone" label="NTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q790110" start="22261" end="22267" title="Avaloq" label="Avaloq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955462" start="22537" end="22563" title="NEC Corporation of America" label="NEC Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045242" start="22566" end="22587" title="Netcracker Technology" label="Netcracker Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953424" start="22590" end="22611" title="NEC Display Solutions" label="NEC Display Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="22626" end="22631" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q790110" start="22683" end="22689" title="Avaloq" label="Avaloq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886761" start="22708" end="22721" title="NEC MobilePro" label="NEC MobilePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="22752" end="22762" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q787901" start="22841" end="22877" title="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation" label="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953438" start="22966" end="22974" title="NEC e616" label="NEC e616"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935113" start="22990" end="22999" title="MultiSync" label="MultiSync"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252927" start="23299" end="23304" title="NEC Versa" label="Versa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341206" start="23437" end="23452" title="hybrid computer" label="hybrid computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="23536" end="23545" title="PC Engine" label="PC Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="23628" end="23639" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q966193" start="23644" end="23656" title="TurboExpress" label="PC-Engine GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q841252" start="23685" end="23698" title="TurboDuo" label="PC-Engine Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136902" start="23723" end="23728" title="PC-FX" label="PC-FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440971" start="23754" end="23768" title="PC-6000 series" label="PC-6000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q976968" start="23772" end="23786" title="PC-6600 series" label="PC-6600 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869483" start="23790" end="23804" title="PC-8000 series" label="PC-8000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338888" start="23808" end="23822" title="PC-8800 series" label="PC-8800 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q183505" start="23826" end="23840" title="PC-98" label="PC-9800 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369202" start="23884" end="23891" title="NEC V20" label="NEC V20"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953433" start="23895" end="23902" title="NEC V25" label="NEC V25"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905219" start="23970" end="23983" title="Early-warning radar" label="early warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q229387" start="23984" end="23992" title="3D radar" label="3D radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q889751" start="23994" end="23999" title="Japan Ground Self-Defense Force" label="JGSDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="24100" end="24104" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="JSDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q911891" start="24130" end="24134" title="Howa" label="Howa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24135" end="24147" title="Howa Type 89#Recent improvements" label="rifle system"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="24149" end="24153" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="JSDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q108940220" start="24230" end="24238" title="NEC ProSpeed" label="ProSpeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953429" start="24480" end="24484" title="NEC SX architecture" label="SX-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869482" start="24613" end="24617" title="NEC SX-6" label="SX-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277662" start="24645" end="24660" title="Earth Simulator" label="Earth Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="24746" end="24755" title="FLOPS" label="gigaflops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334338" start="24763" end="24771" title="NEC SX-8" label="NEC SX-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334338" start="24807" end="24812" title="NEC SX-8" label="SX-8R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422072" start="24834" end="24838" title="NEC SX-9" label="SX-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953428" start="24919" end="24925" title="NEC SX-ACE" label="SX-ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q55231575" start="24947" end="24964" title="NEC SX-Aurora TSUBASA" label="SX-Aurora TSUBASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="25157" end="25172" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349968" start="25177" end="25189" title="Sumio Iijima" label="Sumio Iijima"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264347" start="25234" end="25249" title="design for test" label="design for test"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="25281" end="25284" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534985" start="25295" end="25322" title="level-sensitive scan design" label="level-sensitive scan design"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="25386" end="25391" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="25932" end="25941" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q499707" start="25971" end="25982" title="BNP Paribas" label="BNP Paribas"/>
<link wikidata="Q962894" start="26051" end="26058" title="NEC Cup" label="NEC Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="26062" end="26064" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044830" start="26127" end="26138" title="NEC Shun-Ei" label="NEC Shun-Ei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="26142" end="26144" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="26225" end="26232" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484523" start="26256" end="26273" title="1995 FA Cup Final" label="1995 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="26424" end="26438" title="Sauber" label="Sauber F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q69943" start="26444" end="26448" title="2011 Formula One season" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q69969" start="26462" end="26466" title="2014 Formula One season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q138933" start="26519" end="26545" title="Force India" label="Sahara Force India F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q14293115" start="26550" end="26554" title="2015 Formula One season" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051084" start="26586" end="26590" title="2018 Formula One season" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q56245286" start="26662" end="26674" title="Racing Point F1 Team" label="Racing Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119143" start="26748" end="26770" title="PGA Tour Latinoamérica" label="PGA Tour Latinoamérica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187904" start="26855" end="26865" title="works team" label="works team"/>
<link wikidata="Q629859" start="26927" end="26942" title="NEC Red Rockets" label="NEC Red Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334335" start="26971" end="26988" title="NEC Green Rockets" label="NEC Green Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="27001" end="27012" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045524" start="27036" end="27053" title="Montedio Yamagata" label="Montedio Yamagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27061" end="27078" title="football (soccer)" label="football (soccer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575453" start="27079" end="27088" title="J. League" label="J. League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334334" start="27181" end="27197" title="NEC Blue Rockets" label="NEC Blue Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="27210" end="27220" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834315" start="27237" end="27274" title="List of computer system manufacturers" label="List of computer system manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="27277" end="27290" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383689" wikidata="Q1496611" url="?curid=383689" title="Michael Dobbs">
<text>Michael John Dobbs, Baron Dobbs (born 14 November 1948) is a British Conservative politician, media commentator and author, best known for his &quot;House of Cards&quot; trilogy. He has been a television and radio presenter and a senior corporate executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi. 

The Guardian called him “Westminster’s baby faced hitman.” The Mail on Sunday called him “Perhaps the cleverest man in the country” . The Sunday Express said he was “a man who, in Latin America, would have been shot”. He is the recipient of many public awards and nominations, including being a five-time Emmy Awards nominee.

==Early life and education==
Michael Dobbs was born on 14 November 1948 in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, the son of nurseryman Eric and Eileen Dobbs. He was educated at Hertford Grammar School and Christ Church, Oxford.

After graduating from Oxford in 1971 with a third-class BA in philosophy, politics and economics, Dobbs moved to the United States. He attended the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, and graduated in 1977 with an MA, MALD, and a PhD. His doctoral dissertation on nuclear strategic arms control was published as &quot;China and SALT: Dragon Hunting in a Multinuclear World&quot;. In 2007, Dobbs gave the Alumni Salutation at Fletcher.

He has been a Senior Visiting Professor of International Relations at The Fletcher School, and a Parliamentary Fellow at St Antony&#x27;s College, Oxford.

==Writing==
===Novels and Television===
Michael Dobbs&#x27; writing career began in 1989 with the publication of &quot;House of Cards&quot;, the first in what would become a trilogy of political thrillers with Francis Urquhart as the central character; &quot;House of Cards&quot; was followed by &quot;To Play the King&quot; in 1992 and &quot;The Final Cut&quot; in 1994. In 1990, &quot;House of Cards&quot; was turned into a BBC television mini-series which received 14 BAFTA nominations and two BAFTA wins and was voted the 84th Best British Show in History. Netflix produced an American version based upon Dobbs&#x27;s first novel and its BBC adaptation. He was an executive producer of the American series.

His novel, &quot;Winston&#x27;s War&quot; (2004), was shortlisted for the Channel 4 Political Book of the Year Award, and his Harry Jones novels, &quot;A Sentimental Traitor&quot; and &quot;A Ghost at the Door&quot;, for the Paddy Power Political Book of the Year awards in 2013 and 2014, respectively. His novels are also published in the United States, China and many other countries.

In 2024 his novel &quot;The Lords&#x27; Day&quot; (2007) was chosen by Her Majesty Queen Camilla for inclusion in The Queen&#x27;s Reading Room, where it was described as &quot;An entirely gripping and amazingly authentic thriller about what happens when the State Opening of Parliament really doesn’t go to plan.&quot;

In 2009 Dobbs’ play, &quot;Turning Point&quot;, about the meeting between Winston Churchill and Soviet spy, Guy Burgess, was broadcast by Sky Arts TV, starring Matthew Marsh and Benedict Cumberbatch, and won a Broadcasting Press Guild Award.

Anthony Howard of &quot;The Times&quot; said &quot;Dobbs is following in a respectable tradition. Shakespeare, Walter Scott, even Tolstoy, all used historical events as the framework for their writings. And, unlike some of their distinguished works, Dobbs&#x27;s novel [&quot;Winston&#x27;s War&quot;] is, in fact, astonishingly historically accurate&quot;.

Gyles Brandreth in the &quot;Sunday Express&quot; said &quot;Michael Dobbs does for Westminster skulduggery what Agatha Christie did for the country house murder.&quot;

===Other work===
Dobbs has been a judge of the Whitbread Book of the Year Award. He presented the &quot;Huw Wheldon Memorial Lecture&quot; in 2015 for the Royal Television Society and has lectured at dozens of literary and fundraising events around the world.

===Awards and Nominations===
*Primetime Emmy Awards, Nominee for Outstanding Drama Series &quot;(2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017)&quot;

*PGA Awards, Nominee for Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television, Drama &quot;(2017)&quot;

*International Churchill Society’s Blenheim Prize &quot;(2017)&quot;

*Producers Guild of America Awards, Nominee for The Norman Felton Award for Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television, Drama &quot;(2016)&quot; 

*Online Film and Television Association Award, Nominee for Best Writing in a Drama Series &quot;(2014)&quot; 

*Lifetime Achievement Award for Political Literature, Paddy Power Political Book Awards &quot;(2014)&quot;

*P T Barnum Award for Excellence in Entertainment &quot;(2014)&quot;

*Tufts University Alumni Distinguished Achievement Award &quot;(2014)&quot;

*Paddy Power Political Novel of the Year &quot;(2013, 2014)&quot;

*Benjamin Franklin Award for best historical novel &quot;(2008)&quot; 

*Shortlisted for C4 Political Novel of the Year &quot;(2001)&quot;

==Politics==
After completing his doctorate in 1975, Dobbs returned to England and began working in London for the Conservative Party. From 1977 to 1979, he was a close personal aide to Margaret Thatcher, who was then leader of the Opposition. He was the first person on election night in 1979 to inform Thatcher that she had won.
He held many political posts in the ensuing years, many closely linked to Norman Tebbit: 1981 to 1983 special adviser in the Department of Employment; 1984 to 1986 special adviser in the Department of Trade and Industry; 1986 to 1987 Chief of Staff of the Conservative Party; and 1994 to 1995 Deputy Chairman of the Conservative Party. 

In 1984, he survived the Brighton bombing at the Conservative Party Conference. He was called &quot;Westminster&#x27;s baby-faced hit man&quot;, by &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 1987.

On 18 December 2010, Dobbs was made a life peer, as Baron Dobbs, &quot;of Wylye, in the County of Wiltshire&quot;, and sits in the House of Lords as a Conservative Peer. 

In 2013 he co-sponsored, with James Wharton MP, the European Union (Referendum) Bill to hold a national vote on the UK’s membership of the EU. It failed, but shortly thereafter was followed by a government bill that led to the holding of the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, which voted in favour of leaving the EU.

In August 2014, Lord Dobbs was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to &quot;The Guardian&quot; opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September&#x27;s referendum on that issue.

In March 2019, he criticised the Conservative government, stating that &quot;[w]e have a flat-pack Cabinet that threatens to collapse every time you switch the telly on.&quot;

On October 14 2019 he helped formally introduce the debate on &quot;The Queen’s Speech&quot; in the House of Lords, in which he stated “I am an optimist – I have to be. I have four kids and am a grandfather and a Tory Back-Bencher. All roles for which survival requires endless doses of optimism.”

In 2019 during the state visit of President Xi Jinping of China, he presented Xi with a copy of &quot;House of Cards&quot; bearing the inscription: “Where we agree, let us rejoice. Where we do not agree, let us discuss. Where we cannot agree, let us do so as respected friends.”

On November 5 2023, the then-Foreign Secretary and former Prime Minister, David Cameron, said of Dobbs, “I well remember sending him here (The House of Lords), because a week later we lost a vote by one, and he was the responsible noble Lord. I remember having some words with him after that – although, clearly, it had absolutely no effect.”

Dobbs is a member of the advisory board of the Parthenon Project, an organisation that aims &quot;to reunify the Parthenon Sculptures (also known as the Elgin Marbles) currently on permanent display in the British Museum with the other remaining originals in their home city of Athens&quot; in Greece.
In the House of Lords he said “the debate about the Elgin Marbles is really like grumpy old men talking about teenage sex, and merely the grubby bits. It misses the point. We are talking about building relationships, about creating something that is bigger and better, it’s called soft power.”

==Business and Media==

Dobbs held various positions at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi (1979-1990), including Deputy Chairman and Director of Worldwide Corporate Communications.
He has written for many newspapers, including The Boston Globe (1972-1975) and he was a columnist for the Mail on Sunday (1991-1998). 

He hosted the current affairs programme &quot;Despatch Box&quot; on BBC Two (1998-2001).

He has been a regular contributor to BBC Radio 4. He has written and presented documentaries about the school days of Winston Churchill and Margaret Thatcher, The Archers radio drama series and the Brighton Bomb. In 2023 he was guest editor of the Today Programme, devoting the programme to an interview with HM Queen Camilla (then Princess of Wales), and prostate cancer. In December 2024 he presented a three-part satirical review of the year on Broadcasting House in the voice of Larry (cat), the Downing Street Cat.

==Personal life==
Dobbs divides his time between London and Wiltshire. He has two sons from his first marriage and two stepsons with his second wife, Rachel.

==Charitable work==
Dobbs has been involved with many charities. In 2015 he walked 185 miles from his home in Wiltshire to the Richard Hale School in Hertford, where he had been a pupil, to raise money for a neighbour paralysed as a result of a rugby accident. In 2018 he walked 130 miles around the Isle of Man to raise money for the local hospice.
He has been the patron of the Layton Rahmatulla Benevolent Trust, an eye charity that has treated more than 50 million patients in Pakistan. He has been the president of his local branch of the Royal British Legion. He is active in promoting better treatment of prostate cancer. He is on the advisory board of the Lake Nona Impact Forum, a health and well-being trust.

==Namesake==
Dobbs is a distant relative of the Michael Dobbs, a US non-fiction author with the same name. The two are sometimes confused.

==Bibliography==
Francis Urquhart novels
* &quot;House of Cards&quot; (1989)
* &quot;To Play the King&quot; (HarperCollins, 1992)
* &quot;The Final Cut&quot; (HarperCollins, 1994)

Tom Goodfellowe novels
* &quot;Goodfellowe MP&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Buddha of Brewer Street&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Whispers of Betrayal&quot; (2000)

Winston Churchill novels
* &quot;Winston&#x27;s War&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Never Surrender&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Churchill&#x27;s Hour&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Churchill&#x27;s Triumph&quot; (2005)

Harry Jones thrillers
* &quot;The Lords&#x27; Day&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Edge of Madness&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Reluctant Hero&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Old Enemies&quot; (2011)
* &quot;A Sentimental Traitor&quot; (2012)
* &quot;A Ghost at the Door&quot; (2013)

Non-series novels
* &quot;Wall Games&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Last Man to Die&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Touch of Innocents&quot; (1994)
* &quot;First Lady&quot; (2006)

==References==
==External links==
* Fantasticfiction.co.uk
* Blog.washingtonpost.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1496611" start="0" end="31" title="Michael Dobbs" label="Michael John Dobbs, Baron Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="69" end="81" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749261" start="149" end="163" title="House of Cards (novel)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207680" start="260" end="281" title="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi" label="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="285" end="297" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463285" start="344" end="362" title="The Mail on Sunday" label="The Mail on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="419" end="437" title="The Sunday Express" label="The Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="590" end="601" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19790" start="687" end="695" title="Cheshunt" label="Cheshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="697" end="710" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326210" start="776" end="799" title="Richard Hale School" label="Hertford Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="804" end="825" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="884" end="886" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="890" end="924" title="philosophy, politics and economics" label="philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073441" start="976" end="1012" title="Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy" label="Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="1016" end="1032" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54145" start="1036" end="1058" title="Medford, Massachusetts" label="Medford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1090" end="1092" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073441" start="1094" end="1098" title="M.A.L.D." label="MALD"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1106" end="1109" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035359" start="1433" end="1457" title="St Antony&amp;#x27;s College" label="St Antony&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750951" start="1678" end="1694" title="Francis Urquhart" label="Francis Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055984" start="1892" end="1920" title="House of Cards (British TV series)" label="a BBC television mini-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="1939" end="1944" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="2029" end="2036" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="2046" end="2065" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="an American version"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="2254" end="2263" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q152239" start="2682" end="2711" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Reading Room" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Reading Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2985" end="2991" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918668" start="2997" end="3008" title="Guy Burgess" label="Guy Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299759" start="3049" end="3062" title="Matthew Marsh (actor)" label="Matthew Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q244674" start="3067" end="3087" title="Benedict Cumberbatch" label="Benedict Cumberbatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q573388" start="3132" end="3146" title="Anthony Howard (journalist)" label="Anthony Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3156" end="3165" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3230" end="3241" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3243" end="3255" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="3262" end="3269" title="Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524132" start="3491" end="3506" title="Gyles Brandreth" label="Gyles Brandreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="3520" end="3534" title="Sunday Express" label="Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136336" start="3708" end="3740" title="Costa Book Awards" label="Whitbread Book of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951313" start="3765" end="3776" title="Huw Wheldon" label="Huw Wheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="3816" end="3840" title="Royal Television Society" label="Royal Television Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="5129" end="5146" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117085" start="5175" end="5185" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Loyal Opposition" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="5348" end="5361" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q891856" start="5637" end="5653" title="Brighton hotel bombing" label="Brighton bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5766" end="5778" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="5833" end="5842" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039959" start="5869" end="5874" title="Wylye, Wiltshire" label="Wylye"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="5883" end="5902" title="County of Wiltshire" label="County of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q264337" start="5997" end="6010" title="James Wharton, Baron Wharton of Yarm" label="James Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="6209" end="6265" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="6436" end="6457" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="6492" end="6516" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on that issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="7039" end="7049" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="7349" end="7362" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q606662" start="7772" end="7785" title="Elgin Marbles" label="Elgin Marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="7825" end="7839" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="7897" end="7903" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207680" start="8272" end="8293" title="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi" label="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="8431" end="8447" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264894" start="8567" end="8579" title="Despatch Box" label="Despatch Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="8589" end="8596" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8648" end="8659" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q386813" start="8770" end="8781" title="The Archers" label="The Archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="8855" end="8874" title="the Today Programme" label="the Today Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q152239" start="8920" end="8936" title="HM Queen Camilla" label="HM Queen Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="8967" end="8982" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262318" start="9094" end="9105" title="Larry (cat)" label="Larry (cat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="9192" end="9201" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="9401" end="9410" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326210" start="9418" end="9437" title="Richard Hale School" label="Richard Hale School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9681" start="9441" end="9449" title="Hertford" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="9591" end="9602" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505718" start="9671" end="9705" title="Layton Rahmatulla Benevolent Trust" label="Layton Rahmatulla Benevolent Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="9835" end="9855" title="Royal British Legion" label="Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19359793" start="10059" end="10072" title="Michael Dobbs (American author)" label="Michael Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749261" start="10200" end="10214" title="House of Cards (novel)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993999" start="10448" end="10468" title="Whispers of Betrayal" label="Whispers of Betrayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026019" start="10516" end="10534" title="Winston&amp;#x27;s War" label="Winston&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004284" start="10556" end="10571" title="Never Surrender (novel)" label="Never Surrender"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383697" wikidata="Q347207" url="?curid=383697" title="G5">
<text>G5, G.V, G.5 or G-5 may refer to:
==Businesses and companies==
* G5 Entertainment, a video game developer and publisher; see list of PlayStation minis
* G5, IATA code for China Express Airlines

==Electronics and software==
* Canon PowerShot G5, a digital camera
* Dell G5 Series, a series of gaming laptops
* G5 bipin, a lamp standard
* LG G5, a smartphone developed by LG Electronics
* Logitech G5, a gaming mouse with variable weight and sensitivity settings
* Motorola G5 project, the failed Motorola PowerPC project to succeed its own PPC 74x
* PowerPC G5, the PowerPC 970 microprocessor from IBM
** iMac G5, an all-in-one desktop computer by Apple
** Power Mac G5, Apple&#x27;s marketing name for models of the Power Macintosh which contain the IBM PowerPC 970 CPU

==Groups and organizations==
* G5, former name for G6 (EU), a group of the largest West European countries
* G5 (universities), a grouping of five public research universities in England
* G5 Sahel, an alliance of five countries in West Africa
* Group of Five, five nations which have joined together for an active role in the rapidly evolving international order
* Group of Five conferences, college football conferences in the United States

==Military==
* G-5-class motor torpedo boat, a World War II Soviet torpedo boat
* G5 carbine, a Georgian assault rifle
* G5 howitzer, a South African howitzer
* PMMC G5, a German light tracked vehicle
* G.V (pronounced &quot;G5&quot;), a German designation for several World War I heavy bombers:
** AEG G.V, a biplane bomber aircraft of World War I, a further refinement of the AEG G.IV
** Gotha G.V, a heavy bomber used by the &quot;Luftstreitkräfte&quot; (Imperial German Air Service) during World War I

==Science ==
* G5 star, a subclass of G-class stars
* Group 5 element, part of the periodic table of elements
* Haplogroup G2c (Y-DNA), a human Y chromosome haplogroup, formerly known as haplogroup G5 (Y-DNA)

==Transportation==

===Aircraft===
* Fiat G.5, an Italian aerobatic tourer
* Gribovsky G-5, a Russian sport aircraft
* Gulfstream V, an American business jet

===Automobiles===
* BYD G5, a Chinese compact sedan
* Enranger G5, a Chinese compact crossover
* Gonow Aoosed GX5, a Chinese mid-size SUV previously known as G5
* Moskvitch G5, a Soviet Formula One car
* Pontiac G5, an American compact sedan/coupe
* Riich G5, a Chinese mid-size sedan

===Rail===
* G5, station number for Gaiemmae Station, of the Tokyo Metro Ginza Line
* LNER Class G5, the post-1923 designation for NER Class O steam locomotives
* PRR G5, a 4-6-0 steam locomotive built for the Pennsylvania Railroad
* Prussian G 5.1, Prussian G 5.4, and Prussian G 5.5 a series of 2-6-0 steam locomotives built for the Prussian state railroads

===Other uses in transportation===
* Yamaha Libero G5, a Japanese-Indian motorcycle
* G5 Beijing–Kunming Expressway
* Galactic 05 (G05), a Virgin Galactic suborbital tourist spaceflight in November 2023
* Mazda G5, a Mazda G engine

==Other uses==
* G5 paper, a Swedish paper format additional to SIS 014711

==See also==

* 5G (disambiguation)
* Go Gawa poetry club, an artistic group from early 19th century Japan and leading patron of surimono woodblock prints
* GV (disambiguation) 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347207" start="0" end="2" title="G5" label="G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q347207" start="4" end="7" title="G5" label="G.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q347207" start="9" end="12" title="G5" label="G.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q347207" start="16" end="19" title="G5" label="G-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594250" start="125" end="150" title="list of PlayStation minis" label="list of PlayStation minis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073273" start="171" end="193" title="China Express Airlines" label="China Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q727676" start="226" end="244" title="Canon PowerShot G5" label="Canon PowerShot G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746722" start="265" end="279" title="Dell G5 Series" label="Dell G5 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619226" start="313" end="318" title="bipin" label="bipin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906342" start="338" end="343" title="LG G5" label="LG G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861534" start="388" end="399" title="Logitech G5" label="Logitech G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918386" start="464" end="483" title="Motorola G5 project" label="Motorola G5 project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752061" start="550" end="560" title="PowerPC G5" label="PowerPC G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050381" start="605" end="612" title="iMac G5" label="iMac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="657" end="669" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484421" start="823" end="830" title="G6 (EU)" label="G6 (EU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073858" start="881" end="898" title="G5 (universities)" label="G5 (universities)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18816679" start="961" end="969" title="G5 Sahel" label="G5 Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720495" start="1018" end="1031" title="Group of Five" label="Group of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q56293230" start="1138" end="1163" title="Group of Five conferences" label="Group of Five conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987949" start="1231" end="1259" title="G-5-class motor torpedo boat" label="G-5-class motor torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512730" start="1298" end="1308" title="G5 carbine" label="G5 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q392144" start="1337" end="1348" title="G5 howitzer" label="G5 howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111725521" start="1377" end="1384" title="PMMC G5" label="PMMC G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761311" start="1515" end="1522" title="AEG G.V" label="AEG G.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q507530" start="1606" end="1615" title="Gotha G.V" label="Gotha G.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="1763" end="1774" title="Stellar classification" label="class stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193276" start="1777" end="1792" title="Group 5 element" label="Group 5 element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651803" start="1835" end="1857" title="Haplogroup G2c (Y-DNA)" label="Haplogroup G2c (Y-DNA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744453" start="1970" end="1978" title="Fiat G.5" label="Fiat G.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892556" start="2010" end="2023" title="Gribovsky G-5" label="Gribovsky G-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q386403" start="2052" end="2064" title="Gulfstream V" label="Gulfstream V"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604635" start="2112" end="2118" title="BYD G5" label="BYD G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q64214372" start="2146" end="2157" title="Enranger G5" label="Enranger G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q62014631" start="2189" end="2205" title="Gonow Aoosed GX5" label="Gonow Aoosed GX5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544968" start="2255" end="2267" title="Moskvitch G5" label="Moskvitch G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q877345" start="2296" end="2306" title="Pontiac G5" label="Pontiac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333921" start="2342" end="2350" title="Riich G5" label="Riich G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q275433" start="2414" end="2430" title="Gaiemmae Station" label="Gaiemmae Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953553" start="2464" end="2477" title="LNER Class G5" label="LNER Class G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120486" start="2541" end="2547" title="PRR G5" label="PRR G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q870096" start="2612" end="2626" title="Prussian G 5.1" label="Prussian G 5.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q321189" start="2628" end="2642" title="Prussian G 5.4" label="Prussian G 5.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109214" start="2648" end="2662" title="Prussian G 5.5" label="Prussian G 5.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047714" start="2776" end="2792" title="Yamaha Libero G5" label="Yamaha Libero G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q785374" start="2825" end="2854" title="G5 Beijing–Kunming Expressway" label="G5 Beijing–Kunming Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123286454" start="2857" end="2868" title="Galactic 05" label="Galactic 05"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2956" end="2970" title="Mazda G engine#G5" label="Mazda G engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q205299" start="3036" end="3046" title="SIS 014711" label="SIS 014711"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641059" start="3064" end="3083" title="5G (disambiguation)" label="5G (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049244" start="3086" end="3105" title="Go Gawa poetry club" label="Go Gawa poetry club"/>
<link wikidata="Q235259" start="3205" end="3224" title="GV (disambiguation)" label="GV (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383703" wikidata="Q957693" url="?curid=383703" title="Root locus analysis">
<text>In control theory and stability theory, root locus analysis is a graphical method for examining how the roots of a system change with variation of a certain system parameter, commonly a gain within a feedback system. This is a technique used as a stability criterion in the field of classical control theory developed by Walter R. Evans which can determine stability of the system. The root locus plots the poles of the closed loop transfer function in the complex &quot;s&quot;-plane as a function of a gain parameter (see pole–zero plot).
Evans also invented in 1948 an analog computer to compute root loci, called a &quot;Spirule&quot; (after &quot;spiral&quot; and &quot;slide rule&quot;); it found wide use before the advent of digital computers.

==Uses==

In addition to determining the stability of the system, the root locus can be used to design the damping ratio (&quot;ζ&quot;) and natural frequency (&quot;ω&quot;&quot;n&quot;) of a feedback system. Lines of constant damping ratio can be drawn radially from the origin and lines of constant natural frequency can be drawn as arccosine whose center points coincide with the origin. By selecting a point along the root locus that coincides with a desired damping ratio and natural frequency, a gain &quot;K&quot; can be calculated and implemented in the controller. More elaborate techniques of controller design using the root locus are available in most control textbooks: for instance, lag, lead, PI, PD and PID controllers can be designed approximately with this technique.

The definition of the damping ratio and natural frequency presumes that the overall feedback system is well approximated by a second order system; i.e. the system has a dominant pair of poles. This is often not the case, so it is good practice to simulate the final design to check if the project goals are satisfied.

==Definition==

The root locus of a feedback system is the graphical representation in the complex &quot;s&quot;-plane of the possible locations of its closed-loop poles for varying values of a certain system parameter. The points that are part of the root locus satisfy the angle condition. The value of the parameter for a certain point of the root locus can be obtained using the magnitude condition.

Suppose there is a feedback system with input signal formula_1 and output signal formula_2. The forward path transfer function is formula_3; the feedback path transfer function is formula_4.

For this system, the closed-loop transfer function is given by

:formula_5

Thus, the closed-loop poles of the closed-loop transfer function are the roots of the characteristic equation formula_6. The roots of this equation may be found wherever formula_7.

In systems without pure delay, the product formula_8 is a rational polynomial function and may be expressed as

:formula_9

where formula_10 are the formula_11 zeros, formula_12 are the formula_13 poles, and formula_14 is a scalar gain. Typically, a root locus diagram will indicate the transfer function&#x27;s pole locations for varying values of the parameter formula_14. A root locus plot will be all those points in the &quot;s&quot;-plane where formula_16 for any value of formula_14.

The factoring of formula_14 and the use of simple monomials means the evaluation of the rational polynomial can be done with vector techniques that add or subtract angles and multiply or divide magnitudes. The vector formulation arises from the fact that each monomial term formula_19 in the factored formula_8 represents the vector from formula_21 to formula_22 in the s-plane. The polynomial can be evaluated by considering the magnitudes and angles of each of these vectors.

According to vector mathematics, the angle of the result of the rational polynomial is the sum of all the angles in the numerator minus the sum of all the angles in the denominator. So to test whether a point in the &quot;s&quot;-plane is on the root locus, only the angles to all the open loop poles and zeros need be considered. This is known as the angle condition.

Similarly, the magnitude of the result of the rational polynomial is the product of all the magnitudes in the numerator divided by the product of all the magnitudes in the denominator. It turns out that the calculation of the magnitude is not needed to determine if a point in the s-plane is part of the root locus because formula_14 varies and can take an arbitrary real value. For each point of the root locus a value of formula_14 can be calculated. This is known as the magnitude condition.

The root locus only gives the location of closed loop poles as the gain formula_14 is varied. The value of formula_14 does not affect the location of the zeros. The open-loop zeros are the same as the closed-loop zeros.

===Angle condition===
A point formula_22 of the complex &quot;s&quot;-plane satisfies the angle condition if

:formula_28

which is the same as saying that

:formula_29

that is, the sum of the angles from the open-loop zeros to the point formula_22 (measured per zero w.r.t. a horizontal running through that zero) minus the angles from the open-loop poles to the point formula_22 (measured per pole w.r.t. a horizontal running through that pole) has to be equal to formula_32, or 180 degrees. Note that these interpretations should not be mistaken for the angle differences between the point formula_22 and the zeros/poles.

===Magnitude condition===
A value of formula_14 satisfies the magnitude condition for a given formula_22 point of the root locus if

:formula_36

which is the same as saying that

:formula_37.

==Sketching root locus==
Using a few basic rules, the root locus method can plot the overall shape of the path (locus) traversed by the roots as the value of formula_14 varies. The plot of the root locus then gives an idea of the stability and dynamics of this feedback system for different values of formula_14. The rules are the following:
* Mark open-loop poles and zeros
* Mark real axis portion to the left of an odd number of poles and zeros
* Find asymptotes

Let &quot;P&quot; be the number of poles and &quot;Z&quot; be the number of zeros:

:formula_40

The asymptotes intersect the real axis at formula_41 (which is called the centroid) and depart at angle formula_42 given by:

:formula_43

:formula_44

where formula_45 is the sum of all the locations of the poles, formula_46 is the sum of all the locations of the explicit zeros and formula_47 denotes that we are only interested in the real part.
* Phase condition on test point to find angle of departure
* Compute breakaway/break-in points

The breakaway points are located at the roots of the following equation:

:formula_48

Once you solve for &quot;z&quot;, the real roots give you the breakaway/reentry points. Complex roots correspond to a lack of breakaway/reentry.

==Plotting root locus==
Given the general closed-loop denominator rational polynomial

:formula_49

the characteristic equation can be simplified to

:formula_50

The solutions of formula_22 to this equation are the root loci of the closed-loop transfer function.

===Example===

Given

:formula_52

we will have the characteristic equation

:formula_53

The following MATLAB code will plot the root locus of the closed-loop transfer function as formula_14 varies using the described manual method as well as the codice_1 built-in function:
% Manual method
K_array = (0:0.1:220).&#x27;; % .&#x27; is a transpose. Looking up in Matlab documentation.
NK = length(K_array);
x_array = zeros(NK, 3);
y_array = zeros(NK, 3);

for nK = 1:NK
 K = K_array(nK);
 C = [1, 3, (5 + K), (1 + 3*K)];
 r = roots(C).&#x27;;
 x_array(nK,:) = real(r);
 y_array(nK,:) = imag(r);
end

figure();
plot(x_array, y_array);
grid on;

% Built-in method
sys = tf([1, 3], [1, 3, 5, 1]);
figure();
rlocus(sys);
The following Python code can also be used to calculate and plot the root locus of the closed-loop transfer function using the Python Control Systems Library and Matplotlib.
import control as ct
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# Define the transfer function
sys = ct.TransferFunction([1, 3], [1, 3, 5, 1])

# Calculate and plot the root locus
roots, gains = ct.root_locus(sys, plot=True)
plt.show()
==&quot;z&quot;-plane versus &quot;s&quot;-plane==

The root locus method can also be used for the analysis of sampled data systems by computing the root locus in the &quot;z&quot;-plane, the discrete counterpart of the &quot;s&quot;-plane. The equation maps continuous &quot;s&quot;-plane poles (not zeros) into the &quot;z&quot;-domain, where is the sampling period. The stable, left half &quot;s&quot;-plane maps into the interior of the unit circle of the &quot;z&quot;-plane, with the &quot;s&quot;-plane origin equating to &quot;|z|&quot; = 1 (because &quot;e&quot;0 = 1). A diagonal line of constant damping in the &quot;s&quot;-plane maps around a spiral from (1,0) in the &quot;z&quot; plane as it curves in toward the origin. The Nyquist aliasing criteria is expressed graphically in the &quot;z&quot;-plane by the &quot;x&quot;-axis, where . The line of constant damping just described spirals in indefinitely but in sampled data systems, frequency content is aliased down to lower frequencies by integral multiples of the Nyquist frequency. That is, the sampled response appears as a lower frequency and better damped as well since the root in the &quot;z&quot;-plane maps equally well to the first loop of a different, better damped spiral curve of constant damping. Many other interesting and relevant mapping properties can be described, not least that &quot;z&quot;-plane controllers, having the property that they may be directly implemented from the &quot;z&quot;-plane transfer function (zero/pole ratio of polynomials), can be imagined graphically on a &quot;z&quot;-plane plot of the open loop transfer function, and immediately analyzed utilizing root locus.

Since root locus is a graphical angle technique, root locus rules work the same in the and planes.

The idea of a root locus can be applied to many systems where a single parameter is varied. For example, it is useful to sweep any system parameter for which the exact value is uncertain in order to determine its behavior.

==See also==
* Phase margin
* Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion
* Nyquist stability criterion
* Gain and phase margin
* Bode plot

== References ==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Carnegie Mellon / University of Michigan Tutorial
* Excellent examples. Start with example 5 and proceed backwards through 4 to 1. Also visit the main page
* The root-locus method: Drawing by hand techniques
* &quot;RootLocs&quot;: A free multi-featured root-locus plotter for Mac and Windows platforms
* &quot;Root Locus&quot;: A free root-locus plotter/analyzer for Windows
* Root Locus at ControlTheoryPro.com
* Root Locus Analysis of Control Systems
* MATLAB function for computing root locus of a SISO open-loop model
* Mathematica function for plotting the root locus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="3" end="17" title="control theory" label="control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756677" start="22" end="38" title="stability theory" label="stability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="40" end="59" title="Root locus analysis" label="root locus analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="164" end="173" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271153" start="186" end="190" title="Loop gain" label="gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="200" end="208" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883749" start="247" end="266" title="stability criterion" label="stability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109592" start="283" end="307" title="classical control theory" label="classical control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q556579" start="321" end="336" title="Walter R. Evans" label="Walter R. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424738" start="357" end="366" title="stable polynomial" label="stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q899731" start="407" end="412" title="zeros and poles" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477205" start="420" end="449" title="closed loop transfer function" label="closed loop transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="465" end="484" title="s-plane" label="&amp;quot;s&amp;quot;-plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100961" start="524" end="538" title="pole–zero plot" label="pole–zero plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="572" end="587" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190667" start="675" end="685" title="slide rule" label="slide rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="733" end="749" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127660" start="860" end="873" title="damping ratio" label="damping ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14394" start="881" end="882" title="Zeta" label="ζ"/>
<link wikidata="Q946764" start="894" end="911" title="natural frequency" label="natural frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508813" start="1451" end="1460" title="Lead-lag compensator" label="lag, lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q716829" start="1473" end="1476" title="PID controller" label="PID"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127660" start="1563" end="1576" title="damping ratio" label="damping ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q946764" start="1581" end="1598" title="natural frequency" label="natural frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="1959" end="1978" title="s-plane" label="&amp;quot;s&amp;quot;-plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135313" start="2012" end="2029" title="closed-loop poles" label="closed-loop poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="2243" end="2262" title="magnitude condition" label="magnitude condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="2374" end="2391" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477205" start="2478" end="2507" title="closed-loop transfer function" label="closed-loop transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q899731" start="2875" end="2880" title="zeros and poles" label="zeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="5259" end="5266" title="Degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q179436" start="6049" end="6058" title="asymptote" label="asymptote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410146" start="8328" end="8348" title="sampled data systems" label="sampled data systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="8384" end="8403" title="z-transform" label="&amp;quot;z&amp;quot;-plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="8965" end="8973" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="9251" end="9268" title="Nyquist frequency" label="Nyquist frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180955" start="10238" end="10250" title="Phase margin" label="Phase margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621270" start="10253" end="10286" title="Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion" label="Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="10289" end="10316" title="Nyquist stability criterion" label="Nyquist stability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10319" end="10340" title="Bode plot#Gain margin and phase margin" label="Gain and phase margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q245627" start="10343" end="10352" title="Bode plot" label="Bode plot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383705" wikidata="Q1045191" url="?curid=383705" title="D-subminiature">
<text>The D-subminiature or D-sub is a common type of electrical connector. They are named for their characteristic D-shaped metal shield. When they were introduced, D-subs were among the smallest connectors used on computer systems.

==Description, nomenclature, and variants==


A D-sub contains two or more parallel rows of pins or sockets usually surrounded by a D-shaped metal shield, or shell, that provides mechanical support, ensures correct orientation, and may screen against electromagnetic interference. Calling that shield a shell (or D-shell) can be ambiguous, as the term shell is also short for the cable shell, or backshell. D-sub connectors have gender: parts with pin contacts are called &quot;male connectors&quot; or &quot;plugs&quot;, while those with socket contacts are called &quot;female connectors&quot; or &quot;sockets&quot;. The socket&#x27;s shield fits tightly inside the plug&#x27;s shield. Panel-mounted connectors usually have #4-40 UNC (as designated with the Unified Thread Standard) jackscrews that accept screws on the cable end connector cover that are used for locking the connectors together and offering mechanical strain relief, and can be tightened with a 3/16&quot; (or 5mm) hex socket. 

The hexagonal standoffs (4-40 bolts) at both sides of each connector have a threaded stud fastening the connectors to the metal panel. They also have threaded sockets to receive jackscrews on the cable shell, holding the plug and socket together.
Occasionally the nuts may be found on a cable end connector if it is expected to connect to another cable end (see the male DE-9 pictured). When screened cables are used, the shields are connected to the overall screens of the cables. This creates an electrically continuous screen covering the whole cable and connector system.

The D-sub series of connectors was introduced by Cannon in 1952. Cannon&#x27;s part-numbering system uses &quot;D&quot; as the prefix for the whole series, followed by one of &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, &quot;C&quot;, &quot;D&quot;, or &quot;E&quot; denoting the shell size, followed by the number of pins or sockets, followed by either &quot;P&quot; (plug or pins) or &quot;S&quot; (socket) denoting the gender of the part. Each shell size usually (see below for exceptions) corresponds to a certain number of pins or sockets: A with 15, B with 25, C with 37, D with 50, and E with 9. For example, &quot;DB-25&quot; denotes a D-sub with a 25-position shell size and a 25-position contact configuration. The contacts in each row of these connectors are spaced 326/3000 of an inch apart, or approximately , and the rows are spaced apart; the pins in the two rows are offset by half the distance between adjacent contacts in a row. This spacing is called &quot;normal density&quot;. The suffixes &quot;M&quot; and &quot;F&quot; (for male and female) are sometimes used instead of the original &quot;P&quot; and &quot;S&quot; for plug and socket.

=== Variants ===

Later D-sub connectors added extra pins to the original shell sizes, and their names follow the same pattern. For example, the DE-15, usually found in VGA cables, has 15 pins in three rows, all surrounded by an E size shell. The pins are spaced at horizontally and vertically, in what is called &quot;high density&quot;. The other connectors with the same pin spacing are the DA-26, DB-44, DC-62, DD-78 and 104-pin. They all have three rows of pins, except the DD-78 which has four, and the 104-pin which has five rows. The &quot;double density&quot; series of D-sub connectors features even denser arrangements and consists of the DE-19, DA-31, DB-52, DC-79, and DD-100. These each have three rows of pins, except the DD-100, which has four.

====Common misnomers====
The above naming pattern was not always followed. Because personal computers first used DB-25 connectors for their serial and parallel ports, when the PC serial port began to use 9-pin connectors, they were often labeled as DB-9 instead of DE-9 connectors, due to an ignorance of the fact that &quot;B&quot; represented a shell size. It is now common to see DE-9 connectors sold as DB-9 connectors. &quot;DB-9&quot; nearly always refers to a 9-pin connector with an E-size shell. The non-standard 23-pin D-sub connectors for external floppy drives and video output on most of the Amiga computers are usually labeled &quot;DB-23&quot;, even though their shell size is two pins smaller than ordinary DB sockets. Several computers also used a non-standard 19-pin D-sub connector, sometimes called DB-19, including Macintosh (external floppy drive), Atari ST (external hard drive), and NeXT (Megapixel Display monitor and laser printer).

Reflecting the same confusion of the letters &quot;DB&quot; with just &quot;D&quot; as mentioned above, high-density connectors are also often called DB-15HD (or even DB-15 or HD-15), DB-26HD (HD-26), DB-44HD, DB-62HD, and DB-78HD connectors, respectively, where &quot;HD&quot; stands for &quot;high density&quot;.

Cannon also produced &quot;combo&quot; D-subs with larger contacts in place of some of the normal contacts, for use for high-current, high-voltage, or co-axial inserts. The DB13W3 variant was commonly used for high-performance video connections; this variant provided 10 regular (#20) pins plus three coaxial contacts for the red, green, and blue video signals. Combo D-subs are currently manufactured in a broad range of configurations by other companies. Some variants have current ratings up to 40 A; others are waterproof and meet IP67 standards.

A further family of connectors of similar appearance to the D-sub family uses names such as &quot;HD-50&quot; and &quot;HD-68&quot;, and has a D-shaped shell about half the width of a DB-25. They are common in SCSI attachments.

The original D-sub connectors are now defined by an international standard, IEC 60807-3 / DIN 41652. The United States military also maintains another specification for D-subminiature connectors, the MIL-DTL-24308 standard.

=== Micro-D and Nano-D ===

Smaller connectors have been derived from the D-sub including the &quot;microminiature D (micro-D)&quot; and &quot;nanominiature D (nano-D)&quot; which are trademarks of ITT Cannon. Micro-D is about half the length of a D-sub and Nano-D is about half the length of Micro-D. Their primary applications are in military and space-grade technology such as SpaceWire networks. The MIL-SPEC for Micro-D is MIL-DTL-83513 and for Nano-D is MIL-DTL-32139.

==Typical applications==
===Communications ports===
The widest application of D-subs is for RS-232 serial communications, though the standard did not make this connector mandatory. RS-232 devices originally used the DB-25, but for many applications the less common signals were omitted, allowing a DE-9 to be used. The standard specifies a male connector for terminal equipment and a female connector for modems, but many variations exist. IBM PC-compatible computers tend to have male connectors at the device and female connectors at the modems. Early Apple Macintosh models used DE-9 connectors for RS-422 multi-drop serial interfaces (which can operate as RS-232). Later Macintosh models use 8-pin miniature DIN connectors instead.

On PCs, 25-pin and (beginning with the IBM PC/AT) 9-pin plugs were used for the RS-232 serial ports; 25-pin sockets were used for parallel ports (instead of the Centronics port found on the printer itself, which was inconveniently large for direct placement on the expansion cards).

Many uninterruptible power supply units have a DE-9F connector on them in order to signal to the attached computer via an RS-232 interface. Often these do not send data serially to the computer but instead use the handshaking control lines to indicate low battery, power failure, or other conditions. Such usage is not standardized between manufacturers and may require special cables.

===Network ports===
DE-9 connectors were used for some Token Ring networks as well as other computer networks.
Originally in the 1980s Ethernet network interface cards or devices were connected using Attachment Unit Interface (AUI) cables to Medium Attachment Units that then connected to 10BASE5 and later 10BASE2 or 10BASE-T network cabling. The AUI cables used DA-15 connectors albeit with a sliding latch to lock the connectors together instead of the usual hex studs with threaded holes. The sliding latch was intended to be quicker to engage and disengage and to work in places where jackscrews could not be used for reasons of component shape.

In vehicles, DE-9 connectors are commonly used in Controller Area Networks (CAN): female connectors are on the bus while male connectors are on devices.

===Computer video output===

==== DE-9 connectors ====
A female 9-pin connector on an IBM compatible personal computer may be a digital RGBI video display output such as MDA, Hercules, CGA, or EGA (rarely VGA or others). Even though these all use the same DE-9 connector, the displays cannot all be interchanged and monitors or video interfaces may be damaged if connected to an incompatible device using the same connector.

==== DE-15 connectors ====
Later analog video (VGA and later) adapters generally replaced DE-9 connectors with DE-15 high-density sockets (though some early VGA devices still used DE-9 connectors). DE-15 connectors have the same shell size as DE-9 connectors (see above). The additional pins of the DE-15 VGA connector were used to add increasingly sophisticated monitor-sensing plug and play functionality.

==== DA-15 connectors ====
Many Apple Macintosh models, beginning with the Macintosh II, used DA-15 sockets for analog RGB video out. These connectors had the same number of pins as the above DE-15 connectors, but used the more traditional pin size, pin spacing, and size shell of the DA-15 standard connector. &quot;VGA adapters&quot; (i.e. DA-15 to DE-15 dongles) were available but sometimes monitor-specific, or they needed DIP switch configuration, as the Macintosh&#x27;s monitor sense pins in particular were not identical with a VGA connector&#x27;s DDC.

The earlier Apple IIGS used the same physical DA-15 connector for the same purpose but with an incompatible pinout. A digital (and thus also incompatible) RGB adapter for the Apple IIe also used a DA-15F. The Apple IIc used a DA-15F for an auxiliary video port which was not RGB but provided the necessary signals to derive RGB.
===Game controller ports===

==== DE-9 connectors ====
The 1977 Atari Video Computer System game console uses modified DE-9 connectors (male on the system, female on the cable) for its game controller connectors. The Atari joystick ports have bodies entirely of molded plastic without the metal shield, and they omit the pair of fastening screws. In the years following, various video game consoles and home computers adopted the same connector for their own game ports, though they were not all interoperable. The most common wiring supported five connections for discrete signals (five switches, for up, down, left, and right movement, and a fire button), plus one pair of 100 kΩ potentiometers, or paddles, for analog input. Some computers supported additional buttons, and on some computers additional devices, such as a computer mouse, a light pen, or a graphics tablet were also supported via the game port. Unlike the basic one-button digital joysticks and the basic paddles, such devices were not typically interchangeable between different systems.

Systems using the DE-9 connector for their game port include the TI-99/4A, Atari 8-bit computers, Atari ST, Atari 7800, VIC-20, Commodore 64, Commodore 128, Amiga, Amstrad CPC (which employs daisy-chaining when connecting two Amstrad-specific joysticks), MSX, X68000, FM Towns, ColecoVision, SG-1000, Master System, Mega Drive/Genesis, and the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer.

The ZX Spectrum lacks a built-in joystick connector of any kind but aftermarket interfaces provided the ability to connect DE-9 joysticks. NEC&#x27;s home computers (e.g. PC-88, PC-98) also used DE-9 connectors for game controllers, depending on the sound card used.

The Fairchild Channel F System II and Bally Astrocade use DE-9 connectors for their detachable joystick as well. Both are incompatible with the Atari connector.

Many Apple II computers also use DE-9 connectors for joysticks, but they have a female port on the computer and a male on the controller, use analog rather than digital sticks, and the pinout is completely unlike that used on the aforementioned systems. DE-9 connectors were not used for game ports on the Macintosh, Apple III, IBM PC compatibles, or most game consoles outside the aforementioned examples. Sega switched to proprietary controller ports for the Saturn and Dreamcast.

==== DA-15 connectors ====

DA-15S connectors are used for PC joystick connectors, where each DA-15 connector supports two joysticks each with two analog axes and two buttons. In other words, one DA-15S &quot;game adapter&quot; connector has 4 analog potentiometer inputs and 4 digital switch inputs. This interface is strictly input-only, though it does provide +5 V DC power. Some joysticks with more than two axes or more than two buttons use the signals designated for both joysticks. Conversely, Y-adapter cables are available that allow two separate joysticks to be connected to a single DA-15 game adapter port; if a joystick connected to one of these Y-adapters has more than two axes or buttons, only the first two of each will work.

The IBM DA-15 PC game connector has been modified to add a (usually MPU-401 compatible) MIDI interface, and this is often implemented in the game connectors on third-party sound cards, for example, the Sound Blaster line from Creative Labs. The &quot;standard&quot; straight game adapter connector (introduced by IBM) has three ground pins and four +5 V power pins, and the MIDI adaptation replaces one of the grounds and one of the +5 V pins, both on the bottom row of pins, with MIDI In and MIDI Out signal pins. (There is no MIDI Thru provided.) Creative Labs introduced this adaptation.

The Neo Geo AES game console also used the DA-15 connector, however, the pins are wired differently and it is therefore not compatible with the regular DA-15 PC game controllers.

The Nintendo Famicom&#x27;s controllers were hardwired but also included a DA-15 expansion port for additional controllers. Many clones of the hardware used a DA-15 which implemented a subset of the Famicom expansion port and were therefore compatible with some Famicom accessories. Later clones switched to the cheaper DE-9 port.

The Atari 5200 also used a DA-15 instead of the DE-9 of its predecessor to facilitate the matrix for the keypad. The Atari Falcon, Atari STe and Atari Jaguar used a DE-15.

===Other===
25-pin sockets on Macintosh computers are typically single-ended SCSI connectors, combining all signal returns into one contact (again in contrast to the Centronics C50 connector typically found on the peripheral, supplying a separate return contact for each signal), while older Sun hardware uses DD-50 connectors for Fast-SCSI equipment. As SCSI variants from Ultra2 onwards used differential signaling, the Macintosh DB-25 SCSI interface became obsolete.

D-subminiature connectors are often used in industrial products, the DA-15 version being commonly used on rotary and linear encoders.

The early Macintosh and late Apple II computers used a non-standard 19-pin D-sub for connecting external floppy disk drives. Atari also used this connector on their 16-bit computer range for attaching hard disk drives and the Atari laser printer, where it was known as both the ACSI (Atari Computer System Interface) port and the DMA bus port. The Commodore Amiga used an equally non-standard 23-pin version for both its video output (male) and its port for daisy-chaining up to three extra external floppy disk drives (female).

In professional audio, several connections use DB-25 connectors:
* TASCAM and many others are using a connection over DB-25 connectors, which has been standardized into AES59. This connection transports AES3 digital audio or analog audio using the same pinout.
* TASCAM initially used their TDIF connection over DB-25 connectors for their multitrack recording audio equipment. The transported signals are not AES3 compatible.
* Roland used DB-25 connectors for their multi-track recording audio equipment (R-BUS). A few patch panels have been made which have the DB-25 connectors on the back with phone jacks (or even TRS phone connectors) on the front, however, these are normally wired for TASCAM, which is more common outside of broadcasting.

In broadcast and professional video, &quot;parallel digital&quot; is a digital video interface that uses DB-25 connectors, per the SMPTE 274M specification adopted in the late 1990s. The more common SMPTE 259M serial digital interface (SDI) uses BNC connectors for digital video signal transfer.

DC-37 connectors are commonly used in hospital facilities as an interface between hospital beds and nurse call systems, allowing for the connection and signaling of Nurse Call, Bed Exit, and Cord out including TV entertainment and lighting controls.
The comparatively rare DC-37 connector was also found as the so-called &quot;GeekPort&quot; electronics experimentation breakout connector on the even rarer BeBox computer.

DB-25 connectors are commonly used to carry analog signals for beam displacement and color control to laser projectors, as specified in the ISP-DB25 protocol published by the International Laser Display Association.

==Wire-contact attachment types==

There are many different methods used to attach wires to the contacts in D-sub connectors.

* &quot;Solder-bucket&quot; (or &quot;solder-cup&quot;) contacts have a cavity into which the stripped wire is inserted and hand-soldered.
* &quot;Insulation displacement&quot; contacts (IDCs) allow a ribbon cable to be forced onto sharp tines on the back of the contacts; this action pierces the insulation of all the wires simultaneously. This is a very quick means of assembly whether done by hand or machine.
* &quot;Crimp&quot; contacts are assembled by inserting a stripped wire end into a cavity in the rear of the contact, then crushing the cavity using a crimp tool, causing the cavity to grip the wire tightly at many points. The crimped contact is then inserted into the connector where it locks into place. Individual crimped pins can be removed later by inserting a special tool into the rear of the connector.
* &quot;PCB pins&quot; are soldered directly to a printed circuit board and not to a wire. Traditionally through hole plated (THP) board style pins were used (&quot;print&quot;) but increasingly gull-wing surface mount (SMD) connections are used, although the latter frequently exhibit solder pad contact problems when exposed to mechanical stress. These connectors are frequently mounted at a right angle to the PCB, allowing a cable to be plugged into the edge of the PCB assembly.
* &quot;Wire wrap&quot; connections are made by wrapping solid wire around a square post with a wire wrap tool. This type of connection is often used in developing prototypes.

The wire wrap and IDC connections styles had to contend with incompatible pin spacing to the ribbon cable or proto board grid, especially for larger pin counts.

==See also==
* Micro ribbon connector

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Comprehensive DB-25 wiring diagrams: Tascam, Apple, SCSI, etc.
* A list of common computer connectors, including most D-sub.
* Devices with DE-9 connectors.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="4" end="18" title="D-subminiature" label="D-subminiature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="22" end="27" title="D-subminiature" label="D-sub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="48" end="68" title="electrical connector" label="electrical connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="480" end="508" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531000" start="658" end="664" title="Gender of connectors and fasteners" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579138" start="990" end="1013" title="Unified Thread Standard" label="Unified Thread Standard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1015" end="1025" title="Jackscrew#In electronic connectors" label="jackscrews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1254" end="1264" title="Computer case screws#4-40 jackscrews" label="4-40 bolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118690" start="1407" end="1416" title="jackscrew" label="jackscrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506009" start="1621" end="1635" title="screened cable" label="screened cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974931" start="1855" end="1861" title="Cannon (company)" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531000" start="2213" end="2219" title="Gender of connectors and fasteners" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q539719" start="3122" end="3125" title="VGA connector" label="VGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="3855" end="3861" title="Serial port" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="3866" end="3874" title="Parallel port" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="4320" end="4325" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4586" end="4594" title="Atari ST#Port connections" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983886" start="4628" end="4645" title="NeXT MegaPixel Display" label="Megapixel Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983885" start="4658" end="4671" title="NeXT Laser Printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q595385" start="5164" end="5170" title="DB13W3" label="DB13W3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977384" start="5467" end="5482" title="ampacity" label="current ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q284700" start="5526" end="5530" title="IP67" label="IP67"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="5753" end="5757" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q152746" start="5862" end="5865" title="DIN" label="DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863230" start="5972" end="5985" title="U.S. Military connector specifications" label="MIL-DTL-24308"/>
<link wikidata="Q674249" start="6377" end="6395" title="SpaceWire" label="SpaceWire networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q919510" start="6401" end="6409" title="MIL-SPEC" label="MIL-SPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="6565" end="6571" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="7027" end="7042" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q608019" start="7075" end="7081" title="RS-422" label="RS-422"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359217" start="7175" end="7188" title="Mini-DIN connector" label="miniature DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="7249" end="7258" title="IBM Personal Computer/AT" label="IBM PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="7340" end="7353" title="parallel port" label="parallel port"/>
<link wikidata="Q763131" start="7371" end="7386" title="Centronics port" label="Centronics port"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="7499" end="7527" title="uninterruptible power supply" label="uninterruptible power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="7577" end="7583" title="signal (computing)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207971" start="7936" end="7946" title="Token Ring" label="Token Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="7973" end="7989" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="8016" end="8024" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="8025" end="8047" title="network interface card" label="network interface card"/>
<link wikidata="Q757852" start="8081" end="8106" title="Attachment Unit Interface" label="Attachment Unit Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976547" start="8123" end="8145" title="Medium Attachment Unit" label="Medium Attachment Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q169045" start="8170" end="8177" title="10BASE5" label="10BASE5"/>
<link wikidata="Q169033" start="8188" end="8195" title="10BASE2" label="10BASE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="8199" end="8207" title="10BASE-T" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q728183" start="8583" end="8606" title="Controller Area Network" label="Controller Area Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="8773" end="8787" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629000" start="8823" end="8827" title="RGBI interface" label="RGBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q849817" start="8857" end="8860" title="IBM Monochrome Display Adapter" label="MDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q731861" start="8862" end="8870" title="Hercules Graphics Card" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q725893" start="8872" end="8875" title="Color Graphics Adapter" label="CGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q523204" start="8880" end="8883" title="Enhanced Graphics Adapter" label="EGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194" start="9160" end="9163" title="Video Graphics Array" label="VGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q539719" start="9224" end="9242" title="VGA connector" label="DE-15 high-density"/>
<link wikidata="Q857815" start="9492" end="9505" title="plug and play" label="plug and play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887587" start="9950" end="9960" title="DIP switch" label="DIP switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229213" start="10080" end="10083" title="Display Data Channel" label="DDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282269" start="10098" end="10108" title="Apple IIGS" label="Apple IIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517415" start="10194" end="10200" title="pinout" label="pinout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761667" start="10261" end="10270" title="Apple IIe" label="Apple IIe"/>
<link wikidata="Q420782" start="10295" end="10304" title="Apple IIc" label="Apple IIc"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="10479" end="10506" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari Video Computer System"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="10600" end="10615" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906508" start="10632" end="10651" title="Atari joystick port" label="Atari joystick port"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="10818" end="10831" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127054" start="10874" end="10883" title="game port" label="game port"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="11094" end="11096" title="Ohm" label="kΩ"/>
<link wikidata="Q449573" start="11116" end="11123" title="Paddle (game controller)" label="paddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="11240" end="11254" title="computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20139" start="11258" end="11267" title="light pen" label="light pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="11274" end="11289" title="graphics tablet" label="graphics tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="11365" end="11373" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q454390" start="11539" end="11547" title="TI-99/4A" label="TI-99/4A"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="11549" end="11570" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="11572" end="11580" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q753600" start="11582" end="11592" title="Atari 7800" label="Atari 7800"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="11594" end="11600" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="11602" end="11614" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115919" start="11616" end="11629" title="Commodore 128" label="Commodore 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="11631" end="11636" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="11638" end="11649" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="11665" end="11676" title="Daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy-chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="11729" end="11732" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758277" start="11734" end="11740" title="X68000" label="X68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q531896" start="11742" end="11750" title="FM Towns" label="FM Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046862" start="11752" end="11764" title="ColecoVision" label="ColecoVision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136956" start="11766" end="11773" title="SG-1000" label="SG-1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="11775" end="11788" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="11790" end="11808" title="Sega Genesis" label="Mega Drive/Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="11818" end="11845" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO Interactive Multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="11852" end="11863" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="11987" end="11990" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338888" start="12019" end="12024" title="PC-8800 Series" label="PC-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q183505" start="12026" end="12031" title="PC-9800 Series" label="PC-98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="12098" end="12108" title="sound card" label="sound card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12120" end="12149" title="Fairchild Channel F#Channel F System II" label="Fairchild Channel F System II"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="12283" end="12291" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q420769" start="12595" end="12604" title="Apple III" label="Apple III"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="12606" end="12623" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="12739" end="12745" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="12750" end="12759" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q907708" start="13574" end="13581" title="MPU-401" label="MPU-401"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="13594" end="13598" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q726912" start="13708" end="13721" title="Sound Blaster" label="Sound Blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q477016" start="13732" end="13745" title="Creative Labs" label="Creative Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054350" start="14102" end="14109" title="Neo Geo (system)" label="Neo Geo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="14282" end="14290" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="14291" end="14298" title="Famicom" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982516" start="14407" end="14413" title="Famiclones" label="clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q743222" start="14614" end="14624" title="Atari 5200" label="Atari 5200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398229" start="14700" end="14706" title="Keyboard matrix circuit" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q753619" start="14727" end="14739" title="Atari Falcon" label="Atari Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14741" end="14750" title="Atari ST#STE models" label="Atari STe"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="14755" end="14767" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="14860" end="14864" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="15075" end="15078" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q53699" start="15360" end="15366" title="rotary encoder" label="rotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553439" start="15371" end="15385" title="linear encoder" label="linear encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="15418" end="15426" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="15494" end="15505" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="15554" end="15569" title="Atari ST" label="16-bit computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="15590" end="15605" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="15621" end="15634" title="laser printing" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="15719" end="15722" title="direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="15747" end="15752" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746217" start="15806" end="15829" title="Amiga video connector" label="its video output (male)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203336" start="15966" end="15982" title="D-subminiature (professional audio)" label="DB-25 connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055169" start="15986" end="15992" title="TASCAM" label="TASCAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16088" end="16093" title="AES59" label="AES59"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929514" start="16122" end="16126" title="AES3" label="AES3"/>
<link wikidata="Q634786" start="16210" end="16214" title="Tascam Digital Interface" label="TDIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="16258" end="16278" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="16347" end="16353" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="16386" end="16407" title="multi-track recording" label="multi-track recording"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16425" end="16430" title="R-BUS" label="R-BUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570652" start="16439" end="16450" title="patch panel" label="patch panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q956085" start="16516" end="16526" title="telephone jack and plug" label="phone jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="16537" end="16557" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="TRS phone connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="16651" end="16663" title="broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="16737" end="16750" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892763" start="16797" end="16807" title="SMPTE 274M" label="SMPTE 274M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302333" start="16865" end="16875" title="SMPTE 259M" label="SMPTE 259M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756325" start="16876" end="16900" title="serial digital interface" label="serial digital interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q906097" start="16912" end="16925" title="BNC connector" label="BNC connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q812806" start="17290" end="17298" title="GeekPort" label="GeekPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644080" start="17333" end="17351" title="breakout connector" label="breakout connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q812806" start="17370" end="17375" title="BeBox" label="BeBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349740" start="17562" end="17601" title="International Laser Display Association" label="International Laser Display Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q374830" start="17878" end="17901" title="Insulation-displacement connector" label="Insulation displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187223" start="17932" end="17944" title="ribbon cable" label="ribbon cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="18605" end="18626" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004377" start="18660" end="18679" title="Through-hole technology" label="through hole plated"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="18760" end="18773" title="Surface-mount technology" label="surface mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q605181" start="19047" end="19056" title="Wire wrap" label="Wire wrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q16676348" start="19393" end="19415" title="Micro ribbon connector" label="Micro ribbon connector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383715" wikidata="Q7062838" url="?curid=383715" title="Nothing So Strange">
<text>Nothing So Strange is a 2002 American mockumentary film written, produced and directed by Brian Flemming in the style of an &quot;independent documentary&quot;. It centers on the fictional assassination of Microsoft founder Bill Gates on December 2, 1999. The film won the New York Times Claiborne Pell Award for Original Vision at the Newport Film Festival and received a positive reception from &quot;Variety&quot;.

== Plot ==

At the very beginning of the film, Bill Gates (played by Gates double Steve Sires) walks onto the stage of the pavilion in MacArthur Park, Los Angeles, California on Thursday, December 2, 1999, to give a check for one million dollars to &quot;Literacy For Life&quot; as part of the &quot;Bill Gates Foundation.&quot; (The filmmakers intentionally avoided mentioning Gates&#x27; family members in the film; thus, they refrain from naming the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation.) Upon reaching the stage, Gates is shot dead by a sniper, first in the right shoulder, then the head.

While chasing after the unknown sniper through an abandoned building, a rookie police officer fatally shoots Alek J. Hidell (a known alias of JFK killer Lee Harvey Oswald), a minor anti-establishment figure and minority, in the head. Hiddell is named as the assassin of Gates, a report to this effect is filed by district attorney Gil Garcetti, and the case is closed.

Beyond this point, which occurs before the opening credits are finished, Gates does not reappear and is mentioned only as a wealthy, successful man and the subject of the assassination being investigated. The word &quot;Microsoft&quot; barely makes an appearance in the film, and Gates is portrayed as a well-liked and missed public figure; a very passing mention is made of the existence of anti-Gates sentiment.

However, a group of people dissatisfied with the official version of events organizes into the activist group Citizens for Truth, and sets out to examine the available evidence of the assassination. The organization uncovers numerous details that create reasonable doubt as to the guilt of Hiddell in the assassination, and the possibility that the real assassin is still at large.

The mockumentary follows the organization as they grow in numbers, political prominence, and progress in their investigative efforts. The organization&#x27;s success reaches a climax at their first annual convention, which is followed by their rapid drop in credibility and visibility to become effectively irrelevant.

== Cast ==
* Laurie Pike as Debra Meagher
* David James as David James
* Mark Daniel Cade as Mark Anderson
* Keythe Farley as Keith Charles
* Douglas Glazer as Dan Rivera
* Valerie Gordon as Valerie
* Etana Jacobson as Etana
* Jennifer Lauren as Jennifer Smith
* Steve Sires as Bill Gates
* Sarah Stanley as Julia Serrano
* Philip Anthony Traylor as Alek Hidell
* Steve Wilcox as Steve Martinez
* Didi Williams as himself

== Production ==
Flemming was inspired to make a film about a contemporary assassination that grabbed the public attention after wondering what would happen if a Kennedy-style assassination happened during modern times. Through his research on the Kennedy assassination, he became convinced that there was no conspiracy. Flemming himself has no animosity toward Bill Gates, and used many Microsoft products during the making of &quot;Nothing So Strange&quot;.

Very little of the film was scripted. Flemming has said that he wrote no script, providing perhaps a few important lines, and instead putting the creative effort into the details of the props and artifacts of the story. The &quot;Garcetti Report&quot; on the assassination, for example, is a complete document written by Flemming. The actors improvised most of their own dialogue, interactions, and reflections, and to some extent aiming the direction of the story along with their organization, with minor daily cues from Flemming. Most of the actors had no prior professional acting experience.

Another technique is what Flemming has termed &quot;reality-hacking&quot;; the interaction of the actors in character with the real world. A scene taking place on the protest stage of the 2000 Democratic National Convention was filmed at the real convention, and Flemming crashed a real police commission hearing.

Flemming open sourced all seventy hours of footage he shot, allowing other people to make their own cut.

== Release ==
Prior to release of the film, Flemming registered and developed realistic web pages for a number of the subjects in the film.

&quot;Nothing So Strange&quot; premiered on January 13, 2002, at the Slamdance Film Festival. After having trouble attracting distributors, Flemming decided to self-distribute the film. It was released on DVD on December 19, 2004.

== Reception ==
Scott Foundas of &quot;Variety&quot; called it &quot;a smart, aware, polemical work&quot;. Doug Brunell of &quot;Film Threat&quot; rated it 4/5 stars and called it &quot;brilliantly subversive&quot;. The &quot;Austin Chronicle&quot; wrote, &quot;The result is a genre-bending experience that lives up to Daniel Webster&#x27;s quote: &#x27;There is nothing so powerful as truth, and often nothing so strange.&#x27;&quot; Jason Bovberg of DVD Talk rated it 3/5 stars and wrote, &quot;&quot;Nothing So Strange&quot; isn&#x27;t quite the alternate-reality puzzle box that it aspires to be. It has an undeniably unique premise, but it quickly devolves into the mundane.&quot;

Bill Gates himself stated, &quot;It is very disappointing that a moviemaker would do something like this.&quot;

It won the &quot;New York Times&quot; Claiborne Pell Award for Original Vision.

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="38" end="50" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q912176" start="90" end="104" title="Brian Flemming" label="Brian Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="130" end="141" title="independent film" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="142" end="153" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="206" end="215" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="224" end="234" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="403" end="410" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080246" start="554" end="568" title="MacArthur Park" label="MacArthur Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="570" end="593" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="872" end="907" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1154" end="1157" title="John F. Kennedy" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="1158" end="1164" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="1165" end="1182" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="1325" end="1342" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560519" start="1343" end="1355" title="Gil Garcetti" label="Gil Garcetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1602" end="1611" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="2184" end="2196" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398536" start="2609" end="2622" title="Keythe Farley" label="Keythe Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="4175" end="4205" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="4306" end="4317" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293687" start="4613" end="4636" title="Slamdance Film Festival" label="Slamdance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="4815" end="4822" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448974" start="4905" end="4916" title="Film Threat" label="Film Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="5002" end="5018" title="Austin Chronicle" label="Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670005" start="5229" end="5237" title="DVD Talk" label="DVD Talk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383720" wikidata="Q16877816" url="?curid=383720" title="National government">
<text>A national government is the government of a nation.

National government or 
National Government may also refer to:

* Central government in a unitary state, or a country that does not give significant power to regional divisions
* Federal government, the government of a federal state, or a country that gives significant power to regional divisions
* National unity government, an all-party coalition government, usually formed during a time of war or other national emergency

== Specific governments ==
* Governments of the Republic of China
** National Government of the Republic of China, from 1925 to 1948
** Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China, from 1940 to 1945
* National Government (Canada), the name of the historic Conservative Party of Canada c. 1940
* National Government (United Kingdom), the British government from 1931 to 1940
* New Zealand National Party governments
** First National Government of New Zealand, the New Zealand government led by Sidney Holland from 1949 to 1957
** Second National Government of New Zealand, the New Zealand government led by Keith Holyoake from 1960 to 1972
** Third National Government of New Zealand, the New Zealand government led by Robert Muldoon from 1975 to 1984
** Fourth National Government of New Zealand, the New Zealand government led by Jim Bolger and Jenny Shipley respectively from 1990 to 1999
** Fifth National Government of New Zealand, the New Zealand government led by John Key and Bill English respectively from 2008 to 2017
* Polish National Government (disambiguation)
* Provisional National Government of the Southwestern Caucasus, a provisional government based in Kars, Turkey
* Transitional National Government, the Somali government from 2000 to 2004
* Tsilhqot&#x27;in National Government, an indigenous government in British Columbia, Canada
* Ukrainian national government (1941)

==See also==
* National Government Parks, Japan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16877816" start="2" end="21" title="National government" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="29" end="39" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877816" start="54" end="73" title="National government" label="National government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877816" start="78" end="97" title="National government" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320217" start="120" end="138" title="Central government" label="Central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="233" end="251" title="Federal government" label="Federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="354" end="379" title="National unity government" label="National unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="529" end="546" title="Republic of China (1912–49)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="550" end="594" title="National Government of the Republic of China" label="National Government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696242" start="617" end="673" title="Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China" label="Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="695" end="723" title="National Government (Canada)" label="National Government (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926884" start="789" end="825" title="National Government (United Kingdom)" label="National Government (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="870" end="896" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453423" start="912" end="952" title="First National Government of New Zealand" label="First National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443433" start="1024" end="1065" title="Second National Government of New Zealand" label="Second National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784903" start="1137" end="1177" title="Third National Government of New Zealand" label="Third National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="1249" end="1290" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447538" start="1389" end="1429" title="Fifth National Government of New Zealand" label="Fifth National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q401195" start="1524" end="1567" title="Polish National Government (disambiguation)" label="Polish National Government (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518576" start="1570" end="1630" title="Provisional National Government of the Southwestern Caucasus" label="Provisional National Government of the Southwestern Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134450" start="1681" end="1713" title="Transitional National Government" label="Transitional National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849662" start="1757" end="1793" title="Tsilhqot&amp;#x27;in National Government" label="Tsilhqot&amp;#x27;in National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470663" start="1850" end="1886" title="Ukrainian national government (1941)" label="Ukrainian national government (1941)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972919" start="1903" end="1928" title="National Government Parks" label="National Government Parks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383722" wikidata="Q1068693" url="?curid=383722" title="Cheapside">
<text>Cheapside is a street in the City of London, the historic and modern financial centre of London, England, which forms part of the A40 London to Fishguard road. It links St Martin&#x27;s Le Grand with Poultry. Near its eastern end at Bank Junction, where it becomes Poultry, is Mansion House, the Bank of England, and Bank station. To the west is St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, St Paul&#x27;s tube station and square.

In the Middle Ages, it was known as Westcheap, as opposed to Eastcheap, another street in the City, near London Bridge. The boundaries of the wards of Cheap, Cordwainer and Bread Street run along Cheapside and Poultry; prior to boundary changes in 2003 the road was divided amongst Farringdon Within and Cripplegate wards in addition to the current three.

The contemporary Cheapside is the location of a range of retail and food outlets and offices, as well as the City&#x27;s only major shopping centre, One New Change.

==Etymology and usage==
&quot;Cheapside&quot; is a common English street name, meaning &quot;market place&quot;, from Old English &quot;ceapan&quot;, &quot;to buy&quot; (cf. German &quot;kaufen&quot;, Dutch &quot;kopen&quot;, Danish &quot;købe&quot;, Norwegian &quot;kjøpe&quot;, Swedish &quot;köpa&quot;), whence also &quot;chapman&quot; and &quot;chapbook.&quot; There was originally no connection to the modern meaning of &quot;cheap&quot; (&quot;low-priced&quot; or &quot;low-quality&quot;, a shortening of &quot;good ceap&quot;, &quot;good buy&quot;), though by the 18th century this association may have begun to be inferred.

Other cities and towns in England that have a Cheapside include Ambleside, Ascot, Barnsley, Birmingham, Blackpool, Bradford, Brighton, Bristol, Derby, Halifax, Hanley, Knaresborough, Lancaster, Leicester, Liverpool, Luton, Manchester, Nottingham, Preston, Reading, Settle, Wakefield and Wolverhampton. There is also a Cheapside in Bridgetown, Barbados; Lexington, Kentucky, US; Greenfield, Massachusetts, US; Saint Helier, Jersey; and London, Ontario, Canada.

==History==


Cheapside is the former site of one of the principal produce markets in London, &quot;cheap&quot; broadly meaning &quot;market&quot; in medieval English. Many of the streets feeding into the main thoroughfare are named after the produce that was once sold in those areas of the market, including Honey Lane, Milk Street, Bread Street and Poultry.

In medieval times, the royal processional route from the Tower of London to the Palace of Westminster would include Cheapside. During state occasions such as the first entry of Margaret of France (second wife of King Edward I), into London in September 1299, the conduits of Cheapside customarily flowed with wine.

During the reign of Edward III in the 14th century, tournaments were held in adjacent fields. The dangers were, however, not limited to the participants: a wooden stand built to accommodate Queen Philippa and her companions collapsed during a tournament to celebrate the birth of the Black Prince in 1330. No one died, but the King was greatly displeased, and the stand&#x27;s builders would have been put to death but for the Queen&#x27;s intercession.

In the early 1300s one of the armourers working in the area was Alice la Haubergere, who owned an armour shop and made her role within the occupation part of her identity, which was unusual for the period.

On the day preceding her coronation, in January 1559, Elizabeth I passed through a number of London streets in a pre-coronation procession and was entertained by a number of pageants, including one in Cheapside.

Meat was brought in to Cheapside from Smithfield market, just outside Newgate. After the great Church of St Michael-le-Querne, the top end of the street broadened into a dual carriageway known as the Shambles (referring to an open-air slaughterhouse and meat market), with butcher shops on both sides and a dividing central area also containing butchers. Further down, on the right, was Goldsmiths Row, an area of commodity dealers. From the 14th century to the Great Fire, the eastern end of Cheapside was the location of the Great Conduit.

==Literary connections==

Cheapside was the birthplace of both John Milton and Robert Herrick. It was for a long time one of the most important streets in London. It is also the site of the &#x27;Bow Bells&#x27;, the church of St Mary-le-Bow, which has played a part in London&#x27;s Cockney heritage and the tale of Dick Whittington. Geoffrey Chaucer grew up around Cheapside and there are a scattering of references to the thoroughfare and its environs throughout his work. The first chapter of Peter Ackroyd&#x27;s &quot;Brief Lives&quot; series on Chaucer also colourfully describes the street at that time.

William Shakespeare used Cheapside as the setting for several bawdy scenes in &quot;Henry IV, Part I&quot;. A reference to it is also made in &quot;Henry VI, Part II&quot;, in a speech by the rebel Jack Cade: &quot;all the realm shall be in common; and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass&quot;.

Thomas Middleton&#x27;s play &quot;A Chaste Maid in Cheapside&quot; (1613) both satirises and celebrates the citizens of the neighbourhood during the Renaissance, when the street hosted the city&#x27;s goldsmiths.

William Wordsworth, in his 1797 poem &quot;The Reverie of Poor Susan&quot;, imagines a naturalistic Cheapside of past:

Jane Austen, in her 1813 novel &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot;, characterises Cheapside as a London neighbourhood frowned upon by the landed elite:

Charles Dickens Jr. wrote in his 1879 book &quot;Dickens&#x27;s Dictionary of London&quot;:

Cheapside remains now what it was five centuries ago, the greatest thoroughfare in the City of London. Other localities have had their day, have risen, become fashionable, and have sunk into obscurity and neglect, but Cheapside has maintained its place, and may boast of being the busiest thoroughfare in the world, with the sole exception perhaps of London-bridge.

Hugh Lofting&#x27;s book &quot;Doctor Dolittle&quot;, published in 1951, names a quarrelsome London sparrow with a Cockney accent Cheapside. He lives most of the year in St Edmund&#x27;s left ear in St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral and is invited to the African country of Fantippo to deliver mail to cities because the other birds are not able to navigate city streets.

Cheapside is also depicted in Rosemary Sutcliff&#x27;s 1951 children&#x27;s historical novel &quot;The Armourer&#x27;s House&quot;, along with other parts of Tudor London.

In a more contemporary treatment, the Cheapside of the Middle Ages was referenced in a derogatory sense in the 2001 movie &quot;A Knight&#x27;s Tale&quot; as being the poor, unhealthy and low-class birthplace and home of the unlikely hero.

Nineteenth century Cheapside is presented as the home of Mary &quot;Jacky&quot; Faber in &quot;Bloody Jack&quot; by L. A. Meyer.

Additionally, Cheapside is depicted as a major setting in the bestselling novel by Maria McCann, &quot;As Meat Loves Salt&quot;, a historical feature set against the English Civil War.

William Gibson&#x27;s mystery novel &quot;The Peripheral&quot; depicts a 22nd-century Cheapside converted to a Victorian-era cosplay zone where only 19th century costume is allowed.

==Contemporary Cheapside==
Cheapside today is a street of offices and developments of retail outlets. It can no longer be described as &quot;the busiest thoroughfare in the world&quot; (as in Charles Dickens, Jr.&#x27;s day) and is instead simply one of many routes connecting the East End and the City of London with the West End.

Cheapside was extensively damaged during The Blitz in late 1940 and particularly during the Second Great Fire of London. Much of the rebuilding following these raids occurred during the 1950s and 1960s and included a number of unsympathetic contemporary attempts at recreating the centuries-old architecture that had been destroyed. In recent years many of these buildings have themselves been demolished as a programme of regeneration takes place along Cheapside from Paternoster Square to Poultry.

The draft Core Strategy of the City&#x27;s Local Development Frameworks outlines the vision and policies for the Cheapside area, aiming to increase the amount of retail space along and near the street, and make the area a good environment for visitors and shoppers. The plan is to re-establish the street as the City&#x27;s &quot;High Street&quot;, including as a weekend shopping destination (until recently many retail units in the City were closed on Saturday and Sunday). A major retail and office development at the heart of the scheme, One New Change, opened 28 October 2010. It is sited on Cheapside at the intersection with New Change, immediately to the east of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral.

To address the anticipated rise in the number of shoppers as a result of the regeneration, the street itself has undergone reconstruction works to make the area more sympathetic to pedestrian traffic; the works are expected to make Cheapside the main shopping area in the City of London.

Cheapside formed part of the marathon course of the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games. The women&#x27;s Olympic marathon took place on 5 August and the men&#x27;s Olympic marathon took place on 12 August. The four Paralympic marathons were held on 9 September.

==See also==
* Eleanor cross

==References==
Sources 

* &quot;A Glossary and Etymological Dictionary: Of Obsolete and Uncommon Words&quot; William Toone (Bennett: London, 1834)
* &quot;Kings and Queens of Britain&quot;, Williamson, D. (1986), Salem House, .

Endnotes

==External links==

* View, looking eastwards, of Cheapside in early Stuart times, showing the Cheapside Cross and the Standard
* The Cheapside Initiative official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="0" end="9" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="29" end="43" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="89" end="95" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400528" start="130" end="158" title="A40 road" label="A40 London to Fishguard road"/>
<link wikidata="Q68021561" start="169" end="194" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Le Grand" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Le Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235592" start="200" end="207" title="Poultry, London" label="Poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856012" start="233" end="246" title="Bank Junction" label="Bank Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786933" start="277" end="290" title="Mansion House, London" label="Mansion House"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="296" end="311" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="317" end="329" title="Bank–Monument station" label="Bank station"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="346" end="370" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431081" start="372" end="399" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s tube station" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="420" end="431" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790942" start="474" end="483" title="Eastcheap" label="Eastcheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="518" end="531" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969215" start="555" end="560" title="Wards of the City of London" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088843" start="564" end="569" title="Cheap (ward)" label="Cheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170081" start="571" end="581" title="Cordwainer (ward)" label="Cordwainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959146" start="586" end="598" title="Bread Street" label="Bread Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436292" start="695" end="712" title="Farringdon Within" label="Farringdon Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619586" start="717" end="728" title="Cripplegate" label="Cripplegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093026" start="919" end="933" title="One New Change" label="One New Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1054" end="1065" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073342" start="1261" end="1268" title="chapmen" label="chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558308" start="1285" end="1293" title="chapbook" label="chapbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q391805" start="1633" end="1642" title="Ambleside" label="Ambleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q723329" start="1644" end="1649" title="Ascot, Berkshire" label="Ascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q54212" start="1651" end="1659" title="Barnsley" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="1661" end="1671" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="1673" end="1682" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="1684" end="1692" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="1694" end="1702" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="1704" end="1711" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="1713" end="1718" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q826561" start="1720" end="1727" title="Halifax, West Yorkshire" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575653" start="1729" end="1735" title="Hanley, Staffordshire" label="Hanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q535902" start="1737" end="1750" title="Knaresborough" label="Knaresborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="1752" end="1761" title="Lancaster, Lancashire" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="1763" end="1772" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="1774" end="1783" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="1785" end="1790" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1792" end="1802" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="1804" end="1814" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="1816" end="1823" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="1825" end="1832" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779508" start="1834" end="1840" title="Settle, North Yorkshire" label="Settle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="1842" end="1851" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="1856" end="1869" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36168" start="1900" end="1910" title="Bridgetown" label="Bridgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="1922" end="1941" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="1947" end="1972" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="1978" end="1990" title="Saint Helier" label="Saint Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="2004" end="2019" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522620" start="2097" end="2112" title="farmers&amp;#x27; market" label="produce markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959146" start="2365" end="2377" title="Bread Street" label="Bread Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235592" start="2382" end="2389" title="Poultry, London" label="Poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="2449" end="2464" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="2472" end="2493" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q235480" start="2569" end="2587" title="Margaret of France, Queen of England" label="Margaret of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2604" end="2617" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="2728" end="2738" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="2898" end="2912" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Queen Philippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="2992" end="3004" title="Edward, the Black Prince" label="Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3227" end="3246" title="Alice la Haubergere" label="Alice la Haubergere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3424" end="3435" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="3621" end="3638" title="Smithfield, London" label="Smithfield market"/>
<link wikidata="Q968975" start="3653" end="3660" title="Newgate" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594824" start="3678" end="3708" title="St Michael-le-Querne" label="Church of St Michael-le-Querne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="3753" end="3769" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763628" start="3779" end="3791" title="the Shambles" label="the Shambles"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="3818" end="3832" title="slaughterhouse" label="slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="3997" end="4006" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="4007" end="4013" title="merchant" label="dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="4045" end="4055" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598992" start="4110" end="4123" title="Great Conduit" label="Great Conduit"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="4189" end="4200" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="4205" end="4219" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301992" start="4343" end="4367" title="St Mary-le-Bow" label="church of St Mary-le-Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="4410" end="4417" title="Cockney" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q337493" start="4443" end="4459" title="Dick Whittington" label="Dick Whittington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="4461" end="4477" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="4623" end="4636" title="Peter Ackroyd" label="Peter Ackroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4739" end="4758" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q631855" start="4823" end="4839" title="Henry IV, Part I" label="Henry IV, Part I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236216" start="4887" end="4904" title="Henry VI, Part II" label="Henry VI, Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126349" start="4937" end="4946" title="Jack Cade" label="Jack Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="5042" end="5058" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655831" start="5077" end="5103" title="A Chaste Maid in Cheapside" label="A Chaste Maid in Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="5257" end="5275" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="5377" end="5388" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="5414" end="5433" title="Pride and Prejudice" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775087" start="5526" end="5545" title="Charles Dickens Jr." label="Charles Dickens Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5575" end="5610" title="Charles Dickens Jr.#Dickens&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of London" label="Dickens&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="5970" end="5983" title="London Bridge" label="London-bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q560015" start="5986" end="5998" title="Hugh Lofting" label="Hugh Lofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377081" start="6017" end="6032" title="Doctor Dolittle" label="Doctor Dolittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q254215" start="6380" end="6397" title="Rosemary Sutcliff" label="Rosemary Sutcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714299" start="6449" end="6474" title="The Armourer&amp;#x27;s House" label="The Armourer&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851298" start="6508" end="6520" title="Tudor London" label="Tudor London"/>
<link wikidata="Q114076" start="6651" end="6671" title="A Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale (film)" label="A Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928072" start="6859" end="6870" title="Bloody Jack (novel)" label="Bloody Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456226" start="6880" end="6891" title="L. A. Meyer" label="L. A. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761422" start="6977" end="6989" title="Maria McCann" label="Maria McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="7080" end="7094" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756730" start="7122" end="7136" title="The Peripheral" label="The Peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="7205" end="7212" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="7544" end="7552" title="East End of London" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="7585" end="7593" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="7637" end="7646" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443327" start="7688" end="7715" title="Second Great Fire of London" label="Second Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056775" start="8065" end="8083" title="Paternoster Square" label="Paternoster Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235592" start="8087" end="8094" title="Poultry, London" label="Poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664329" start="8140" end="8168" title="Local Development Frameworks" label="Local Development Frameworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093026" start="8639" end="8653" title="One New Change" label="One New Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283094" start="9113" end="9128" title="2012 Olympic Marathon Course" label="marathon course"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="9136" end="9148" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="9153" end="9163" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917190" start="9361" end="9374" title="Eleanor cross" label="Eleanor cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383724" wikidata="Q5050271" url="?curid=383724" title="Castle Rock Foundation">
<text>The Castle Rock Foundation was an American conservative foundation started in 1993 with an endowment of $36.6M from the Adolph Coors Foundation. It ranked as Colorado&#x27;s 15th largest foundation by assets at the end of 2001. The foundation gathered media attention during Pete Coors&#x27; unsuccessful 2004 Senate run, when opponents pointed at the dichotomy between the Coors Brewing Company&#x27;s attempt to appeal to a broad audience, in particular with minorities and gay customers, while the Castle Rock Foundation was used by the Coors family to fund several conservative initiatives intent on curtailing the rights of these same customers.

The Castle Rock Foundation merged into the Adolph Coors Foundation on November 30, 2011.

== Mission ==
* &quot;Promote a better understanding of the free enterprise system&quot;
* &quot;Preserve the principles upon which our democracy was founded to help ensure a limited role for government and the protection of individual rights as provided for in the Constitution&quot;
* &quot;Encourage personal responsibility and leadership&quot;
* &quot;Uphold traditional American values&quot;

==References==

==External links==
* List of recipients</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5050271" start="4" end="26" title="Castle Rock Foundation" label="Castle Rock Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="34" end="55" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="American conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684325" start="120" end="143" title="Adolph Coors Foundation" label="Adolph Coors Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="158" end="166" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171906" start="275" end="285" title="Pete Coors" label="Pete Coors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407305" start="374" end="395" title="Coors Brewing Company" label="Coors Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684325" start="695" end="718" title="Adolph Coors Foundation" label="Adolph Coors Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="1117" end="1131" title="American value" label="American value"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383726" wikidata="Q7395524" url="?curid=383726" title="Saab Quantum">
<text>SAAB Quantum was a series of five privately designed and built automobiles using various Saab components. The earliest used Saab 93 two-stroke engines, transmissions and suspension. The later used Saab 96 drivetrains and suspension parts. All were built in the United States. 

The Quantum I was built in 1959, with a chassis computer engineered by Walter Kern at IBM in his spare time. It wore only the most basic bodywork at first. After initial testing and a race or two, it was replaced with moderately more complete bodywork which it still wears to this day. The Quantum II was nearly identical in every way, though built later. Both Quantums I and II were raced in the SCCA H-Modified class. They were pure prototypes and racing cars, never intended for production.

The Quantum III was designed to be a production car and was first presented in 1962. Only a few copies were built. Due to a lack of quality it was turned down by Saab in Sweden and never went into production.

* Quantum I (1959) - 1st iteration was with a very basic aluminum body. Second iteration of the bodywork was only slightly more finished. This is the version it wears today.
* Quantum II - Nearly identical to the Quantum I in every way. Both use a water-cooled, three-cylinder Saab two-stroke engine.
* Quantum III - Completely new design. Two built.
* Quantum IV (1963) - Single seater formula car sold as a kit car. Intended for Sports Car Club of America&#x27;s (SCCA) &quot;Formula S&quot; series.
* Quantum V (1965) - Ginetta body. Saab two-stroke engine and transmission. One built.


==External links==

* New England Saab Association: The Quantum Series
* Formula S register
* George Vapaa&#x27;s Quantum Formula S restoration scrapbook
* A Quantum IV restoration website
* &quot;La prima Saab Quantum I&quot;

===Pictures===
* Quantum III,
* Walter Kern (right)
* 1959 Quantum I</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7395524" start="0" end="12" title="Saab Quantum" label="SAAB Quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48957" start="89" end="93" title="Saab Automobile" label="Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q420939" start="124" end="131" title="Saab 93" label="Saab 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="132" end="142" title="two-stroke cycle" label="two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q420796" start="197" end="204" title="Saab 96" label="Saab 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="326" end="345" title="Computer-aided design" label="computer engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="364" end="367" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395533" start="1260" end="1275" title="Saab two-stroke" label="Saab two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743827" start="1392" end="1399" title="kit car" label="kit car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="1414" end="1440" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1461" end="1470" title="Formula S" label="Formula S"/>
<link wikidata="Q167016" start="1506" end="1513" title="Ginetta" label="Ginetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="1525" end="1535" title="two-stroke cycle" label="two-stroke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383727" wikidata="Q2732007" url="?curid=383727" title="Threadneedle Street">
<text>Threadneedle Street is a street in the City of London, England, between Bishopsgate at its northeast end and Bank junction in the southwest. It is one of nine streets that converge at Bank. It lies in the ward of Cornhill.

==History==
Threadneedle street is famous as the site of the Bank of England. The bank itself is sometimes known as &#x27;the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street&#x27; and has been based at its current location since 1734. The London Stock Exchange was situated on Threadneedle Street until 2004, when it relocated to nearby Paternoster Square. The Baltic Exchange was founded in the on Threadneedle Street in 1744. It is now located on St Mary Axe.

==Etymology==
Some believe that the name originated as Three Needle Street, first attested to in 1598, perhaps from a signboard portraying three needles, or from the three needles on the arms of needle-makers who had premises on the street. The threads and needles used by the members of the Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors is another possibility, since the livery company&#x27;s hall has been located on Threadneedle Street since 1347. Before 1598, the road was part of Broad Street, now Old Broad Street.

==Points of interest==
In addition to the Bank of England, there are a number of shops, banks, restaurants and offices located on Threadneedle Street.

The Merchant Taylors&#x27; Hall, home of the Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors, has occupied a site off Threadneedle Street since 1347. Reportedly the British national anthem was sung, in private, in 1607 for the first time, conducted by John Bull.

The headquarters of the South Sea Company was located on the street, from 1711 to the 1850s.

The London office of the world&#x27;s oldest merchant bank, Berenberg Bank, is located at No. 60.

The nearest London Underground station is Bank and Monument. London&#x27;s first bus service ran between Threadneedle Street and Paddington from 1829. Today, the street is served by bus routes 8, 11, 23, 26, 133, 242, and 388.

Over 5,000 tonnes of gold bars are held by the Bank of England, both official reserves of the UK Treasury, and others, in a system of eight vaults, over two floors, under Threadneedle Street.

==References==
;General
* &quot;Threadneedle Street&quot;, Old and New London: Volume 1 (1878), pp. 531-544.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2732007" start="0" end="19" title="Threadneedle Street" label="Threadneedle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="39" end="53" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q779444" start="72" end="83" title="Bishopsgate" label="Bishopsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856012" start="109" end="122" title="Bank junction" label="Bank junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782039" start="213" end="221" title="Cornhill, London" label="Cornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="285" end="300" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="447" end="468" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056775" start="545" end="563" title="Paternoster Square" label="Paternoster Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q805708" start="569" end="584" title="Baltic Exchange" label="Baltic Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590464" start="657" end="668" title="St Mary Axe" label="St Mary Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037066" start="963" end="1001" title="Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors" label="Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818403" start="1032" end="1062" title="Merchant Taylors&amp;#x27; Hall, London" label="the livery company&amp;#x27;s hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818403" start="1342" end="1369" title="Merchant Taylors&amp;#x27; Hall, London" label="Merchant Taylors&amp;#x27; Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037066" start="1383" end="1421" title="Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors" label="Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="1494" end="1517" title="God Save the Queen" label="British national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q511463" start="1581" end="1590" title="John Bull (composer)" label="John Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="1617" end="1634" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q670792" start="1747" end="1761" title="Berenberg Bank" label="Berenberg Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="1798" end="1816" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="1828" end="1845" title="Bank–Monument station" label="Bank and Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="1915" end="1925" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670134" start="1979" end="1980" title="London Buses route 8" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669919" start="1982" end="1984" title="London Buses route 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670010" start="1986" end="1988" title="London Buses route 23" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670034" start="1990" end="1992" title="London Buses route 26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669938" start="1994" end="1997" title="London Buses route 133" label="133"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383728" wikidata="Q5358332" url="?curid=383728" title="Electronic art">
<text>Electronic art is a form of art that makes use of electronic media. More broadly, it refers to technology and/or electronic media. It is related to information art, new media art, video art, digital art, interactive art, internet art, and electronic music. It is considered an outgrowth of conceptual art and systems art.

==Background==

The term &quot;electronic art&quot; is almost synonymous to computer art and digital art. The latter two terms, and especially the term computer-generated art are mostly used for visual artworks generated by computers. However, electronic art has a much broader connotation, referring to artworks that include any type of electronic component, such as works in music, dance, architecture and performance. It is an interdisciplinary field in which artists, scientists and engineers often collaborate when creating their works. The art historian of electronic art Edward A. Shanken works to document current and past experimental art with a focus on the intersection of art, science, and technology. Other writers on the topic of electronic art include Frank Popper, Dominique Moulon, Sarah Cook, and Christiane Paul. 

Electronic art often features components of interactivity. Artists make use of technologies like the Internet, computer networks, robotics, wearable technology, digital painting, wireless technology and immersive virtual reality. As the technologies used to deliver works of electronic art become obsolete, electronic art faces serious issues around the challenge to preserve artwork beyond the time of its contemporary production. Currently, research projects are underway to improve the preservation and documentation of the fragile electronic arts heritage (see DOCAM – Documentation and Conservation of the Media Arts Heritage). Digital graphics software such as Photoshop allows for the digital manipulation of analog photographs, the creation of wholly electronic images, and application of AI-enhanced generative fills. 

==Wearable Tech==

With the advancements in lightweight microchips, wireless capabilities, sensors and motion tracking technology, new mediums in digital art and performance have become possible. Technology has the capability to augment and manipulate reality as well as audience or viewer perception. Motion tracking suits are used in creating 3D renders of animated characters for film and video games. The animation or CGI produced can be edited and adjusted before viewing, but research into real time rendering for live performance art is being streamlined through the use of artificial intelligence, automation, and programing. Live renders are similarly used in the metaverse to create more realistic avatar movement and expression. Further implications of wearable technology include audio and music production. Laurie Anderson is a performance artist who used a suit equipped with amplified tactile sensors. She used her movements to create music, as various body parts were assigned different percussive or instrumental sounds and tones when hit or moved. Similar to this musical tech is the SOMI-1 device as used in the dance performance entitled “My body is an instrument” by: Mike Tyus and Luca Renzi. This piece of technology was designed by the company Instrument of Things; the SOMI-1 is a small proprioceptive disk that tracks movement and translates it into sound. 

==Art festivals that use the term &quot;electronic art&quot; in their name==
* International Symposium for Electronic Art (ISEA), organized annually since 1988, international
* Ars Electronica Symposium, organized yearly since 1979 by Ars Electronica in Linz, Austria
* Dutch Electronic Art Festival (DEAF), organized yearly since 1994 by V2 Institute for the Unstable Media in Rotterdam, the Netherlands
* Electronic Language International Festival (FILE) organized yearly since 2000 in São Paulo, Brazil
*The Prix Ars Electronica, a major yearly award for several categories of electronic art

==Artists==

Notable artists working in electronic art include:
* Laurie Anderson
* Roy Ascott
* Maurice Benayoun
* Maurizio Bolognini
* Angie Bonino
* Mez Breeze
* Miguel Chevalier
* Heiko Daxl
* Elizabeth Diller
* David Em
* Ken Feingold
* Ingeborg Fülepp
* Peter Gabriel
* Walter Giers
* Pietro Grossi
* Genco Gulan
* Garnet Hertz
* Perry Hoberman
* Jodi (art collective)
* Eduardo Kac
* Knowbotic Research
* Marc Lee
* George Legrady
* Golan Levin
* Liu Dao
* Rafael Lozano-Hemmer
* Chico MacMurtrie
* Sergio Maltagliati
* Jennifer &amp; Kevin McCoy
* Yucef Merhi
* Jonathan Monaghan
* Joseph Nechvatal
* Yves Netzhammer
* Graham Nicholls
* Simon Penny
* Melinda Rackham
* Martin Rev
* Ken Rinaldo
* David Rokeby
* Stefan Roloff
* Lillian Schwartz
* Ricardo Scofidio
* Paul Sermon
* Scott Snibbe
* Michael Snow
* Stelarc
* Survival Research Laboratories
* Gianni Toti
* Tamás Waliczky
* Norman White
*Allan Kaprow
==See also==

*Algorithm art
*Artificial intelligence art
*Artmedia
*Computer art
*Computer art scene
*Computer graphics
*Computer music
*Cybernetic art
*Demoscene
*Digital art
*Digital illustration
*Digital painting
*Digital poetry
*EVA Conferences (Electronic Visualisation and the Arts)
*Evolutionary art
*Fractal art
*Generative art
*Image development
*Interactive art
*Intermedia
*Multimedia
*Music visualization
*New media art
*Systems art
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Nicolas Bourriaud, &quot;Relational Aesthetics&quot;, Dijon: Les Presses du Réel, 2002, orig. 1997
* Paul Brown, Charlie Gere, Nicholas Lambert, Catherine Mason (eds.), White Heat Cold Logic: British Computer Art 1960–1980, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2006
* Christine Buci-Glucksmann, &quot;L’art à l’époque du virtuel&quot;, in Frontières esthétiques de l’art, Arts 8, Paris: L’Harmattan, 2004
* Frank Popper, Art of the Electronic Age, Thames &amp; Hudson, 1997
* Joline Blais and Jon Ippolito, &quot;At the Edge of Art&quot;, Thames &amp; Hudson, 2006
* Charlie Gere, &quot;Digital Culture&quot;, Reaktion, 2002. 
* Oliver Grau (2003). &quot;Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion&quot; (Leonardo Book Series). Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press/Leonardo Books. .
* Oliver Grau (Ed.): &quot;Media Art Histories&quot;, MIT Press/Leonardo Books, 2007.
* Mark Hansen, &quot;New Philosophy for New Media&quot;, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2004
* Norman M. Klein, &quot;Spaces Between: Traveling Through Bleeds, Apertures, and Wormholes Inside the Database Novel,&quot; in &quot;Third Person: Authoring and Exploring Vast Narratives,&quot; Pat Harrigan and Noah Wardip-Fruin (eds.), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2009
* Donald Kuspit &quot;Del Atre Analogico al Arte Digital&quot; in Arte Digital Y Videoarte, Kuspit, D. (ed.), Consorcio del Circulo de Bellas Artes, Madrid, pp. 33–34 &amp; 3 color images
* Donald Kuspit, &quot;The Matrix of Sensations&quot;, &quot;VI: Digital Artists and the New Creative Renaissance&quot;
* Alan Liu, &quot;The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information&quot;, The University of Chicago Press, pp. 331–336 &amp; 485–486
* Dominic McIver Lopes, &quot;A Philosophy of Computer Art&quot;, London: Routledge, 2009
* Lev Manovich, &quot;The Language of New Media&quot;, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press/Leonardo Books, 2001. 
*Lev Manovich, Ten Key Texts on Digital Art: 1970–2000, &quot;Leonardo&quot;, Volume 35, Number 5, October 2002, pp. 567–569
* Yucef Merhi, &quot;Artists&#x27; Fellowship – 2009 Digital/Electronic Arts&quot;, New York Foundation for the Arts, 2009
* Robert C. Morgan &quot;Digital Hybrids&quot;, &quot;art press&quot;, Volume 255
* Christiane Paul, &quot;Digital Art&quot;, Thames &amp; Hudson
* Frank Popper, From Technological to Virtual Art, The MIT Press/Leonardo Books, 2007
* Frank Popper, &quot;Origins and Development of Kinetic Art&quot;, Studio Vista and New York Graphic Society, 1968
* Frank Popper, &quot;Die Kinetische Kunst-Licht und Bewegung, Umweltkunst und Aktion&quot;, Dumont Schauberg, 1975
* Frank Popper, &quot;Le Déclin de l&#x27;objet&quot;, Le Chêne, 1975
*Dick Higgins, &quot;Intermedia&quot;, 1966. Reprinted in Donna De Salvo (ed.), Open Systems Rethinking Art c. 1970, London: Tate Publishing, 2005
* Margot Lovejoy, &quot;Digital Currents: Art in the Electronic Age&quot;, Routledge, 2004
* Frank Popper, Art—Action and Participation, New York University Press, 1975
* Frank Popper, &quot;Origins and Development of Kinetic Art&quot;, New York Graphic Society/Studio Vista, 1968
* Frank Popper, &quot;Réflexions sur l&#x27;exil, l&#x27;art et l&#x27;Europe : Entretiens avec Aline Dallier&quot;, Klincksieck, 1998
* Frank Popper, &quot;Ecrire sur l&#x27;art : De l&#x27;art optique a l&#x27;art virtuel&quot;, L&#x27;Harmattan, 2007
* Fred Forest, &quot;Art et Internet&quot;, Editions Cercle D&#x27;Art / Imaginaire Mode d&#x27;Emploi
* Sarah J. Rogers (ed.), &quot;Body Mécanique: Artistic Explorations of Digital Realms&quot;, Columbus, Ohio, Wexner Center for the Arts, The Ohio State University, 1998* Edward A. Shanken Selected Writings on Art and Technology http://artexetra.com
* Edward A. Shanken &quot;Art and Electronic Media&quot;. London: Phaidon, 2009. 
* Rainer Usselmann, &quot;The Dilemma of Media Art: Cybernetic Serendipity at the ICA London&quot;. , Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press/Leonardo Journal, Volume 36, Number 5, October 2003, pp. 389–396
* Bruce Wands, &quot;Art of the Digital Age&quot;, London: Thames &amp; Hudson, 2006. 

==External links==
* Stephen Wilson: extensive list of &quot;information arts&quot; links
* newArteest, list of prominent digital artists
* New Media Art book (wiki edition)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5358332" start="0" end="14" title="Electronic art" label="Electronic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="28" end="31" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209283" start="50" end="66" title="electronic media" label="electronic media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="95" end="105" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209283" start="113" end="129" title="electronic media" label="electronic media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031007" start="148" end="163" title="information art" label="information art"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="165" end="178" title="new media art" label="new media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="180" end="189" title="video art" label="video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q860372" start="191" end="202" title="digital art" label="digital art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394336" start="204" end="219" title="interactive art" label="interactive art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569950" start="221" end="233" title="internet art" label="internet art"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="239" end="255" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="290" end="304" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q919251" start="309" end="320" title="systems art" label="systems art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376265" start="399" end="411" title="computer art" label="computer art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835759" start="475" end="497" title="computer-generated art" label="computer-generated art"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="700" end="705" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="707" end="712" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="714" end="726" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="731" end="742" title="performance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="753" end="770" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="869" end="882" title="art historian" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341479" start="901" end="918" title="Edward A. Shanken" label="Edward A. Shanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082774" start="1090" end="1102" title="Frank Popper" label="Frank Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291159" start="1104" end="1120" title="Dominique Moulon" label="Dominique Moulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422203" start="1122" end="1132" title="Sarah Cook (curator)" label="Sarah Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082786" start="1138" end="1153" title="Christiane Paul (curator)" label="Christiane Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q839721" start="1201" end="1214" title="interactivity" label="interactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1258" end="1266" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="1268" end="1284" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="1287" end="1295" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845080" start="1297" end="1316" title="wearable technology" label="wearable technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225029" start="1318" end="1334" title="digital painting" label="digital painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1336" end="1344" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660060" start="1360" end="1385" title="immersive virtual reality" label="immersive virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q282744" start="1454" end="1462" title="obsolete" label="obsolete"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993143" start="1524" end="1540" title="Art conservation and restoration" label="preserve artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205840" start="1722" end="1787" title="Docam" label="DOCAM – Documentation and Conservation of the Media Arts Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1824" end="1833" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066631" start="1954" end="1965" title="AI art" label="AI-enhanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044710" start="3450" end="3492" title="ISEA International" label="International Symposium for Electronic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="3606" end="3621" title="Ars Electronica" label="Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="3625" end="3629" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052476" start="3710" end="3745" title="V2 Institute for the Unstable Media" label="V2 Institute for the Unstable Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="3749" end="3758" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358269" start="3778" end="3820" title="Electronic Language International Festival" label="Electronic Language International Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="3859" end="3868" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q697762" start="3882" end="3902" title="Prix Ars Electronica" label="Prix Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q235066" start="4033" end="4048" title="Laurie Anderson (performance artist)" label="Laurie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445740" start="4051" end="4061" title="Roy Ascott" label="Roy Ascott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300395" start="4064" end="4080" title="Maurice Benayoun" label="Maurice Benayoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793836" start="4083" end="4101" title="Maurizio Bolognini" label="Maurizio Bolognini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763187" start="4104" end="4116" title="Angie Bonino" label="Angie Bonino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826590" start="4119" end="4129" title="Mez Breeze" label="Mez Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312954" start="4132" end="4148" title="Miguel Chevalier" label="Miguel Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q262429" start="4151" end="4161" title="Heiko Daxl" label="Heiko Daxl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225543" start="4164" end="4180" title="Elizabeth Diller" label="Elizabeth Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233375" start="4183" end="4191" title="David Em" label="David Em"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387597" start="4194" end="4206" title="Ken Feingold" label="Ken Feingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q543867" start="4209" end="4224" title="Ingeborg Fülepp" label="Ingeborg Fülepp"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="4227" end="4240" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558438" start="4243" end="4255" title="Walter Giers" label="Walter Giers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388139" start="4258" end="4271" title="Pietro Grossi" label="Pietro Grossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315897" start="4274" end="4285" title="Genco Gulan" label="Genco Gulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24288563" start="4288" end="4300" title="Garnet Hertz" label="Garnet Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375632" start="4303" end="4317" title="Perry Hoberman" label="Perry Hoberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915356" start="4320" end="4341" title="Jodi (art collective)" label="Jodi (art collective)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331376" start="4344" end="4355" title="Eduardo Kac" label="Eduardo Kac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423199" start="4358" end="4376" title="Knowbotic Research" label="Knowbotic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892688" start="4379" end="4387" title="Marc Lee" label="Marc Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101713" start="4390" end="4404" title="George Legrady" label="George Legrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578394" start="4407" end="4418" title="Golan Levin" label="Golan Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583346" start="4421" end="4428" title="Liu Dao" label="Liu Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872461" start="4431" end="4451" title="Rafael Lozano-Hemmer" label="Rafael Lozano-Hemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096434" start="4454" end="4470" title="Chico MacMurtrie" label="Chico MacMurtrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956170" start="4473" end="4491" title="Sergio Maltagliati" label="Sergio Maltagliati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178046" start="4494" end="4520" title="Jennifer &amp;amp; Kevin McCoy" label="Jennifer &amp;amp; Kevin McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487770" start="4523" end="4534" title="Yucef Merhi" label="Yucef Merhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273936" start="4537" end="4554" title="Jonathan Monaghan" label="Jonathan Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185405" start="4557" end="4573" title="Joseph Nechvatal" label="Joseph Nechvatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q120579" start="4576" end="4591" title="Yves Netzhammer" label="Yves Netzhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593099" start="4594" end="4609" title="Graham Nicholls" label="Graham Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519510" start="4612" end="4623" title="Simon Penny" label="Simon Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812495" start="4626" end="4641" title="Melinda Rackham" label="Melinda Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q433265" start="4644" end="4654" title="Martin Rev" label="Martin Rev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388376" start="4657" end="4668" title="Ken Rinaldo" label="Ken Rinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239175" start="4671" end="4683" title="David Rokeby" label="David Rokeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q96160" start="4686" end="4699" title="Stefan Roloff" label="Stefan Roloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503703" start="4702" end="4718" title="Lillian Schwartz" label="Lillian Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027988" start="4721" end="4737" title="Ricardo Scofidio" label="Ricardo Scofidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153530" start="4740" end="4751" title="Paul Sermon" label="Paul Sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437280" start="4754" end="4766" title="Scott Snibbe" label="Scott Snibbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q558332" start="4769" end="4781" title="Michael Snow" label="Michael Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q648866" start="4784" end="4791" title="Stelarc" label="Stelarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647183" start="4794" end="4824" title="Survival Research Laboratories" label="Survival Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522649" start="4827" end="4838" title="Gianni Toti" label="Gianni Toti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681994" start="4841" end="4855" title="Tamás Waliczky" label="Tamás Waliczky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052936" start="4858" end="4870" title="Norman White" label="Norman White"/>
<link wikidata="Q366380" start="4872" end="4884" title="Allan Kaprow" label="Allan Kaprow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835759" start="4900" end="4913" title="Algorithm art" label="Algorithm art"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066631" start="4915" end="4942" title="Artificial intelligence art" label="Artificial intelligence art"/>
<link wikidata="Q968991" start="4944" end="4952" title="Artmedia" label="Artmedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376265" start="4954" end="4966" title="Computer art" label="Computer art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157523" start="4968" end="4986" title="Computer art scene" label="Computer art scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="4988" end="5005" title="Computer graphics" label="Computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122550" start="5007" end="5021" title="Computer music" label="Computer music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864597" start="5023" end="5037" title="Cybernetic art" label="Cybernetic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q824340" start="5039" end="5048" title="Demoscene" label="Demoscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q860372" start="5050" end="5061" title="Digital art" label="Digital art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890556" start="5063" end="5083" title="Digital illustration" label="Digital illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225029" start="5085" end="5101" title="Digital painting" label="Digital painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q919982" start="5103" end="5117" title="Digital poetry" label="Digital poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324595" start="5119" end="5134" title="EVA Conferences" label="EVA Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382568" start="5176" end="5192" title="Evolutionary art" label="Evolutionary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q777696" start="5194" end="5205" title="Fractal art" label="Fractal art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502032" start="5207" end="5221" title="Generative art" label="Generative art"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="5223" end="5240" title="Image development (visual arts)" label="Image development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394336" start="5242" end="5257" title="Interactive art" label="Interactive art"/>
<link wikidata="Q358151" start="5259" end="5269" title="Intermedia" label="Intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="5271" end="5281" title="Multimedia" label="Multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q758903" start="5283" end="5302" title="Music visualization" label="Music visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="5304" end="5317" title="New media art" label="New media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q919251" start="5319" end="5330" title="Systems art" label="Systems art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979892" start="5365" end="5382" title="Nicolas Bourriaud" label="Nicolas Bourriaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474624" start="5466" end="5476" title="Paul Brown (artist)" label="Paul Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084903" start="5478" end="5490" title="Charlie Gere" label="Charlie Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084638" start="5510" end="5525" title="Catherine Mason" label="Catherine Mason"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5534" end="5587" title="White Heat Cold Logic: British Computer Art 1960–1980" label="White Heat Cold Logic: British Computer Art 1960–1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q384688" start="5626" end="5651" title="Christine Buci-Glucksmann" label="Christine Buci-Glucksmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="5806" end="5825" title="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson" label="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193478" start="5834" end="5846" title="Joline Blais" label="Joline Blais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270960" start="5851" end="5863" title="Jon Ippolito" label="Jon Ippolito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="5897" end="5916" title="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson" label="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084903" start="5925" end="5937" title="Charlie Gere" label="Charlie Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q61681" start="5987" end="5998" title="Oliver Grau" label="Oliver Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="6109" end="6122" title="The MIT Press" label="The MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q61681" start="6143" end="6154" title="Oliver Grau" label="Oliver Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="6195" end="6204" title="MIT Press" label="MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294655" start="6594" end="6607" title="Donald Kuspit" label="Donald Kuspit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294655" start="6782" end="6795" title="Donald Kuspit" label="Donald Kuspit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="6989" end="7020" title="The University of Chicago Press" label="The University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="7122" end="7131" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q716367" start="7140" end="7152" title="Lev Manovich" label="Lev Manovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q716367" start="7257" end="7269" title="Lev Manovich" label="Lev Manovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229697" start="7318" end="7326" title="Leonardo (journal)" label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487770" start="7383" end="7394" title="Yucef Merhi" label="Yucef Merhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342636" start="7506" end="7522" title="Robert C. Morgan" label="Robert C. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864718" start="7558" end="7567" title="art press" label="art press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082786" start="7588" end="7603" title="Christiane Paul (curator)" label="Christiane Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q466521" start="7785" end="7796" title="Kinetic Art" label="Kinetic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="8039" end="8051" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687961" start="8163" end="8178" title="Tate Publishing Ltd" label="Tate Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760685" start="8187" end="8201" title="Margot Lovejoy" label="Margot Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="8322" end="8347" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086831" start="8722" end="8733" title="Fred Forest" label="Fred Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527311" start="8933" end="8959" title="Wexner Center for the Arts" label="Wexner Center for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="8965" end="8986" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341479" start="8994" end="9011" title="Edward A. Shanken" label="Edward A. Shanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341479" start="9075" end="9092" title="Edward A. Shanken" label="Edward A. Shanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q928675" start="9139" end="9146" title="Phaidon Press" label="Phaidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="9283" end="9296" title="The MIT Press" label="The MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229697" start="9297" end="9313" title="Leonardo (journal)" label="Leonardo Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q120405711" start="9364" end="9375" title="Bruce Wands" label="Bruce Wands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="9421" end="9440" title="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson" label="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383732" wikidata="Q189153" url="?curid=383732" title="Saint-Cloud">
<text>Saint-Cloud () is a commune in the western suburbs of Paris, France, from the centre of Paris. Like other communes of Hauts-de-Seine such as Marnes-la-Coquette, Neuilly-sur-Seine and Vaucresson, Saint-Cloud is one of France&#x27;s wealthiest towns, with the second-highest average household income of communities with 10,000 to 50,000 households.

Saint-Cloud is home to the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (IBWM), located in the Parc de Saint-Cloud&#x27;s Pavillon de Breteuil.

== History ==

The town is named after Clodoald, grandson of Clovis, who is supposed to have sought refuge in a hamlet on the Seine near Paris, then named Novigentum, like many other newly founded mercantile settlements outside the traditional towns. After he was canonized, the village where his tomb was located took the name of Sanctus Clodoaldus.

A park contains the ruins of the Château de Saint-Cloud, built in 1572 and destroyed by fire in 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War. The château was the residence of several French rulers and served as the main country residence of the cadet Orléans line until the French Revolution. The palace was also the site of the &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; led by Napoleon Bonaparte that overthrew the French Directory in 1799.

The town is also famous for the Saint-Cloud porcelain produced there from 1693 to 1766.

The Headquarters of the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) was at 22 Rue Armengaud from 1966 until 1989, when it moved to Lyon.

==Demographics==
== Main sights ==
The main landmarks are the park of the demolished Château de Saint-Cloud and the Pavillon de Breteuil. The Saint-Cloud Racecourse, a racetrack for Thoroughbred flat racing, was built by Edmond Blanc in 1901 and hosts a number of important races, including the annual Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud.

=== Tribute to Santos-Dumont ===
On the Avenue de Longchamp is a bronze statue commissioned by the Airclub of France representing the Greek mythological figure Icarus, in honour of Alberto Santos-Dumont. Inaugurated on October 19, 1913, it sits on a square near the old Aerostation of Saint-Cloud, where Santos-Dumont performed his experiments with heavier-than-air aircraft. Santos-Dumont was also responsible for the construction of the world&#x27;s first hangar. A replica has occupied the hangar&#x27;s site in Saint-Cloud since 1952 after the original was destroyed for its bronze during the Nazi military occupation.

== Transport ==
Saint-Cloud is served by two stations on the Transilien La Défense and Paris-Saint-Lazare suburban rail lines: Le Val d&#x27;Or and Saint-Cloud.

The town is also served by tramway Line T2, which runs alongside the Seine.

Central Saint-Cloud, known as &quot;le village&quot; (&quot;the village&quot;), is also served by the Métro station Boulogne–Pont de Saint-Cloud (Line 10), just across the Seine on the Boulogne-Billancourt side of the Pont de Saint-Cloud.

Saint-Cloud will at the horizon of end 2031equally be connected to the Line 15 of the Paris metro, that is currently under construction.

== Hospital ==
* René Huguenin Hospital

== Education ==
Public high schools:
* Lycée Alexandre-Dumas
* Lycée Santos-Dumont
It is also served by the public high school Lycée Jean Pierre Vernant in Sèvres.

Private high schools:
* Institution Saint-Pie-X

International schools:
*American School of Paris
*Internationale Deutsche Schule Paris (German school)

A campus of the Paris Nanterre University is also located in the city.
== Personalities ==

=== Notable births ===
* Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (1674–1723), Regent of France from 1715 to 1723
* Élisabeth Charlotte d&#x27;Orléans (1676–1744), Regent of Lorraine, lived at the Palace at Saint-Cloud
* Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (1747–1793), a key figure during the early stages of the French Revolution;
* Princess Marie Bonaparte (1882–1962), psychoanalyst, closely linked with Sigmund Freud
* Gilbert Norman (1914–1944), Special Operations Executive member
* Annick Gendron, painter
* Nicole Courcel (1930–2016), film actress
* Jean-Claude Killy (born 1943), alpine skier and a triple Olympic champion
* Gérard Manset (born 1945), known as Manset, rock songwriter
* Hervé Guibert (1955–1991), writer
* Mino Cinelu (born 1957), musician
* Alexandra Fusai (born 1973), former professional tennis player
* Marie Silin (born 1979), member of parliament
* Magalie Poisson (born 1982), Olympic rhythmic gymnast
* Paul Lasne (born 1989), footballer
* Ingmar Lazar (born 1993), classical pianist, prodigy
=== Notable residents ===
* Henri III of France (1551–1589), King of France, assassinated in Saint-Cloud
* Philippe d&#x27;Orléans (1640–1701) lived in the Château de Saint-Cloud from 1658 to his death in 1701
* Henrietta of England (1644–1670) lived and died in the Château de Saint-Cloud
* Napoléon I (1769–1821) lived in the Château de Saint-Cloud
* Antoine Sénard (1800–1885), member of the National Assembly, mayor of Saint-Cloud from 1871 to 1874
* Émile Verhaeren (1855–1916), Flemish poet
* André Chevrillon (1864–1957), French author
* Florent Schmitt (1870–1958), French composer
* Maurice Ravel (1875–1937), French composer
* Marcel Dassault (1892–1986), French businessman and politician
* Alberto Santos-Dumont (1873–1932), Brazilian inventor and aviation pioneer
* Lino Ventura (1919–1987), Italian actor, lived and died in Saint-Cloud
* Jean-Pierre Fourcade (born 1929), French Minister, mayor of Saint-Cloud from 1971 to 1992
* Christophe Dominici (1972–2020), rugby union player for France and Stade Français
* Gérard Holtz (born 1946), French sports journalist
* Jean-Marie Le Pen, French politician, owner of Domaine de Montretout in Saint-Cloud

=== Notable burials ===
* Alimardan Topchubashov (1863–1934)
* Edmond Blanc (1856–1920)
* René Alexandre (1885–1946)
* Maurice Bessy (1910–1993), author of &quot;A Pictorial History of Magic and The Supernatural&quot; (1963)
* Gérard Blain (1930–2000)
* Gilbert Grandval (1904–1981)
* Fernand Gravey (1905–1970)
* Jean-René Huguenin (1936–1962)
* Dorothy Jordan (1761–1816)
* Vlado Perlemuter (1904–2002)
* Andrée Servilange (1911–2001)
* Jean Toulout (1887–1962)
* Maurice Yvain (1891–1965)

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Saint-Cloud is twinned with:

* Bad Godesberg (Bonn), Germany
* Boadilla del Monte, Spain
* Frascati, Italy
* Kortrijk, Belgium
* St. Cloud, Florida, United States
* St. Cloud, Minnesota, United States
* Windsor and Maidenhead, England, United Kingdom
== In popular culture ==
Saint-Cloud is the main setting of the 1955 French film &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Diabolique&quot;).

== See also ==
*Communes of the Hauts-de-Seine department

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="0" end="11" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="20" end="27" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="54" end="59" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="61" end="67" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q329477" start="78" end="93" title="Kilometre zero" label="centre of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12543" start="118" end="132" title="Hauts-de-Seine" label="Hauts-de-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q636993" start="141" end="159" title="Marnes-la-Coquette" label="Marnes-la-Coquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="161" end="178" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q638656" start="183" end="193" title="Vaucresson" label="Vaucresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="375" end="419" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="International Bureau of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030715" start="443" end="462" title="Parc de Saint-Cloud" label="Parc de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373063" start="470" end="490" title="Pavillon de Breteuil" label="Pavillon de Breteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q705362" start="532" end="540" title="Clodoald" label="Clodoald"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="554" end="560" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q662491" start="878" end="900" title="Château de Saint-Cloud" label="Château de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="957" end="976" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q502190" start="1087" end="1094" title="Duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1110" end="1127" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q620965" start="1161" end="1193" title="18 Brumaire" label="the &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;état&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1201" end="1219" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="1239" end="1255" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400585" start="1298" end="1319" title="Saint-Cloud porcelain" label="Saint-Cloud porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="1423" end="1431" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1496" end="1500" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q662491" start="1588" end="1610" title="Château de Saint-Cloud" label="Château de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373063" start="1619" end="1639" title="Pavillon de Breteuil" label="Pavillon de Breteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135925" start="1645" end="1667" title="Saint-Cloud Racecourse" label="Saint-Cloud Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="1685" end="1697" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1698" end="1709" title="flat racing" label="flat racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047749" start="1724" end="1736" title="Edmond Blanc" label="Edmond Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114146" start="1805" end="1830" title="Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud" label="Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q34041" start="1993" end="1999" title="Icarus" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="2014" end="2035" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="2182" end="2207" title="heavier-than-air aircraft" label="heavier-than-air aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="2430" end="2454" title="German occupation of France" label="Nazi military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q389554" start="2518" end="2528" title="Transilien" label="Transilien"/>
<link wikidata="Q93559" start="2529" end="2539" title="Transilien La Défense" label="La Défense"/>
<link wikidata="Q732778" start="2544" end="2562" title="Transilien Paris-Saint-Lazare" label="Paris-Saint-Lazare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2584" end="2600" title="Le Val d&amp;#x27;Or station" label="Le Val d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q615052" start="2605" end="2616" title="Saint-Cloud station" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142114" start="2646" end="2653" title="Tramways in Île-de-France" label="tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771110" start="2654" end="2661" title="Île-de-France tramway Line 2" label="Line T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="2688" end="2693" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="2798" end="2803" title="Paris Métro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q895108" start="2812" end="2840" title="Boulogne–Pont de Saint-Cloud (Paris Métro)" label="Boulogne–Pont de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q50754" start="2842" end="2849" title="Paris Métro Line 10" label="Line 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q172455" start="2881" end="2901" title="Boulogne-Billancourt" label="Boulogne-Billancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787259" start="2914" end="2933" title="Pont de Saint-Cloud" label="Pont de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3007" end="3033" title=":fr:Ligne_15_du_métro_de_Paris" label="Line 15 of the Paris metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q22924354" start="3091" end="3113" title="René Huguenin Hospital" label="René Huguenin Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q26828823" start="3154" end="3175" title="Lycée Alexandre-Dumas (Saint-Cloud)" label="Lycée Alexandre-Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515603" start="3242" end="3267" title="Lycée Jean Pierre Vernant" label="Lycée Jean Pierre Vernant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206493" start="3271" end="3277" title="Sèvres" label="Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744944" start="3353" end="3377" title="American School of Paris" label="American School of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820289" start="3379" end="3415" title="Internationale Deutsche Schule Paris" label="Internationale Deutsche Schule Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394262" start="3449" end="3474" title="Paris Nanterre University" label="Paris Nanterre University"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="3550" end="3578" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="3592" end="3598" title="Regent" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q233610" start="3629" end="3663" title="Élisabeth Charlotte d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Élisabeth Charlotte d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="3734" end="3768" title="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3826" end="3843" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472" start="3856" end="3871" title="Marie Bonaparte" label="Marie Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="3885" end="3898" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="3920" end="3933" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105812" start="3936" end="3950" title="Gilbert Norman" label="Gilbert Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="3964" end="3992" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851583" start="4002" end="4016" title="Annick Gendron" label="Annick Gendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q430016" start="4028" end="4042" title="Nicole Courcel" label="Nicole Courcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11485" start="4071" end="4088" title="Jean-Claude Killy" label="Jean-Claude Killy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="4102" end="4114" title="Alpine skiing" label="alpine skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="4128" end="4135" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124164" start="4147" end="4160" title="Gérard Manset" label="Gérard Manset"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="4196" end="4206" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84153" start="4209" end="4222" title="Hervé Guibert" label="Hervé Guibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937469" start="4245" end="4256" title="Mino Cinelu" label="Mino Cinelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q468226" start="4281" end="4296" title="Alexandra Fusai" label="Alexandra Fusai"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="4317" end="4343" title="tennis" label="professional tennis player"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704921" start="4346" end="4357" title="Marie Silin" label="Marie Silin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044918" start="4371" end="4391" title="Member of Parliament (France)" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q31294969" start="4394" end="4409" title="Magalie Poisson" label="Magalie Poisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61465" start="4431" end="4447" title="Rhythmic gymnastics" label="rhythmic gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27822" start="4450" end="4460" title="Paul Lasne" label="Paul Lasne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663084" start="4487" end="4499" title="Ingmar Lazar" label="Ingmar Lazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="4513" end="4530" title="classical pianist" label="classical pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="4568" end="4587" title="Henri III of France" label="Henri III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q296555" start="4647" end="4670" title="Philippe I, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q230921" start="4752" end="4772" title="Henrietta of England" label="Henrietta of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="4832" end="4842" title="Napoléon Ier" label="Napoléon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q587009" start="4893" end="4907" title="Antoine Sénard" label="Antoine Sénard"/>
<link wikidata="Q193680" start="4995" end="5010" title="Émile Verhaeren" label="Émile Verhaeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847528" start="5039" end="5055" title="André Chevrillon" label="André Chevrillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q321630" start="5085" end="5100" title="Florent Schmitt" label="Florent Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="5132" end="5145" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160802" start="5177" end="5192" title="Marcel Dassault" label="Marcel Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="5242" end="5263" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q337260" start="5319" end="5331" title="Lino Ventura" label="Lino Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685206" start="5392" end="5412" title="Jean-Pierre Fourcade" label="Jean-Pierre Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q923207" start="5484" end="5503" title="Christophe Dominici" label="Christophe Dominici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124024" start="5568" end="5580" title="Gérard Holtz" label="Gérard Holtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177" start="5621" end="5638" title="Jean-Marie Le Pen" label="Jean-Marie Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444750" start="5732" end="5754" title="Alimardan Topchubashov" label="Alimardan Topchubashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047749" start="5769" end="5781" title="Edmond Blanc" label="Edmond Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425745" start="5796" end="5810" title="René Alexandre" label="René Alexandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q710654" start="5933" end="5945" title="Gérard Blain" label="Gérard Blain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523977" start="5960" end="5976" title="Gilbert Grandval" label="Gilbert Grandval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406503" start="5991" end="6005" title="Fernand Gravey" label="Fernand Gravey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169913" start="6020" end="6038" title="Jean-René Huguenin" label="Jean-René Huguenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q262755" start="6053" end="6067" title="Dorothea Jordan" label="Dorothy Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q725456" start="6082" end="6098" title="Vlado Perlemuter" label="Vlado Perlemuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848973" start="6113" end="6130" title="Andrée Servilange" label="Andrée Servilange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174831" start="6145" end="6157" title="Jean Toulout" label="Jean Toulout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911484" start="6172" end="6185" title="Maurice Yvain" label="Maurice Yvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="6246" end="6253" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q153260" start="6263" end="6283" title="Bad Godesberg" label="Bad Godesberg (Bonn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641013" start="6295" end="6313" title="Boadilla del Monte" label="Boadilla del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q190963" start="6323" end="6331" title="Frascati" label="Frascati"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="6341" end="6349" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q928701" start="6361" end="6379" title="St. Cloud, Florida" label="St. Cloud, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q736834" start="6397" end="6417" title="St. Cloud, Minnesota" label="St. Cloud, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368496" start="6435" end="6457" title="Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead" label="Windsor and Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q739046" start="6570" end="6585" title="Les Diaboliques (film)" label="Les Diaboliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q316918" start="6642" end="6683" title="Communes of the Hauts-de-Seine department" label="Communes of the Hauts-de-Seine department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383735" wikidata="Q1326918" url="?curid=383735" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961">
<text>[[Ethiopian Airlines]] Flight 961 was a scheduled international flight serving the route Addis Ababa–Nairobi–Brazzaville–Lagos–Abidjan. On 23 November 1996, the aircraft serving the flight, a Boeing 767-200ER, was hijacked en route from Addis Ababa to Nairobi by three Ethiopians seeking asylum in Australia. The plane crash-landed in the Indian Ocean near Grande Comore, Comoros Islands, due to fuel exhaustion; 125 of the 175 passengers and crew on board, including the three hijackers, died. This is the first recorded instance of a ditching utilizing a wide-body aircraft.

==Background==
=== Aircraft ===
The aircraft involved was a Boeing 767-260ER, registered ET-AIZ, c/n 23916, that first flew on 17 September 1987. Powered by two Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D-7R4E engines, it was delivered new to Ethiopian Airlines on 22 October 1987. Except for a short period between and when it was leased to Air Tanzania, the airplane spent its life in the Ethiopian Airlines fleet. It was nine years old at the time the hijacking took place.

=== Crew ===
Captain Leul Abate (42), an experienced pilot with over 11,500 total flight hours (including 4,067 hours in the Boeing 757/767), was the pilot-in-command. The first officer on the flight was Yonas Mekuria (34). He had flown more than 6,500 hours, 3,042 of them in the Boeing 757/767.

Prior to the crash, Leul had experienced two previous hijackings. The first occurred 12 April 1992 on Flight ETH574, a Boeing 727-260. Two hijackers with hand grenades demanded to be taken to Nairobi and onwards to Canada. After a five-hour standoff at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, the hijackers surrendered. The second occurred on 17 March 1995, flying a Boeing 737-260. Five hijackers demanded to be taken to Libya, and the airplane was diverted to El Obeid, Sudan. There the hijackers changed their mind and wanted to fly to Sweden instead. However, the Sudanese authorities refused to refuel the aircraft, and after several hours of standoff the hijackers surrendered. In both cases, the aircraft were undamaged and no one was injured or killed.

==Incident==
=== Departure ===
The flight had been delayed in order to wait for a connecting flight. The aircraft took off at 08:09 UTC from Addis Ababa.

===Hijacking===
At about 08:29 UTC, when the aircraft, referred to as &quot;Zulu&quot; by Ethiopian Airlines&#x27; pilots after the last letter of its registration, was 20 minutes into the flight, three Ethiopian men charged the cockpit and hijacked the aircraft after taking an axe and a fire extinguisher from the cockpit. Ethiopian state-operated radio later identified the hijackers as two unemployed high-school graduates and a nurse; their names were Alemayehu Bekeli Belayneh, Mathias Solomon Belay, and Sultan Ali Hussein (they did not say who had which description).

The men threatened to blow up the plane in flight if the pilots did not obey their demands. The hijackers claimed that there were 11 of them when in fact there were only three. After assaulting and forcing first officer Yonas Mekuria into the cabin, they made an announcement. Over the intercom, they declared in Amharic, French and English that if anyone tried to interfere, they had a bomb and they would use it to blow up the plane. Authorities later determined that the purported bomb was actually a covered bottle of liquor.

The hijackers demanded the plane be flown to Australia. Leul tried to explain they had only taken on the fuel needed for the Addis Ababa to Nairobi sector and thus could not even make a quarter of the journey to Australia, but the hijackers did not believe him. One of them pointed to a statement in the fleet page of the airline&#x27;s in-flight magazine that the maximum flying time of the 767 was 11 hours.

Leul later commented:

Instead of flying towards Australia, the captain followed the African coastline southward. The hijackers noticed that land was still visible and forced the pilot to steer east. Leul secretly headed for the Comoro Islands, which lie midway between Madagascar and the African mainland. During this time, two of the hijackers went into the cabin, with the lead hijacker (as stated in the report) staying in the cockpit.

===Ditching===

The plane was nearly out of fuel as it approached the island group, but the hijackers continued to ignore the captain&#x27;s warnings. Out of options, Leul began to circle the area, hoping to land the plane at the Comoros&#x27; main airport. This forced Leul to land at more than .

At 11:41 UTC, the right engine flamed out. The hijacker briefly exited the cabin to talk with the other hijackers. Leul took this opportunity to make use of the aircraft&#x27;s public address system and made the following announcement:

Hearing this, the lead hijacker returned to the cockpit and knocked Leul&#x27;s microphone out of his hand. Shortly after this, the left engine flamed out, forcing the 767 to glide. The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) then recorded the following (lowercase words were spoken in Amharic while words typed in uppercase were spoken in English):

Leul&#x27;s sentence was cut off as the CVR and flight data recorder (FDR) both stopped recording at this point due to both engines having flamed out.

Leul tried to make an emergency landing at Prince Said Ibrahim International Airport on Grande Comore, but a fight with the hijackers at the last minute caused him to lose his visual point of reference, leaving him unable to locate the airport. While still fighting with the hijackers, he tried to ditch the aircraft in shallow waters off Le Galawa Beach Hotel, near Mitsamiouli at the northern end of Grande Comore island. Leul attempted to land parallel with the waves instead of against the waves in an effort to smooth the landing. Seconds prior to contacting the water, the aircraft was banked left some ten degrees; the left engine and wingtip struck the water first. The engine acted as a scoop and struck a coral reef, slowing that side of the aircraft quickly and causing the Boeing 767 to suddenly tilt left. The rest of the aircraft then entered the water unevenly, causing it to break apart. Except for the rear part of the airframe, the broken portions of the fuselage sank rapidly. Many passengers died because they prematurely inflated their life jackets in the cabin, causing them to be trapped inside by the sinking plane.

Island residents and tourists, including a group of scuba divers and some French and Indian doctors on vacation, came to the aid of crash survivors. A tourist recorded a video of ET-AIZ crashing. She said that she had begun taping because she initially believed that the 767 formed a part of an air show for tourists.

===Medical treatment and repatriation of bodies===
Survivors were initially taken to Mitsamiouli Hospital. The crash site was fewer than away from this hospital. The passengers were transferred to El-Maarouf Regional Hospital Centre () in Moroni the same day. The two French people who survived and 19 injured were transported to Réunion. In Réunion, one of the injured died, making the death toll 125. Excluding those transported to Réunion, survivors were transported to Kenya and South Africa.

At the time, there was no mortuary in Moroni, so cold rooms were used to store 124 bodies.

===Investigation===

On 3 December 1996, the General Directorate of Civil Aviation of the Comoros () agreed to delegate the investigation of ET961 to the Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority (ECAA). The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) analysed the flight recorders.

==Fate of the passengers and crew==
The final accident report includes a listing of surviving and dead passengers and crew. All 12 crew members were Ethiopians. Six survived, including the captain and first officer.

The passengers originated from 36 countries.

The passenger manifest (including hijackers but not crew members) follows:

The dead passenger count includes the three hijackers. Of the passengers, 42 originated in Mumbai, including:
* 3 Americans
* 9 Nigerians
* 9 Sri Lankans
* 19 Indians

The rest of the passengers originated in Addis Ababa.

Of the 175 passengers and crew members, 125 were killed, including the three hijackers. According to the accident report, all six surviving crew members and 38 passengers received serious injuries, two passengers received minor injuries, and four passengers received no injuries. One passenger, an Ethiopian, was identified as a child on the manifest; this passenger was among the dead.

Many of the passengers survived the initial crash, but they had disregarded, did not understand, or did not hear Leul&#x27;s warning not to inflate their life jackets inside the aircraft, causing them to be pushed against the ceiling of the fuselage by the inflated life jackets when water flooded in. Unable to escape, they drowned. An estimated 60 to 80 passengers, strapped to their seats, presumably drowned.

Leul and Yonas both survived. For his actions, Leul was awarded the Flight Safety Foundation Professionalism in Flight Safety Award.

===Notable passengers===
Among those killed was Mohamed Amin, a wartime photojournalist and publisher of &quot;Selamta&quot;, Ethiopian Airlines&#x27; in-flight magazine. He was believed to be standing near the entrance to the cockpit arguing or negotiating with the hijacker presumed to be guarding the cockpit during the final moments of the flight.

Franklin Huddle, the U.S. Consul General of Bombay at the time, and his wife both survived the crash. Huddle said that he chose to fly on Ethiopian Airlines while planning a safari trip to Kenya because of the airline&#x27;s reputation; it was one of the few airlines in Africa to have Federal Aviation Administration certification. Huddle wanted a flight during the day, reasoning that flying during the day was &quot;safer&quot;. He credits his and his wife&#x27;s survival to a last-minute upgrade to business class.

==Maps==
&lt;mapframe latitude=&quot;0.615223&quot; longitude=&quot;16.787109&quot; zoom=&quot;3&quot; width=&quot;425&quot; height=&quot;500&quot; text=&quot;Location of the crash and the airports&quot; align=&quot;left&quot;&gt;{
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;FeatureCollection&quot;,
 &quot;features&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Addis Ababa&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;airport&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#080&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 38.74, 9.03 ]
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Nairobi&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;airport&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#080&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 36.817, -1.283 ]
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Crash site&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;cross&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#f70&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 43.3, -11.36667 ]
 }
}&lt;/mapframe&gt;&lt;mapframe latitude=&quot;-12.042007&quot; longitude=&quot;44.189758&quot; zoom=&quot;8&quot; width=&quot;425&quot; height=&quot;500&quot; text=&quot;Crash site in the Comoros&quot; align=&quot;right&quot;&gt;{
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;FeatureCollection&quot;,
 &quot;features&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Addis Ababa&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;airport&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#080&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 38.74, 9.03 ]
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Nairobi&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;airport&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#080&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 36.817, -1.283 ]
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Feature&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Crash site&quot;,
 &quot;marker-symbol&quot;: &quot;cross&quot;,
 &quot;marker-color&quot;: &quot;#f70&quot;
 &quot;geometry&quot;: {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;Point&quot;,
 &quot;coordinates&quot;: [ 43.3, -11.36667 ]
 }
}&lt;/mapframe&gt;

==Aftermath==
A memorial service was held in Galawa on 30 November 1996.

The incident has become a well-known hijacking because of the videotape. This was one of very few large airliner water landings, and it was the first water landing due to hijacking. Both the captain and first officer of the flight received aviation awards, and both continued to fly for Ethiopian Airlines, although Leul considers Yonas, the first officer, the real hero. Yonas fought the hijackers while he himself was bruised and bleeding, giving time for Leul to land the airplane. &quot;He was a life-saver&quot;, Leul said.

==In the media==
In 2005, the crash was featured in an episode of the TV show &quot;Mayday&quot; with the title &quot;Ocean Landing&quot;; the episode is from season 3, episode 12.

It was also featured in a 2010 episode of the Biography Channel series &quot;I Survived...&quot;, in which a survivor told his story of what happened on the plane.

==See also==

* Air Canada Flight 143
* 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions
* Tuninter Flight 1153, an ATR 72 ditched into the Mediterranean Sea after a fuel exhaustion
* US Airways Flight 1549
* Ethiopian Airlines accidents and incidents
* List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft
* List of airline flights that required gliding
== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==

*Final Incident Report (Archive Alt archive) – Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority – Includes list of passengers, surviving and deceased
* &quot;Milestones&quot;. (Archive) &quot;Time&quot;. 9 December 1996. – Announcement of deaths of Mohammed Amin and Brian Tetley
* &quot;Rescuers continue search for victims of hijacked plane&quot;. (Archive) &quot;Associated Press&quot; at the &quot;Lubbock Avalanche-Journal&quot;. 1996.
*The Hijacking of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961 (Criminal Acts Against Civil Aviation – 1996, FAA) (Archive Alt archive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326918" start="0" end="33" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961" label="[[Ethiopian Airlines]] Flight 961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="89" end="100" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="101" end="108" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="109" end="120" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="121" end="126" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="127" end="134" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="192" end="208" title="Boeing 767-200ER" label="Boeing 767-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="214" end="222" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918061" start="269" end="279" title="Ethiopians" label="Ethiopians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148045" start="288" end="307" title="asylum in Australia" label="asylum in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="319" end="331" title="Emergency landing" label="crash-landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="339" end="351" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q244978" start="357" end="370" title="Grande Comore" label="Grande Comore"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="372" end="387" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoros Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507172" start="396" end="411" title="fuel exhaustion" label="fuel exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q120706493" start="443" end="447" title="Aircrew member" label="crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164719" start="536" end="544" title="water landing" label="ditching"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="557" end="575" title="wide-body aircraft" label="wide-body aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="638" end="654" title="Boeing 767-200ER" label="Boeing 767-260ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="656" end="666" title="Aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="675" end="678" title="Manufacturer&amp;#x27;s serial number" label="c/n"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="691" end="701" title="Maiden flight" label="first flew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107978" start="739" end="768" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D-7R4E"/>
<link wikidata="Q245233" start="802" end="820" title="Ethiopian Airlines" label="Ethiopian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q407842" start="901" end="913" title="Air Tanzania" label="Air Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146304" start="1050" end="1057" title="Pilot in command" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592087" start="1119" end="1131" title="Flight time" label="flight hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="1162" end="1172" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="1173" end="1176" title="Boeing 767" label="767"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146304" start="1187" end="1203" title="pilot-in-command" label="pilot-in-command"/>
<link wikidata="Q123030" start="1209" end="1222" title="First officer (aviation)" label="first officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="1454" end="1468" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727-260"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="1494" end="1501" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="1527" end="1534" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1550" end="1556" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q206349" start="1588" end="1623" title="Jomo Kenyatta International Airport" label="Jomo Kenyatta International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="1699" end="1713" title="Boeing 737-260" label="Boeing 737-260"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1754" end="1759" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q309475" start="1794" end="1802" title="El Obeid" label="El Obeid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1804" end="1809" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1871" end="1877" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="2226" end="2229" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="2235" end="2246" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="2478" end="2485" title="cockpit" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="2490" end="2511" title="aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked the aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="2528" end="2531" title="Fire axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190672" start="2538" end="2555" title="fire extinguisher" label="fire extinguisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513293" start="3069" end="3074" title="Aircraft cabin" label="cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603074" start="3112" end="3120" title="intercom" label="intercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="3139" end="3146" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3148" end="3154" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3159" end="3166" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="3348" end="3354" title="Distilled beverage" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3402" end="3411" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="3997" end="4011" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="4038" end="4048" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q451996" start="4539" end="4549" title="Flameout" label="flamed out"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="4931" end="4953" title="cockpit voice recorder" label="cockpit voice recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="5133" end="5153" title="flight data recorder" label="flight data recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q653299" start="5280" end="5321" title="Prince Said Ibrahim International Airport" label="Prince Said Ibrahim International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q244978" start="5325" end="5338" title="Grande Comore" label="Grande Comore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109029" start="5604" end="5615" title="Mitsamiouli" label="Mitsamiouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474233" start="5879" end="5886" title="Wing tip" label="wingtip"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="5952" end="5962" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262971" start="6294" end="6305" title="life jacket" label="life jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079255" start="6430" end="6435" title="scuba set" label="scuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="6936" end="6942" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="7027" end="7034" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="7170" end="7175" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7180" end="7192" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451172" start="7221" end="7229" title="Morgue" label="mortuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7332" end="7384" title="General Directorate of Civil Aviation of the Comoros" label="General Directorate of Civil Aviation of the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999130" start="7441" end="7475" title="Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority" label="Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q406725" start="7488" end="7522" title="Air Accidents Investigation Branch" label="Air Accidents Investigation Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="7543" end="7559" title="Flight recorder" label="flight recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q120706493" start="7693" end="7705" title="Aircrew" label="crew members"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859000" start="7829" end="7847" title="passenger manifest" label="passenger manifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7992" end="7998" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262971" start="8666" end="8678" title="Personal flotation device" label="life jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459239" start="8994" end="9018" title="Flight Safety Foundation" label="Flight Safety Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182608" start="9108" end="9120" title="Mohamed Amin" label="Mohamed Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="9132" end="9147" title="Photojournalism" label="photojournalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106296" start="9413" end="9428" title="Franklin Huddle" label="Franklin Huddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164580" start="9434" end="9463" title="Consulate General of the United States, Mumbai" label="U.S. Consul General of Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q849944" start="9587" end="9593" title="safari" label="safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="9699" end="9730" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="12627" end="12635" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164719" start="12636" end="12649" title="water landing" label="water landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q527965" start="13137" end="13143" title="Mayday (Canadian TV series)" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q622329" start="13281" end="13298" title="Biography Channel" label="Biography Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979093" start="13312" end="13325" title="I Survived..." label="I Survived..."/>
<link wikidata="Q370555" start="13416" end="13437" title="Gimli Glider" label="Air Canada Flight 143"/>
<link wikidata="Q800043" start="13440" end="13480" title="1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions" label="1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q962475" start="13483" end="13503" title="Tuninter Flight 1153" label="Tuninter Flight 1153"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="13508" end="13514" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="13532" end="13549" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q251039" start="13576" end="13598" title="US Airways Flight 1549" label="US Airways Flight 1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403532" start="13601" end="13643" title="Ethiopian Airlines accidents and incidents" label="Ethiopian Airlines accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="13646" end="13707" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605174" start="13710" end="13755" title="List of airline flights that required gliding" label="List of airline flights that required gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999130" start="13852" end="13886" title="Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority" label="Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13983" end="13987" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="14157" end="14173" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695114" start="14193" end="14218" title="Lubbock Avalanche-Journal" label="Lubbock Avalanche-Journal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383736" wikidata="Q591310" url="?curid=383736" title="General position">
<text>In algebraic geometry and computational geometry, general position is a notion of genericity for a set of points, or other geometric objects. It means the &quot;general case&quot; situation, as opposed to some more special or coincidental cases that are possible, which is referred to as special position. Its precise meaning differs in different settings.

For example, generically, two lines in the plane intersect in a single point (they are not parallel or coincident). One also says &quot;two generic lines intersect in a point&quot;, which is formalized by the notion of a &quot;generic point&quot;. Similarly, three generic points in the plane are not collinear; if three points are collinear (even stronger, if two coincide), this is a degenerate case.

This notion is important in mathematics and its applications, because degenerate cases may require an exceptional treatment; for example, when stating general theorems or giving precise statements thereof, and when writing computer programs (see &quot;generic complexity&quot;).

==General linear position==
A set of points in a -dimensional affine space (-dimensional Euclidean space is a common example) is in general linear position (or just general position) if no of them lie in a -dimensional flat for . These conditions contain considerable redundancy since, if the condition holds for some value then it also must hold for all with . Thus, for a set containing at least points in -dimensional affine space to be in general position, it suffices that no hyperplane contains more than points – i.e. the points do not satisfy any more linear relations than they must.

A set of at most points in general linear position is also said to be &quot;affinely independent&quot; (this is the affine analog of linear independence of vectors, or more precisely of maximal rank), and points in general linear position in affine &quot;d&quot;-space are an affine basis. See affine transformation for more.

Similarly, &quot;n&quot; vectors in an &quot;n&quot;-dimensional vector space are linearly independent if and only if the points they define in projective space (of dimension ) are in general linear position.

If a set of points is not in general linear position, it is called a degenerate case or degenerate configuration, which implies that they satisfy a linear relation that need not always hold.

A fundamental application is that, in the plane, five points determine a conic, as long as the points are in general linear position (no three are collinear).

== More generally ==
This definition can be generalized further: one may speak of points in general position with respect to a fixed class of algebraic relations (e.g. conic sections). In algebraic geometry this kind of condition is frequently encountered, in that points should impose &quot;independent&quot; conditions on curves passing through them.

For example, five points determine a conic, but in general six points do not lie on a conic, so being in general position with respect to conics requires that no six points lie on a conic.

General position is preserved under biregular maps – if image points satisfy a relation, then under a biregular map this relation may be pulled back to the original points. Significantly, the Veronese map is biregular; as points under the Veronese map corresponds to evaluating a degree &quot;d&quot; polynomial at that point, this formalizes the notion that points in general position impose independent linear conditions on varieties passing through them.

The basic condition for general position is that points do not fall on subvarieties of lower degree than necessary; in the plane two points should not be coincident, three points should not fall on a line, six points should not fall on a conic, ten points should not fall on a cubic, and likewise for higher degree. 

This is not sufficient, however. While nine points determine a cubic, there are configurations of nine points that are special with respect to cubics, namely the intersection of two cubics. The intersection of two cubics, which is formula_1 points (by Bézout&#x27;s theorem), is special in that nine points in general position are contained in a &quot;unique&quot; cubic, while if they are contained in two cubics they in fact are contained in a pencil (1-parameter linear system) of cubics, whose equations are the projective linear combinations of the equations for the two cubics. Thus such sets of points impose one fewer condition on cubics containing them than expected, and accordingly satisfy an additional constraint, namely the Cayley–Bacharach theorem that any cubic that contains eight of the points necessarily contains the ninth. Analogous statements hold for higher degree.

For points in the plane or on an algebraic curve, the notion of general position is made algebraically precise by the notion of a regular divisor, and is measured by the vanishing of the higher sheaf cohomology groups of the associated line bundle (formally, invertible sheaf). As the terminology reflects, this is significantly more technical than the intuitive geometric picture, similar to how a formal definition of intersection number requires sophisticated algebra. This definition generalizes in higher dimensions to hypersurfaces (codimension 1 subvarieties), rather than to sets of points, and regular divisors are contrasted with superabundant divisors, as discussed in the Riemann–Roch theorem for surfaces.

Note that not all points in general position are projectively equivalent, which is a much stronger condition; for example, any &quot;k&quot; distinct points in the line are in general position, but projective transformations are only 3-transitive, with the invariant of 4 points being the cross ratio.

== Different geometries ==
Different geometries allow different notions of geometric constraints. For example, a circle is a concept that makes sense in Euclidean geometry, but not in affine linear geometry or projective geometry, where circles cannot be distinguished from ellipses, since one may squeeze a circle to an ellipse. Similarly, a parabola is a concept in affine geometry but not in projective geometry, where a parabola is simply a kind of conic. The geometry that is overwhelmingly used in algebraic geometry is projective geometry, with affine geometry finding significant but far less use.

Thus, in Euclidean geometry three non-collinear points determine a circle (as the circumcircle of the triangle they define), but four points in general do not (they do so only for cyclic quadrilaterals), so the notion of &quot;general position with respect to circles&quot;, namely &quot;no four points lie on a circle&quot; makes sense. In projective geometry, by contrast, circles are not distinct from conics, and five points determine a conic, so there is no projective notion of &quot;general position with respect to circles&quot;.

== General type ==

General position is a property of configurations of points, or more generally other subvarieties (lines in general position, so no three concurrent, and the like). General position is an &quot;extrinsic&quot; notion, which depends on an embedding as a subvariety. Informally, subvarieties are in general position if they cannot be described more simply than others. An &quot;intrinsic&quot; analog of general position is general type, and corresponds to a variety which cannot be described by simpler polynomial equations than others. This is formalized by the notion of Kodaira dimension of a variety, and by this measure projective spaces are the most special varieties, though there are other equally special ones, meaning having negative Kodaira dimension. For algebraic curves, the resulting classification is: projective line, torus, higher genus surfaces (formula_2), and similar classifications occur in higher dimensions, notably the Enriques–Kodaira classification of algebraic surfaces.

==Other contexts==
In intersection theory, both in algebraic geometry and in geometric topology, the analogous notion of transversality is used: subvarieties in general intersect &quot;transversally,&quot; meaning with multiplicity 1, rather than being tangent or other, higher order intersections.

===General position for Delaunay triangulations in the plane===
When discussing Voronoi tessellations and Delaunay triangulations in the plane, a set of points in the plane is said to be in general position only if no four of them lie on the same circle and no three of them are collinear. The usual lifting transform that relates the Delaunay triangulation to the bottom half of a convex hull (i.e., giving each point &quot;p&quot; an extra coordinate equal to |&quot;p&quot;|2) shows the connection to the planar view: Four points lie on a circle or three of them are collinear exactly when their lifted counterparts are &quot;not&quot; in general linear position.

==Abstractly: configuration spaces==
In very abstract terms, general position is a discussion of generic properties of a configuration space; in this context one means properties that hold on the generic point of a configuration space, or equivalently on a Zariski-open set.

This notion coincides with the measure theoretic notion of generic, meaning almost everywhere on the configuration space, or equivalently that points chosen at random will almost surely (with probability 1) be in general position.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="3" end="21" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q874709" start="26" end="48" title="computational geometry" label="computational geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q591310" start="50" end="66" title="General position" label="general position"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532678" start="82" end="92" title="generic property" label="genericity"/>
<link wikidata="Q591310" start="288" end="304" title="General position" label="special position"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="585" end="598" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="659" end="668" title="Line (geometry)" label="collinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q917661" start="744" end="759" title="degeneracy (mathematics)" label="degenerate case"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="921" end="928" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="985" end="1001" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532647" start="1014" end="1032" title="Generic-case complexity" label="generic complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="1092" end="1101" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="1104" end="1116" title="affine space" label="affine space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="1131" end="1146" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="1249" end="1258" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024397" start="1261" end="1265" title="Flat (geometry)" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="1523" end="1533" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="1769" end="1788" title="linear independence" label="linear independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="1912" end="1924" title="affine basis" label="affine basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="1930" end="1951" title="affine transformation" label="affine transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="2107" end="2123" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q917661" start="2242" end="2257" title="degenerate case" label="degenerate case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456251" start="2414" end="2443" title="five points determine a conic" label="five points determine a conic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="2693" end="2706" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="2713" end="2731" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456251" start="2892" end="2921" title="five points determine a conic" label="five points determine a conic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309604" start="3105" end="3114" title="biregular" label="biregular"/>
<link wikidata="Q129112856" start="3261" end="3273" title="Veronese map" label="Veronese map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542114" start="4098" end="4119" title="Bézout&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bézout&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15736718" start="4292" end="4298" title="pencil (mathematics)" label="pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072174" start="4312" end="4325" title="linear system" label="linear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455043" start="4584" end="4608" title="Cayley–Bacharach theorem" label="Cayley–Bacharach theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q909669" start="4874" end="4881" title="Divisor (algebraic geometry)" label="divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493952" start="4930" end="4946" title="sheaf cohomology" label="sheaf cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509762" start="4972" end="4983" title="line bundle" label="line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905137" start="4995" end="5011" title="invertible sheaf" label="invertible sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q638846" start="5156" end="5175" title="intersection number" label="intersection number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333126" start="5420" end="5453" title="Riemann–Roch theorem for surfaces" label="Riemann–Roch theorem for surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q899539" start="5745" end="5756" title="cross ratio" label="cross ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="5912" end="5930" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="6448" end="6460" title="circumcircle" label="circumcircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q692086" start="6546" end="6566" title="cyclic quadrilateral" label="cyclic quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425087" start="7346" end="7358" title="general type" label="general type"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425087" start="7496" end="7513" title="Kodaira dimension" label="Kodaira dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584390" start="7868" end="7899" title="Enriques–Kodaira classification" label="Enriques–Kodaira classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434805" start="7903" end="7920" title="algebraic surface" label="algebraic surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176852" start="7946" end="7965" title="intersection theory" label="intersection theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="8001" end="8019" title="geometric topology" label="geometric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300767" start="8045" end="8059" title="Transversality (mathematics)" label="transversality"/>
<link wikidata="Q757267" start="8304" end="8324" title="Voronoi tessellation" label="Voronoi tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192445" start="8330" end="8352" title="Delaunay triangulation" label="Delaunay triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="8377" end="8382" title="Point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="8391" end="8396" title="plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532678" start="8989" end="9007" title="generic property" label="generic properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q41636387" start="9013" end="9032" title="configuration space (mathematics)" label="configuration space"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="9088" end="9101" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="9199" end="9216" title="measure theory" label="measure theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="9244" end="9261" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="9340" end="9353" title="almost surely" label="almost surely"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383746" wikidata="Q25550691" url="?curid=383746" title="Town hall">
<text>In local government, a city hall, town hall, civic centre (in the UK or Australia), guildhall, or municipal hall (in the Philippines) is the chief administrative building of a city, town, or other municipality. It usually houses the city or town council and at least some other arms of the local government. It also often functions as the office of the mayor (or other executive), if the relevant municipality has such an officer. In large cities, the local government is often administratively expansive, and the city hall may bear more resemblance to a municipal capitol building.

By convention, until the middle of the 19th century, a single large open chamber (or &quot;hall&quot;) formed an integral part of the building housing the council and such other organs of government as supported it. The hall may be used for council meetings and other significant events. This large chamber, the &quot;town hall&quot; (and its later variant &quot;city hall&quot;) became synonymous with the whole building, and, synecdochically, the municipal government headquartered there. The terms &quot;council chambers&quot;, &quot;municipal building&quot; or variants may be used locally in preference to &quot;town hall&quot; if no such large hall is present within the building.

The local government may endeavor to use the building to promote and enhance the quality of life of the community. In many cases, &quot;town halls&quot; serve not only as buildings for government functions, but also have facilities for various civic and cultural activities. These may include art shows, stage performances, exhibits, and festivals. Modern town halls or &quot;civic centres&quot; are often designed with a great variety and flexibility of purpose in mind. In some European countries, the town hall is the venue for the declaration of Christmas Peace, such as Turku and Porvoo in Finland and Tartu in Estonia.

As symbols of local government, city, and town halls have distinctive architecture, and the buildings may have great historical significance for example the Guildhall, London. City hall buildings may also serve as cultural icons that symbolize their cities. City Hall buildings often serve citizens in accessing government functions as well as providing vital symbolic roles for their communities.

== Nomenclature ==

In Commonwealth countries, the term &quot;town hall&quot; may be used even in a city. This is often the case in the United Kingdom (examples being Manchester Town Hall and Liverpool Town Hall), Australia (Sydney Town Hall), New Zealand, and elsewhere.

People in some regions use the term &quot;city hall&quot; to designate the council offices of a municipality of city status. This is the case in North America, where a distinction is made between city halls and town halls. The term is also sometimes (but more rarely) used as a name in Commonwealth countries: for example, for the City Halls of Brisbane in Australia, and of Cardiff, Norwich and Bristol in the UK. City Hall in Dublin, Ireland, is another example. City Hall in London, opened in 2002, is an exceptional case, being the seat not of a conventional municipal authority, but of a regional strategic authority.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; sums up the generic terms:

* town hall: &quot;A building used for the administration of local government, the holding of court sessions, public meetings, entertainments, etc.; (in early use also) a large hall used for such purposes within a larger building or set of buildings. ... By metonymy: the government or administration of a town; the town authorities.&quot;
* city hall: &quot;(The name of) the chief administrative building or offices of a municipal government. ... Originally and chiefly &quot;North American&quot;. Municipal officers collectively; city government.&quot;

County Council administrations in parts of England and Wales generally operate from a base in a building called, by analogy, a &quot;county hall&quot; or &quot;shire hall&quot;. Conversely, cities that have subdivisions with their councils may have borough halls. Scottish local government in larger cities operates from the &quot;City Chambers&quot;.

Other names are occasionally used. The administrative headquarters of the City of London retains its Anglo-Saxon name, the Guildhall, signifying a place where taxes were paid. In a few English cities (including Birmingham, Coventry and Nottingham) the preferred term is &quot;Council House&quot;: this was also true in Bristol until 2012, when the building was renamed &quot;City Hall&quot;. In Birmingham, there is a distinction between the Council House and the Town Hall, a concert and meeting venue that pre-dates it. In Sheffield, the distinction is between the Town Hall, the seat of local government, and the City Hall, a concert and ballroom venue. In Leeds, the Town Hall, built in the 1850s as a seat of local government, now functions primarily as a concert, conference, and wedding venue, many of its municipal functions having moved in 1933 to the new Civic Hall.

== History ==

The development of the town hall as a setting for local governance meetings and decisions is historically related to the early cities in medieval Europe. The objective was to have engagement with the citizens in a public space by a representative civic authority. The oldest town hall in the world is Palazzo Senatorio in Rome, Italy, which is established in AD 1144. The town hall concept of democracy was developed prolifically in northern Italy where several merchant cities entered into the allegiance of the Lombard League.

In the later Middle Ages or early modern period, many European market towns erected communal market halls, comprising a covered space to function as a marketplace at street level, and one or more rooms used for public or civic purposes above it. These buildings were frequently the precursors of dedicated town halls. The modern concept of the town hall developed with the rise of medieval communes. Much as a lord was based in his hall, the new councils which formed to rule the cities required a headquarters. This building needed a debating chamber for council meetings, office space for city employees, an archive room for official documents, and some degree of fortification lest the city be attacked.

The Palazzo Senatorio has been the headquarters of the municipal government of Rome since 1144, making it the oldest city hall in the world. The Cologne City Hall of 1135 is another early example. The Palazzo Pubblico of the Republic of Siena and the Palazzo Vecchio of the Republic of Florence, both late-medieval town halls, date from 1297 and 1299 respectively. In each case, the large, fortified building comprises a large meeting hall and numerous administrative chambers. Both buildings are topped by tall towers, have ancient clocks against which townsfolk measured time, and have space for local archives of official documents. These features became standard for town halls across Europe. The 15th-century Brussels Town Hall, with its tower, is one of the grandest examples of the medieval era, serving as a model for 19th-century town halls such as the Rathaus, Vienna.

Over centuries, the idea of civic representation along with notions of urbanism and public space evolved. Even the building form grew in size and the town hall concept expanded beyond Europe to become an established institution across the world.

== Municipal government ==
As the functions of government generally and municipal government in particular expanded in the 19th and 20th centuries, the role of town and city halls became broader. Many cities established a reading room in their city hall, which later grew into a public library, typically in its own building. The central room in a town hall (the &quot;hall&quot; proper) began to be used for a variety of other functions; some cities installed a large pipe organ to facilitate public entertainment.

In the 20th century, the town hall served the public as place for voting, examinations, vaccinations, disaster relief, and disseminating information through noticeboards, as well as for the more usual civil work, festivities, and entertainments. Local councils have increasingly moved administrative functions into modern office buildings. New premises are designed and constructed to separately house local government, the functions of administrative office, and the civic town hall.

== Language ==
Particularly in North America, &quot;city hall&quot; can be used as a metonym to mean municipal government, or government in general, as in the axiom &quot;You can&#x27;t fight city hall&quot;. &quot;Town hall&quot; tends to have less formal connotations (cf. Town meeting).

== See also ==
* List of city and town halls
* Ratusz 
* Barangay hall
* Market hall
* Moot hall
* Town meeting
* Administrative centre

== References ==
==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="3" end="19" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="23" end="33" title="Town hall" label="city hall,"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="34" end="44" title="Town hall" label="town hall,"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="45" end="57" title="Town hall" label="civic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="66" end="68" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="72" end="81" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="84" end="94" title="Town hall" label="guildhall,"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="98" end="112" title="Town hall" label="municipal hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="121" end="132" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="147" end="161" title="administration (government)" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="197" end="209" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="233" end="237" title="City council" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="241" end="253" title="town council" label="town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="353" end="358" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q224158" start="565" end="572" title="Capitol (disambiguation)" label="capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="1012" end="1027" title="Synecdoche" label="synecdochically"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="1353" end="1368" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555455" start="1822" end="1837" title="Christmas Peace" label="Christmas Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="1847" end="1852" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="1857" end="1863" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1867" end="1874" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="1879" end="1884" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="1888" end="1895" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="2055" end="2072" title="Guildhall, London" label="Guildhall, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="2112" end="2125" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757823" start="2320" end="2342" title="Commonwealth countries" label="Commonwealth countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2433" end="2447" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578415" start="2464" end="2484" title="Manchester Town Hall" label="Manchester Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855296" start="2489" end="2508" title="Liverpool Town Hall" label="Liverpool Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2511" end="2520" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192985" start="2522" end="2538" title="Sydney Town Hall" label="Sydney Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2541" end="2552" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="2666" end="2678" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q10929914" start="2682" end="2693" title="city status" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2715" end="2728" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="2915" end="2923" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974562" start="2945" end="2952" title="City Hall, Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123186" start="2954" end="2961" title="City Hall, Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123185" start="2966" end="2973" title="City Hall, Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101808" start="2985" end="2994" title="City Hall, Dublin" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2998" end="3004" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093950" start="3035" end="3044" title="City Hall, Southwark" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3204" end="3229" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="3522" end="3530" title="metonymy" label="metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="3821" end="3835" title="County Council" label="County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="3864" end="3881" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177802" start="3954" end="3965" title="county hall" label="county hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="4070" end="4077" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="4085" end="4110" title="Scottish local government" label="Scottish local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="4248" end="4262" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="4297" end="4306" title="Guildhall, London" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176236" start="4385" end="4395" title="Council House, Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179068" start="4397" end="4405" title="Council House, Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063627" start="4410" end="4420" title="Nottingham Council House" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="4493" end="4500" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123185" start="4549" end="4558" title="City Hall, Bristol" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191338" start="4638" end="4647" title="Birmingham Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="4699" end="4708" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492762" start="4741" end="4750" title="Sheffield Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492611" start="4790" end="4799" title="Sheffield City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="4834" end="4839" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017744" start="4845" end="4854" title="Leeds Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390835" start="5039" end="5049" title="Leeds Civic Hall" label="Civic Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34921" start="5368" end="5385" title="Piazza del Campidoglio" label="Palazzo Senatorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5389" end="5393" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q623476" start="5580" end="5594" title="Lombard League" label="Lombard League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="5625" end="5644" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="5660" end="5671" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q46002125" start="5690" end="5701" title="market house" label="market hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="5748" end="5759" title="marketplace" label="marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="5978" end="5994" title="medieval commune" label="medieval commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="6043" end="6051" title="Municipal council" label="councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099281" start="6132" end="6148" title="Debate chamber" label="debating chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q34921" start="6309" end="6326" title="Piazza del Campidoglio" label="Palazzo Senatorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48617968" start="6360" end="6388" title="City Council of Rome" label="municipal government of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q323556" start="6450" end="6467" title="Cologne City Hall" label="Cologne City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190961" start="6506" end="6522" title="Palazzo Pubblico" label="Palazzo Pubblico"/>
<link wikidata="Q736727" start="6530" end="6547" title="Republic of Siena" label="Republic of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="6556" end="6571" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="6579" end="6599" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166118" start="6909" end="6916" title="archive" label="archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255327" start="7019" end="7037" title="Brussels Town Hall" label="Brussels Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q686468" start="7167" end="7182" title="Rathaus, Vienna" label="Rathaus, Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="7504" end="7524" title="municipal government" label="municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="7711" end="7725" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="7901" end="7911" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="8015" end="8021" title="voting" label="voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355298" start="8023" end="8035" title="examinations" label="examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="8037" end="8049" title="vaccinations" label="vaccinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="8051" end="8066" title="disaster relief" label="disaster relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q183398" start="8106" end="8117" title="noticeboard" label="noticeboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="8195" end="8209" title="Local government" label="Local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="8271" end="8286" title="office building" label="office building"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="8520" end="8527" title="metonym" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="8536" end="8556" title="municipal government" label="municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="8594" end="8599" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="8710" end="8722" title="Town meeting" label="Town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609887" start="8743" end="8770" title="List of city and town halls" label="List of city and town halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q64163168" start="8773" end="8779" title="Ratusz" label="Ratusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858368" start="8783" end="8796" title="Barangay hall" label="Barangay hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080521" start="8799" end="8810" title="Market hall" label="Market hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908719" start="8813" end="8822" title="Moot hall" label="Moot hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="8825" end="8837" title="Town meeting" label="Town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="8840" end="8861" title="Administrative centre" label="Administrative centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383748" wikidata="Q1431935" url="?curid=383748" title="London Biggin Hill Airport">
<text>London Biggin Hill Airport is a minor commercial airport serving Biggin Hill in the London Borough of Bromley, located south-southeast of Central London. It specialises in general aviation, handling a spectrum of traffic from private aviation to large business jets. It currently has no scheduled airline service, as flights using the airport are not regularly permitted to carry fare-paying passengers.

The airport was formerly a Royal Air Force station RAF Biggin Hill, and a small enclave on the airport still retains that designation. Biggin Hill is best known for its role during the Battle of Britain in the Second World War, when it served as one of the principal fighter bases protecting London and South East England from attack by German Luftwaffe bombers. Over the course of the war, fighters based at Biggin Hill claimed 1,400 enemy aircraft, at the cost of the lives of 453 Biggin Hill based aircrew.

The airport has a CAA Ordinary Licence (Number P804) that allows flights for the public transport of passengers or for flying instruction as authorised by the licensee (Regional Airports Limited). 

== History==
===Military airfield===

====First World War ====
The airfield was originally opened by the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) during the First World War. Koonowla House was requisitioned by the War Office in 1916 for the RFC to conduct wireless experiments. Then on 13 February 1917 the RFC transferred there (from their long-time HQ at RAF Joyce Green, at Long Reach near Dartford), and established it as part of the London Air Defence Area, using the adjacent Cudham Lodge estate, which contained a huge undivided field ideal for aircraft. The same year Lord Stanhope&#x27;s Aperfield Court and grounds, some from the station, were requisitioned for use as a radio transmitter and fighter ground control station. The station was responsible for defending the capital against attacks by Zeppelins and Gotha bombers. To this end, 141 Squadron of the RFC was based at Biggin Hill and equipped with Bristol Fighters.

Shortly after the war, on 7 January 1919, around 700 RAF technical staff mutinied. Their grievances included poor food and living conditions, with one complaint being that they only had eight washbasins between them. The mutiny was ended by the intervention of sympathetic officers.

Apperfield Court was demolished in 1920 and the aerodrome extended onto its grounds. Between the wars, the airfield was used by a number of experimental units, working on instrument design, ground-based anti-aircraft defences, and night flying. The base was closed between 1929 and 1932, during which period reconstruction work took place including the building of new hangars.

====Second World War====
During the Second World War the airfield was one of the commanding bases for No. 11 Group RAF, RAF Fighter Command during the Battle of Britain, with both Supermarine Spitfires and Hawker Hurricanes from a variety of squadrons being based there. The squadrons based at Biggin Hill claimed to have destroyed 1,400 enemy aircraft, at the cost of the lives of 453 Biggin Hill-based aircrew. Due to its importance to the defence of London, the airfield itself became a target. Between August 1940 and January 1941, the airfield was attacked twelve times, the worst of which wrecked workshops, stores, barracks, WAAF quarters and a hangar, killing 39 people on the ground. 

During the war Biggin Hill was also used by RAF Balloon Command.

====Post war ====
After the war, Biggin Hill was briefly used by RAF Transport Command, and then became a base for both regular and reserve fighter squadrons, flying Spitfires, Meteors and Hunters. A fatal incident involving the loss of three Meteors on 18 June 1951 (see incidents and accidents below) caused the station&#x27;s continued use by the military to be called into question. However, in 1958 Biggin Hill ceased to be an operational RAF station, becoming the Officer and Aircrew Selection Centre for the RAF. Due to the impending closure of the nearby original London Airport at Croydon, from 1956 much of the civilian light aviation from Croydon relocated to Biggin Hill and it became a joint civilian and military airport. Croydon closed completely in 1959, at which time Biggin Hill became a mainly civilian airport with only occasional military flying taking place.

====RAF units at Biggin Hill====
The following units were at Biggin Hill at some time:

;Units:
===Civilian airport===
Towards the end of 1963, the Orpington Urban District Council (within whose boundaries the airfield lay) was approached by the Board of Trade as to whether the Council would purchase (effectively from the RAF) Biggin Hill airfield. In 1964, on formation of the London Borough of Bromley, which absorbed Orpington, the offer to purchase was open to the new borough. Protracted negotiations were held with the Board of Trade and later the Department of Trade and Industry. At a special meeting on 15 June 1972 the Council decided to purchase the airport by a recorded vote of 41 to 9. The purchase was eventually completed in 1974.
RAF Biggin Hill was awarded the Freedom of the Borough of Bromley on 5 October 1980.

In May 1992 the Department of Transport issued a direction to the Council under s.13 of the Airports Act 1986. The effect of this direction, which affected airports generating turnover of £1 million or more (Biggin Hill just scraped into this limit), was to require the Council to set up a new company for the purpose of operating the airport as an independent commercial undertaking. To comply with the direction would have required the transfer of all the assets and liabilities to the company with a consequential loss of council control over airport activities. In the circumstances, the council decided that the granting of a 125-year lease would enable more control to be retained than an outright disposal of the freehold or by a transfer to a local authority company with an uncertain future. In May 1994, the airport was leased to Biggin Hill Airport Limited (&quot;BHAL&quot;), now a subsidiary of Regional Airports Limited, for 125 years.

Meanwhile, the Officer and Aircrew Selection Centre moved to RAF Cranwell in 1992, marking the end of active RAF involvement.

In 2001, the London Borough of Bromley as freeholder of the airport succeeded in an action in the Court of Appeal. The court ruling prohibits the airport operators from allowing tickets to be sold for flights into and out of the airport, thus preventing its use for scheduled or holiday charter flights, but allowing business aviation and corporate shuttles.

In May 2017 runway 29/11 was permanently withdrawn from use.

== Description ==


The airport is located on a hilltop, just to the east of the Bromley to Westerham road (A233) and about to the north of the town of Biggin Hill in the London Borough of Bromley. It is in a rural area to the south-east of Greater London, outside of the Greater London Built-up Area. The small village of Leaves Green lies adjacent to the north-western perimeter of the airport.

The airport has one runway (03/21, so close to northeast by north/southwest by west) 1,820 metres in length, making it usable by aircraft up to Boeing 737/Airbus A320 size, and it has an Instrument Landing System. Radar air traffic control (ATC) services are provided by Thames Radar at the London Terminal Control Centre, while procedural approach and VFR ATC services are provided by the airport itself.

Despite the ban on scheduled services, Biggin Hill is used by a large number of business flights by business jets and similar sized aircraft. The airport has a passenger terminal, located on the A233 road just south of Leaves Green, which provides facilities for such flights, including departure lounges, a licensed café bar, and customs and immigration facilities.

The current RAF Biggin Hill is a small enclave on the western boundary of the airport to the south of the passenger terminal, and contains the headquarters of 2427 Squadron of the Air Training Corps. Next to this is &quot;St George&#x27;s Chapel of Remembrance&quot;. This brick built chapel was erected in 1951, to replace an earlier chapel destroyed by fire, and now serves as a memorial to all the aircrew who died flying from the Biggin Hill Sector. It is surrounded by a garden of remembrance and has gate guardians in the form of full-sized replicas of a Hurricane and a Spitfire, representing the aircraft that flew from the former airfield during the Battle of Britain. The replicas replaced genuine aircraft that formerly served as the guardians. Air Marshal Hugh Dowding laid the foundation stone. The chapel was taken out of the RAF&#x27;s control in 2015, and is now run by Biggin Hill Airport.

Besides the passenger terminal and RAF enclave, other former RAF buildings still exist in the &#x27;North Camp&#x27; to the west of the main runway, including the Sergeant&#x27;s Mess of 1932, the Airmen&#x27;s Institute of circa 1926, the former Station Headquarters building of 1931 and several barrack blocks. The buildings, which are Grade II listed, are in a redbrick neo-Georgian style typical of military airfields of the interwar period. They have been vacant since the Officer and Aircrew Selection Centre closed in 1992, and were added to English Heritage&#x27;s list of buildings at risk in 2006.

The &#x27;South Camp&#x27;, situated to the south of runway 11/29, was transferred to civil usage in the 1950s and now consists of a utilitarian collection of hangars and sheds, together with a modern office park. It now contains many aviation related businesses, flying clubs and flying schools. Many private light aircraft are based on the airport.

From 1963, Biggin Hill airport was the venue of the Biggin Hill International Air Fair, an annual airshow that usually took place towards the end of June. On 5 July 2010 Biggin Hill Airport Ltd cancelled the 25-year contract with Air Displays International (the Air Fair organisers) without warning, a few weeks after the 2010 event, during which the Air Fair had attracted record breaking crowds.

Construction on a new state-of-the-art hangar alongside the Passenger Terminal commenced in October 2010. Excavations of the site uncovered underground war-time fuel tanks and associated pump rooms; these were re-covered during the same building works. Construction was planned to finish late in Spring 2011.

Biggin Hill is the location of one of the four &quot;stacks&quot; for aircraft landing at Heathrow Airport, and is used by aircraft approaching from the south east. It uses a VOR navigational beacon with the identifier &quot;BIG&quot;. Noise from aircraft using this stack is often wrongly attributed to aircraft using Biggin Hill Airport.

Three model aircraft clubs operate within a three-mile radius of Biggin Hill Airport. One site operates within its Aerodrome Traffic Zone ( radius)

For 60 years (to 2016) an Air Scout centre has been located on the grounds of the airport. The centre allowed young people aged between 7 and 18 to take part in aviation activities with their scout groups. In 2016, Biggin Hill Airport Limited, which has historically claimed to support young people coming into aviation, rescinded its sub-lease to the Scout Aviation Centre in order to make way for new car parking spaces, giving them until 30 September 2016 to vacate their home of some 60 years.

The airfield still retains its history by the continued restoration projects running at the Biggin Hill Heritage Hangar. IntotheBlue experience days, a UK company within the airfield allows members of the public to fly alongside a Mk9 Spitfire in a 1950s Harvard. Projects like this hold a timely reminder to how important the airport was during the Second World War.

== Airlines and destinations ==
Commercial service to the airport has previously been rejected. An application by the airport to allow such flights around the time of the 2012 London Olympics was rejected by Bromley Council in March 2011. Under the terms of its lease, no scheduled or fare-paying passenger services are permitted to operate to or from the airport. Air Alderney announced it planned to launch charter services between the airport and Alderney.

== Accidents ==
* On 18 June 1951, three Gloster Meteors crashed and their pilots were killed in accidents, all three crashing in an area of about . The first, a Meteor VIII piloted by Flight Lieutenant Gordon McDonald of 41 Squadron, crashed shortly after take-off, corkscrewing as pieces of structure fell from the aircraft. The aircraft hit a bungalow, killing the pilot. The jet wash of his flight leader was named as a possible cause. Within seconds of this accident two Mark IV Meteors of 600 Squadron, piloted by Sergeant Kenneth Clarkson and Squadron Leader Phillip Sandeman, both circling over the wreckage and preparing to land, collided at above the scene. Although Sandeman managed to bail out, he was killed when his parachute failed to open. Clarkson was killed in his aircraft. A week after this incident, another Meteor overshot the runway, narrowly missing passing cars. After these incidents, several residents stated they would be &quot;selling up&quot; and there were calls for traffic lights to be installed on the Bromley road for use during take-offs and landings.
* On 15 May 1977, during the annual International Air Fair, a Bell 206 helicopter was in a mid-air collision with a de Havilland Tiger Moth at the airport. The Tiger Moth landed but the Bell 206 crashed, killing all five on board.
* On 25 November 1978, a Socata Rallye 150 collided with a Cessna 150 over the airfield. The Rallye crashed near flying club buildings, killing the student pilot. The Cessna landed in a field and both occupants escaped with minor injuries. A report by the Air Accidents Investigation Branch concluded that the collision was caused by the failure of the Cessna pilot to see and give way to the other aircraft. The failure of the Rallye pilot to keep sufficient look-out was a contributory factor.
* On 21 September 1980 a Douglas B-26 Invader (registered N3710G) crashed during an air display. The aircraft was attempting to carry out a climbing roll in front of the crowd when the nose dropped sharply, and the aircraft continued rolling until it dropped vertically into a valley. The pilot and seven passengers were killed. The Civil Aviation Authority subsequently introduced rules preventing passengers from being carried during air displays.
* On 2 June 2001 a vintage de Havilland Vampire jet crashed during an air display, killing both pilots. The Vampire had been flying a display in tandem with a de Havilland Sea Vixen aircraft, and the likely cause of the accident was that the Vampire&#x27;s flight path had been disrupted by wake turbulence from the larger aircraft.
* On 3 June 2001 a 1944 Bell P-63 Kingcobra crashed during a display, killing the pilot. The American Second World War fighter aircraft had been flying an unplanned sequence when the pilot lost control at the top of a climbing manoeuvre and was unable to recover from the resulting dive. The aircraft impacted the ground to the west of the runway in a steep nose-down attitude.
* On 30 March 2008 a Cessna Citation 501 aircraft crashed into a housing estate north of the airfield, killing all five people on board. Shortly after take-off from Biggin Hill, the pilot had reported severe engine vibration and was attempting to return to the airfield when the aircraft crashed. An investigation concluded that both engines had been shut down (possibly inadvertently) during the course of the short flight. Among those killed were Eurosport commentator and former Touring Car driver David Leslie and ex-Le Mans driver Richard Lloyd.
* On 24 November 2014, a Gulfstream III left the runway at during takeoff. There were no injuries. Investigators concluded that the pilot had misidentified lights marking the edge of the runway, believing them to denote the centreline. The aircraft, which was owned by American televangelist Creflo Dollar, sustained significant damage and was declared a hull loss.

== Cultural references ==
The airport features briefly in the 2006 film &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, as a landing site for the main characters travelling to London.

== See also ==
* List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*

== Further reading ==
* Bruce Barrymore Halpenny - &quot;Action Stations: Military Airfields of Greater London v. 8&quot; ()

== External links ==
* Detailed historic record about RAF Biggin Hill</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1431935" start="0" end="26" title="London Biggin Hill Airport" label="London Biggin Hill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="38" end="48" title="Commercial aviation" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="49" end="56" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q122241" start="65" end="76" title="Biggin Hill" label="Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="84" end="109" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="138" end="152" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="172" end="188" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246183" start="226" end="242" title="private aviation" label="private aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="252" end="264" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="297" end="304" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="432" end="447" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431935" start="456" end="471" title="London Biggin Hill Airport" label="RAF Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="590" end="607" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="615" end="631" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="672" end="679" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="708" end="726" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="742" end="748" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="749" end="758" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="759" end="765" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="934" end="937" title="Civil Aviation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="CAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="1220" end="1238" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1256" end="1271" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="1313" end="1323" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1355" end="1363" title="radio" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912984" start="1456" end="1471" title="RAF Joyce Green" label="RAF Joyce Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q109546835" start="1476" end="1486" title="Long Reach, Kent" label="Long Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q858775" start="1492" end="1500" title="Dartford" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143495" start="1675" end="1695" title="James Stanhope, 7th Earl Stanhope" label="Lord Stanhope&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="1907" end="1915" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696016" start="1921" end="1933" title="Gotha bomber" label="Gotha bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q629425" start="2016" end="2032" title="Bristol F.2 Fighter" label="Bristol Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551751" start="2800" end="2816" title="No. 11 Group RAF" label="No. 11 Group RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="2818" end="2837" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="2849" end="2866" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="2878" end="2898" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="2904" end="2920" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="3330" end="3334" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="WAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275150" start="3437" end="3456" title="RAF Balloon Command" label="RAF Balloon Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275641" start="3524" end="3545" title="RAF Transport Command" label="RAF Transport Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="3636" end="3643" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Meteors"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="3648" end="3655" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="4022" end="4056" title="Croydon Airport" label="original London Airport at Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264364" start="4489" end="4513" title="Orpington Urban District" label="Orpington Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="4587" end="4601" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="4721" end="4746" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q584148" start="4897" end="4929" title="Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="5122" end="5144" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="5192" end="5215" title="Department for Transport" label="Department of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603388" start="5268" end="5285" title="Airports Act 1986" label="Airports Act 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q716894" start="5816" end="5821" title="leasing" label="lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="6188" end="6200" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492696" start="6296" end="6306" title="freehold (law)" label="freeholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="6352" end="6367" title="Court of Appeal of England and Wales" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="6541" end="6555" title="charter flight" label="charter flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="6757" end="6764" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321393" start="6768" end="6777" title="Westerham" label="Westerham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975622" start="6784" end="6788" title="A233 road" label="A233"/>
<link wikidata="Q122241" start="6828" end="6839" title="Biggin Hill" label="Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="6847" end="6872" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447222" start="6948" end="6976" title="Greater London Built-up Area" label="Greater London Built-up Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q122571" start="6999" end="7011" title="Leaves Green" label="Leaves Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="7218" end="7228" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="7229" end="7240" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q464020" start="7261" end="7286" title="Instrument Landing System" label="Instrument Landing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="7294" end="7313" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670833" start="7365" end="7395" title="London Terminal Control Centre" label="London Terminal Control Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q907246" start="7427" end="7430" title="visual flight rules" label="VFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="7581" end="7593" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="7812" end="7819" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="7824" end="7835" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="8029" end="8047" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758835" start="8355" end="8368" title="gate guardian" label="gate guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="8605" end="8629" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Air Marshal Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="9054" end="9061" title="Barracks" label="barrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="9104" end="9110" title="listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="9130" end="9142" title="Georgian architecture" label="neo-Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="9306" end="9322" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906923" start="9770" end="9804" title="Biggin Hill International Air Fair" label="Biggin Hill International Air Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361939" start="10480" end="10486" title="Holding (aviation)" label="stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="10517" end="10533" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q820036" start="10602" end="10605" title="VHF omnidirectional range" label="VOR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10943" end="10952" title="Air Scout#United Kingdom" label="Air Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="11956" end="11976" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017971" start="12150" end="12162" title="Air Alderney" label="Air Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559952" start="12235" end="12243" title="Alderney Airport" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="12287" end="12301" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q660969" start="13396" end="13404" title="Bell 206" label="Bell 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q654062" start="13450" end="13473" title="de Havilland Tiger Moth" label="de Havilland Tiger Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455427" start="13590" end="13603" title="Socata Rallye" label="Socata Rallye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057117" start="13624" end="13634" title="Cessna 150" label="Cessna 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q406725" start="13821" end="13855" title="Air Accidents Investigation Branch" label="Air Accidents Investigation Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q562167" start="14086" end="14106" title="Douglas B-26 Invader" label="Douglas B-26 Invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q107570765" start="14127" end="14156" title="1980 Biggin Hill Invader crash" label="crashed during an air display"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="14394" end="14418" title="Civil Aviation Authority of the United Kingdom" label="Civil Aviation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="14538" end="14558" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26225" start="14670" end="14692" title="de Havilland Sea Vixen" label="de Havilland Sea Vixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037959" start="14802" end="14817" title="wake turbulence" label="wake turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q815732" start="14868" end="14887" title="Bell P-63 Kingcobra" label="Bell P-63 Kingcobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610613" start="15241" end="15279" title="2008 Biggin Hill Cessna Citation crash" label="a Cessna Citation 501 aircraft crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484379" start="15671" end="15680" title="Eurosport" label="Eurosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q849783" start="15704" end="15715" title="British Touring Car Championship" label="Touring Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175203" start="15723" end="15735" title="David Leslie (racing driver)" label="David Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="15743" end="15750" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327418" start="15758" end="15771" title="Richard Lloyd (racing driver)" label="Richard Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554307" start="15798" end="15812" title="Gulfstream III" label="Gulfstream III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139523" start="16065" end="16078" title="Creflo Dollar" label="Creflo Dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931405" start="16128" end="16137" title="hull loss" label="hull loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="16218" end="16235" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q741071" start="16325" end="16398" title="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies" label="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q587332" start="16483" end="16507" title="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny" label="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383750" wikidata="Q5335438" url="?curid=383750" title="Ed Sprague Jr.">
<text>Edward Nelson Sprague Jr. (born July 25, 1967) is an American former Major League Baseball third baseman. He played 11 seasons in the major leagues from 1991 to 2001, with six different teams. He later served as the head baseball coach of the NCAA&#x27;s Pacific Tigers for 12 seasons, from 2004 to 2015. He is now the Oakland Athletics Director of Player Development.

Sprague is the only baseball player ever to win the College World Series, an Olympic championship, and the World Series. He is also the only baseball player to win the College World Series two consecutive seasons and the World Series two consecutive seasons.

==College career and Olympics==
Sprague was an NCAA standout where he played third base helping Stanford win College World Series championships in 1987 and 1988. In 1986, he played collegiate summer baseball with the Cotuit Kettleers of the Cape Cod Baseball League. He collected an Olympic Gold Medal in the 1988 Olympics on the men&#x27;s baseball team. (However, because baseball was a demonstration sport that year, the medals were unofficial and did not count towards respective countries&#x27; medal counts.) He is a member of Delta Tau Delta International Fraternity.

Sprague was drafted in the first round of the 1988 Major League Baseball draft by the Toronto Blue Jays.

==Major league career==
Sprague made his debut in 1991 for the Toronto Blue Jays and was a part of the 1992 and 1993 World Series championships. He is particularly remembered for hitting the game-winning home run in the ninth inning of Game 2 of the 1992 Series against the Atlanta Braves. His best individual year came in 1996 when he hit .247 with 36 home runs and 101 runs batted in.

Sprague was a regular with Toronto until 1998, when he was traded to the Oakland Athletics. He was granted free agency at the end of 1998, and then played for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1999, for which he made his only All-Star game appearance. That year, he hit .267 with 22 homers, 81 RBI and a .352 on-base percentage, the best of his career as a regular player.

In 2000, Sprague played for the San Diego Padres and Boston Red Sox. After becoming a free agent at the end of the year, he signed with the Seattle Mariners for the 2001 season, playing in 45 regular season games. He signed a minor league contract with the Texas Rangers in early 2002, but did not return to the major leagues.

Sprague twice led the league in getting hit by pitches and finished with a career total of 91. Sprague is the only baseball player ever to win championships in the College World Series, the Olympics, and the World Series.

Sprague&#x27;s final career totals include 1203 games played, 506 runs, 1010 hits, 225 doubles, 12 triples, 152 home runs, 558 runs batted in, a .247 batting average, a .318 on-base average, and a .419 slugging average.

According to a report in the &quot;Stockton Record&quot;, Sprague said he used performance-enhancing substances later banned by Major League Baseball and admitted hitting a home run with a corked bat.

==Coaching career==
Sprague was the head coach of the Pacific Tigers college baseball team from the 2004 season until he resigned following the 2015 season.

In 2016, Sprague returned to Major League Baseball as a Special Assistant to the General Manager of the Oakland Athletics. He was named Director of Player Development following the 2019 season.

==Personal life==
Sprague and his wife Kristen Babb-Sprague, who is an Olympic Gold Medalist in synchronized swimming, have four children. Their daughter Payton attended the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Business and currently works for the National Basketball Association. Their son Jed played baseball at University of Nevada, and was selected by the Chicago White Sox in the 37th round of the 2014 MLB Draft. His other kids are Paris and John. Sprague is an alumnus of St. Mary&#x27;s High School in Stockton, California.

Sprague&#x27;s father, Ed Sr., pitched in the majors from 1968 through 1976.

==Head coaching record==
Below is a table of Sprague&#x27;s yearly records as an NCAA head baseball coach.





==See also==
* List of second-generation Major League Baseball players

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5335438" start="0" end="25" title="Ed Sprague Jr." label="Edward Nelson Sprague Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="69" end="90" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="91" end="104" title="third baseman" label="third baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="243" end="247" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q107874849" start="255" end="269" title="Pacific Tigers baseball" label="Pacific Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="677" end="681" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="726" end="734" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q787505" start="739" end="759" title="College World Series" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610731" start="811" end="837" title="collegiate summer baseball" label="collegiate summer baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175874" start="847" end="863" title="Cotuit Kettleers" label="Cotuit Kettleers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034674" start="871" end="895" title="Cape Cod Baseball League" label="Cape Cod Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="939" end="952" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485466" start="1039" end="1048" title="Baseball at the 1988 Summer Olympics" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254760" start="1163" end="1178" title="Delta Tau Delta" label="Delta Tau Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186071" start="1252" end="1284" title="1988 Major League Baseball draft" label="1988 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="1292" end="1309" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092944" start="1415" end="1419" title="1992 World Series" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062194" start="1424" end="1441" title="1993 World Series" label="1993 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="1586" end="1600" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1665" end="1673" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="1683" end="1697" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="1773" end="1790" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="1863" end="1881" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="1918" end="1926" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="2001" end="2019" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="2098" end="2114" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="2119" end="2133" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2152" end="2162" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="2206" end="2222" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="2323" end="2336" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326574" start="2434" end="2446" title="hit by pitch" label="hit by pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759804" start="2873" end="2888" title="Stockton Record" label="Stockton Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q107874849" start="3094" end="3108" title="Pacific Tigers baseball" label="Pacific Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146585" start="3109" end="3125" title="college baseball" label="college baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603098" start="3140" end="3151" title="2004 NCAA Division I baseball season" label="2004 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377824" start="3184" end="3195" title="2015 NCAA Division I baseball season" label="2015 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984399" start="3432" end="3452" title="Kristen Babb-Sprague" label="Kristen Babb-Sprague"/>
<link wikidata="Q180692" start="3489" end="3510" title="synchronized swimming" label="synchronized swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590326" start="3877" end="3904" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s High School (Stockton, California)" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="3908" end="3928" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335437" start="3954" end="3960" title="Ed Sprague, Sr." label="Ed Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="3962" end="3969" title="pitcher" label="pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638051" start="4136" end="4191" title="List of second-generation Major League Baseball players" label="List of second-generation Major League Baseball players"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383757" wikidata="Q6602756" url="?curid=383757" title="List of United States defense contractors">
<text>The Top 100 Contractors Report on the Federal Procurement Data System lists the top 100 defense contractors by sales to the United States Armed Forces and Department of Defense. (&#x27;DoD 9700&#x27; worksheet). The Department of Defense announces contracts valued at $7 million or more each business day at 5 pm. All defense contractors maintain CAGE (Commercial and Government Entity) Codes and are profiled in the System for Award Management (SAM).

==List of top 100 United States defense contractors==
==See also==
*Government contractor
*List of private military companies
*Top 100 Contractors of the U.S. federal government

==References==
==External links==
* private business of military suppliers and contractors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6602756" start="4" end="30" title="List of United States defense contractors" label="Top 100 Contractors Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="124" end="150" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="216" end="237" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115390" start="353" end="385" title="Commercial and Government Entity" label="Commercial and Government Entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060650" start="417" end="444" title="System for Award Management" label="System for Award Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589147" start="521" end="542" title="Government contractor" label="Government contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634953" start="544" end="578" title="List of private military companies" label="List of private military companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824393" start="580" end="630" title="Top 100 Contractors of the U.S. federal government" label="Top 100 Contractors of the U.S. federal government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="383758" wikidata="Q399621" url="?curid=383758" title="Mike Honda">
<text>Michael Makoto Honda (born June 27, 1941) is an American politician. A member of the Democratic Party, he served in Congress from 2001 to 2017.

Initially involved in education in California, he first became active in politics in 1971, when then San Jose mayor Norman Mineta appointed Honda to the city&#x27;s Planning Commission. Mineta later joined both the
Bush and Clinton cabinets. After holding other positions, Honda was elected to the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors in 1990, and to the California State Assembly in 1996, where he served until 2001.

In November 2003, Democratic National Committee chair Terry McAuliffe appointed Honda as deputy chair of the DNC. In February 2005, Honda was elected a vice chair of the Democratic National Committee under the chairmanship of Howard Dean. In 2009, Honda was reelected for a second term as DNC vice chair, under the chairmanship of former Virginia governor Tim Kaine; he served in this role until 2013.

Honda became the subject of an ethics investigation by the United States House Committee on Ethics in 2015 for the alleged use of taxpayer resources to bolster his 2014 re-election campaign. He was defeated for re-election in 2016 by fellow Democrat Ro Khanna.

==Early life and teaching==

A third-generation Japanese American (&quot;sansei&quot;), Makoto Honda was born in 1941 in Walnut Grove, California, the son of Fusako (Tanouye) and Giichi Honda. His father, Giichi (nicknamed &quot;Byron&quot;), was one of 6,000 Military Intelligence Service (MIS) agents, although the family was subjected to internment. His grandparents were from Kumamoto prefecture and immigrated to the United States in the early 1900s, and both of his parents were born in California.

When he was one year old, he and his family were sent to Camp Amache, a Japanese-American internment camp in southeastern Colorado. In 1953, his family returned to California, where they became strawberry sharecroppers in Blossom Valley in San Jose.

Honda started at Andrew P. Hill High School, and then transferred to and graduated from San Josė High Academy. He entered San Josė State University, but interrupted his studies from 1965 to 1967 to serve in the United States Peace Corps in El Salvador, where he learned to speak Spanish. He returned to San Jose State, where, in 1968, he received a bachelor&#x27;s degree in biological sciences and Spanish. He earned a master&#x27;s degree in education from San Jose State in 1974.

In his 30-year career as an educator, Honda was a science teacher, a principal at two public schools, and a school board member, and he conducted educational research at Stanford University.

==Political career==
===Teaching and state positions===
In 1971, San Jose Mayor Norman Mineta appointed Honda to the city&#x27;s Planning Commission. In 1981, Honda was elected to the San Jose Unified School Board. He was elected to the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors in 1990, and to the California State Assembly in 1996, where he served until 2001.

===DNC and national positions===
In the 2000 United States House of Representatives elections, Honda won the Democratic nomination for the 15th district, which had once been represented by Norm Mineta, and won the general election by a 12-point margin. He remained the incumbent in the resultant elections of 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012. 

In November 2003, chairman of the Democratic National Committee Terry McAuliffe appointed Honda as deputy chair of the DNC. In February 2005, Honda was elected a vice chair of the Democratic National Committee under the chairmanship of Howard Dean. In 2009, Honda was reelected for a second term as DNC vice chair, under the chairmanship of former Virginia Governor Tim Kaine; he served in this role until 2013.

Due to redistricting after the 2010 US census, Honda began representing the California&#x27;s 17th congressional district at the beginning of the 113th Congress on January 3, 2013. The district incorporates Silicon Valley, which is the only Asian American-majority district in the continental United States. The district encompasses all or part of the cities of Cupertino, Fremont, Milpitas, Newark, Santa Clara, San Jose, and Sunnyvale. Honda was narrowly re-elected in 2014 against Ro Khanna, but lost a rematch to Khanna in 2016.

====Early committees and caucuses====

From 2001 to 2007 Honda served on the United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology and was the ranking member of its Energy Subcommittee from 2005 to 2007. He also served on the United States House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure from 2001 to 2007. In 2007, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi appointed Honda to the United States House Committee on Appropriations. From 2011 to 2013, he was ranking member of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Subcommittee. From 2001 to 2003, and again from 2011 to 2013, Honda also was appointed to serve on the House Budget Committee.

Honda was a member of the following (and other) committees, commissions, and caucuses:
* United States House Committee on Appropriations
** United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies (Ranking Member)
** United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies
* Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus (chair emeritus from 2004 to 2010)
* Congressional Anti-Bullying Caucus (founder and chair)
* LGBT Equality Caucus (vice chair and founding member)
* Congressional Hepatitis Caucus (co-chair)
* Congressional Progressive Caucus (vice chair for new members) 
* Democratic Caucus New Media Working Group (co-chair)
* Congressional Ethiopia Caucus (founder and chair)
* Congressional-Executive Commission on China (appointed commissioner since 2005)

====Major appropriations====
As of August 2015, Honda had secured over $1.3 billion in appropriations since 2001.

Some of Honda&#x27;s most notable appropriations were for the extension of the BART system into Silicon Valley. During his five years on the House Transportation Committee, he secured $11 million in direct earmarks attached to a number of bills. Also during his time on that committee, he facilitated the BART projects qualification for the New Starts Program, which authorized another $900 million in funds, the first $400 million of which Honda managed to appropriate over the three-year period of FY2012-14. During the 2014 midterm election cycle, Honda&#x27;s opponent Ro Khanna alleged that Honda only secured $2 million for the project. In response, a number of local officials including a Congresswoman, a state senator, a former US Secretary of Transportation, and former and current Valley Transportation Authority chairs, sent the Khanna campaign an open letter refuting its claims and requesting that they correct their campaign language.

The $11 million in direct appropriations was part of:
*H.R. 2673 (FY2004 Consolidated Appropriations Act, became Public Law 108-199)
*H.R. 4818 (FY 2005 Consolidated Appropriations Act, became Public Law 108-447)
*H.R. 3058 (the Transportation, Treasury, Housing and Urban Development, the Judiciary, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act for 2006, became Public Law 109-115)

The $400 million from the New Starts Program was allocated as follows:
*$100M for FY 2012 in H.R. 2112, The Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012, which became Public Law 112-55
*$150M for FY 2013 in H.R. 933, the FY 2013 Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, which became Public Law 113-6
*$150M for FY 2014 in H.R. 3547, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2014, which became Public Law 113–76.

==Legislation==
===Raising the minimum wage===
Honda has been a long-time supporter of organized labor, and has supported numerous bills for creating a living wage. In 2013 and 2014, he cosponsored the Original Living American Wage Act (H.R. 229), the WAGES Act (H.R. 650), and the Fair Minimum Wage Act (H.R. 1010), which would raise the federal minimum wage. Honda was also a supporter of the San Jose&#x27;s successful ballot initiative that raised the city&#x27;s minimum wage to $10 per hour.

===Defense===
As former chairman of the Afghanistan Taskforce for the Congressional Progressive Caucus, and former co-chair of the CPC&#x27;s Peace and Security Taskforce, Congressman Honda has consistently critiqued the war strategy through a series of Congressional briefings, legislation, published opinion pieces (&quot;Alternative Strategies to Obama&#x27;s Afghan Agenda&quot;, &quot;A Different Kind of Surge&quot;), and Congressional letters to the Administration. Honda advocated an orderly withdrawal of U.S. military forces from Afghanistan and a significant realignment of U.S. aid to focus on strengthening government institutions, capacity building, economic development, and humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan. Honda criticized the Obama administration for failing to seek Congressional approval for U.S. military operations in Libya. He is critical of the wide-scale use of drones and is a cosponsor of the Targeted Lethal Force Transparency Act (H.R. 4372) requiring an annual report on the number of civilians and combatants killed and injured in drone strikes.

===Education===
In 2008, Honda worked with then-Senator Barack Obama to introduce the Enhancing STEM Education Act. Honda introduced the House version, H.R. 6104, and Obama introduced the Senate version, S.3047, on the same day.

The bills sought to enhance the coordination among state and federal governments to improve STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) education by creating a committee on STEM education at the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and an Office of STEM at the Department of Education, instituting a voluntary State Consortium on STEM education, and creating a National STEM Education Research Repository. Portions of this bill (notably, creating a committee on STEM education at OSTP), as well as Honda&#x27;s INVENT Act (which would develop curriculum tools for use in teaching innovation and fostering inventiveness at the K-16 level), were eventually included in the America COMPETES Act reauthorization, which President Obama signed into law on January 4, 2011.

Honda led the Congressional authorization for The Equity and Excellence Commission, a commission that began in 2011 and reported its findings to the Secretary of Education in late 2012. The commission is a federal advisory committee chartered by Congress, operating under the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA); 5 U.S.C., App.2. The commission had 27 members from a range of backgrounds, including education, law, tax, government, business, and civil rights. The committee met 17 times in Washington, DC and across the country. In November 2012, the commission presented its findings in a report titled &quot;For Each and Every Child: A Strategy for Education Equity and Excellence.&quot; The findings focused around five recommendations: (1) restructuring the financing of schools, focusing on equitable resources; (2) supporting quality teachers and school leaders; (3) supporting early childhood education; (4) promoting increased parental engagement; and, (5) addressing changes in accountability and governance in the education system. Opposed by special interests, including the teachers&#x27; unions, the commission&#x27;s recommendations went largely ignored.

===Environment===
Honda secured millions of dollars in federal funding for the cleanup and demolition of the former Almaden Air Force Station atop Mt. Umunhum. Contaminated with standard-use hazardous materials during its military use (lead paint, asbestos, etc.), the site was remediated, demolished, and is slated to open for public access in spring 2017. Honda has also advocated for programs such as the Land and Water Conservation Fund.

In 2014, Honda introduced the Climate Change Education Act (H.R. 4461), legislation that aims to improving public understanding of the impact of greenhouse gases on the environment and the steps that individuals and communities can take to combat the global warming crisis.

===Faith and religion===

In 2014, Honda introduced the Freedom of Faith Act (H.R. 4460).

Honda has been a defender of the civil rights of American Muslims. Soon after the September 11 attacks in 2001, Honda spoke at a convention of the American Muslim Alliance (AMA) in October 2001. He told those in attendance not to change their identity or name. &quot;My last name is Honda. You cannot be more Japanese than that.&quot; The congressman remembered what he and especially his parents had to go through when Pearl Harbor was attacked. &quot;We were taken in a vehicle with windows covered, we had no idea where we were being taken.&quot;

In the Quran oath controversy of the 110th United States Congress, Rep. Virgil Goode (R-VA) issued a letter to his constituents stating his view that the decision of Representative-elect Keith Ellison (D-MN) to use the Quran in his swearing-in ceremony is a threat to &quot;the values and beliefs traditional to the United States of America... I fear that in the next century we will have many more Muslims in the United States if we do not adopt the strict immigration policies&quot;. In response, Honda penned a response to Goode expressing his surprise and offense by that letter and declaring &quot;No person should be labeled as un-American based on his or her religion, and it is outrageous to cast aspersions on Representative-elect Ellison purely because of his religious background.&quot;

===Government reform===
In 2007, Honda voted for the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007, which was the legislative response to the Jack Abramoff scandal and introduced comprehensive new transparency requirements for lobbyists and for Members of Congress. In 2012, he cosponsored H.R. 1148, the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge (STOCK) Act, which criminalized insider trading by Members of Congress and required numerous disclosures. He voted for H.Res. 895, which created the first-ever independent ethics office, the Office of Congressional Ethics.

===Health care===
Honda has advocated for the expansion of health coverage for all through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and is a big proponent of the public option. As the Chair of the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, Honda was successful in ensuring that the ACA addressed racial and ethnic health disparities, including improvements in data collection, and measures to increase the number of health care providers from different backgrounds.

As the chairman and chair emeritus of Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, he sponsored and supported the Health Care Equality and Accountability Act, which would have expanded access to care for individuals with limited English proficiency, increased health workforce diversity, and encouraged further studies on the minority health issues. As a member of the TriCaucus with the Congressional Black Caucus and Congressional Hispanic Caucus, Honda has introduced legislation focused on health disparities in correlation to an annual health disparities summit.

Honda has led efforts to address tuberculosis by seeking changes to the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention&#x27;s (CDC) formula for direct funding for tuberculosis treatment and education to include highly impacted counties. He was successful in getting report language in the 2009 Omnibus Appropriations Bill to have the CDC review its funding distribution policies.

Honda has been a leader in Congress for viral hepatitis and founded and co-chairs the Congressional Viral Hepatitis Caucus. He is a cosponsor of the Viral Hepatitis Testing Act (H.R. 3723), which will authorize new prevention and testing programs for hepatitis B and hepatitis C, and implement screening for veterans for hepatitis C. He also cosponsored the Viral Hepatitis Testing Act (H.R. 3381) in the 112th Congress, the Viral Hepatitis and Liver Cancer Control and Prevention Act (H.R. 3974) in the 111th Congress, and the National Hepatitis B Act (H.R. 3944) in the 110th Congress.

Honda has supported mobile health technology innovation and introduced the Health Care Innovation and Marketplace Technologies Act of 2013 (H.R. 2363).

This bill establishes an Office of Wireless Health at the FDA, award grant for the development of effective product, process, or structure that enhances the use, particularly by patients, of health information technology, and provides medical professionals tax incentives to implement qualified health information technology in their practices.

Honda has been an advocate for women&#x27;s health including supporting provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act such as the elimination of gender-based discrimination in insurance prices, recognizing that being a woman is not a preexisting condition that should force women to pay higher premiums. Honda opposed the Stupak–Pitts Amendment to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which would have prohibited the use of federal funds &quot;to pay for any abortion or to cover any part of the costs of any health plan that includes coverage of abortion&quot; except in cases of rape, incest or danger to the life of the mother. The amendment was dropped by co-author Rep. Bart Stupak in exchange for an executive order promised by President Obama which would address the concerns of the Stupak-Pitts amendment supporters.

Honda has supported Medicare and Medicaid programs throughout his career, fighting for the health rights of seniors and low-income families. He introduced the People&#x27;s Budget, the Congressional Progressive Caucus 2012 budget alternative, which would keep Medicare and Medicaid solvent while closing the national debt within 10 years.

Honda supports the permanent repeal of the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) and cosponsored the SGR Repeal and Medicare Provider Payment Modernization Act of 2014 (H.R. 4015) which would have repealed the SGR and improved the physician payment system to reward value over volume.

===Human rights===
On the issue of comfort women, in 2007 Honda proposed US H.Res. 121, which stated that Japan should formally acknowledge, apologize, and accept historical responsibility in a clear and unequivocal manner, refute any claims that the issue of comfort women never occurred, and educate current and future generations &quot;about this horrible crime while following the recommendations of the international community with respect to the &#x27;comfort women&#x27;.&quot;

Honda stated, &quot;the purpose of this resolution is not to bash or humiliate Japan.&quot; On July 30, 2007, the House of Representatives passed Honda&#x27;s resolution after 30 minutes of debate, in which no opposition was voiced. Honda was quoted on the floor as saying, &quot;We must teach future generations that we cannot allow this to continue to happen. I have always believed that reconciliation is the first step in the healing process.&quot; Honda later secured report language in the Fiscal Year 2014 Consolidated Appropriation Act (submitted July 2013) urging the Secretary of State to encourage the Government of Japan to address issues raised in H.Res.121. President Obama signed the spending bill into law on January 17, 2014.

Honda works on the elimination of human trafficking. He cosponsored the Fraudulent Overseas Recruitment and Trafficking Elimination Act of 2013 (H.R. 3344). The bill addresses predatory recruiters who use international labor recruitment as a human trafficking medium. On January 23, 2014, Honda hosted a training at the San Jose International Airport for airport and airline employees on how to detect signs of human trafficking.

Honda is a cosponsor of the Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act (H.R. 15), which entails comprehensive immigration reform to increase high skill visas, reunite families, and provide a pathway to citizenship for those living in the shadows.

===LGBT issues===
Honda has been recognized as a long-time supporter of equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, with a 100% scorecard rating from the Human Rights Campaign since 2001. HRC endorsed Honda for his 2014 reelection. In the 1990s, he supported same-sex partner benefits as a Santa Clara County Supervisor. In 2008, he was a co-founder of the Congressional Equality Caucus, when there were only two openly gay congresspersons. He opposed the use of taxpayer funds to protect the Defense of Marriage Act in the United States Supreme Court.

In 2013, Honda worked with Mayor of Campbell Evan Low to raise awareness for the ban against blood donations from gay and bisexual men. In 2015, Honda revealed in a speech at the event Courageous Conversation, a one-day symposium that addresses how administrators can work to make their schools safer for their students, that his granddaughter Malisa is transgender. &quot;As both an individual, and as an educator, I have experienced and witnessed bullying in its many forms. And as the proud jichan, or grandpa, of a transgender grandchild, I hope that my granddaughter can feel safe going to school without fear of being bullied. I refuse to be a bystander while millions of people are dealing with the effects of bullying on a daily basis.&quot;

===Manufacturing===
In 2013, Honda introduced the Market Based Manufacturing Incentives Act (H.R. 615), one of the main bills in the Democratic Party&#x27;s Make it in America Agenda, which would create a commission of private-sector experts to designate market-changing technologies. These technologies would be eligible for a consumer tax credit as long as they are made in the United States. Honda introduced the Scaling Up Manufacturing Act (H.R. 616). The bill would provide companies a 25% tax credit on the costs associated with building their first manufacturing facility in the United States.

Honda was a vocal supporter of the National Network for Manufacturing Innovation proposed by President Obama to help revitalize American manufacturing. He is a cosponsor of the bipartisan Revitalizing American Manufacturing Innovation Act (H.R. 2996) and has urged President Obama to locate a manufacturing hub in Silicon Valley to focus on the domestic development of the next generation of semiconductor manufacturing tools.

Honda used his position as a member of the House Appropriations Committee and the Commerce, Justice, Science Subcommittee to prioritize funding for the National Institute of Standards and Technology&#x27;s Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP) program which works with small and medium-sized manufacturers to help them create and retain jobs, increase profits, and save time and money.

===Science and technology===
As the Representative for the heart of Silicon Valley, Honda has been intimately involved in technology and nanotechnology policy for many years. He has supported the principle of network neutrality, and is a cosponsor of the Open Internet Preservation Act (H.R. 3982).

Honda was critical of the National Security Agency&#x27;s surveillance of electronic communications as a violation of privacy. He is an original cosponsor of the Uniting and Strengthening America by Fulfilling Rights and Ending Eavesdropping, Dragnet Collection, and Online Monitoring Act (USA FREEDOM ACT - H.R 3361) which seeks to rein in the dragnet collection of data by the NSA, increase transparency of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, provide businesses the ability to release information regarding FISA requests, and create an independent constitutional advocate to argue cases before the FISC. Honda has been a proponent of government intelligence transparency and has pushed to require that top-line intelligence spending be disclosed during annual budget submission to Congress through his co-sponsorship of the Intelligence Budget Transparency Act (H.R. 3855).

In 2002, he introduced one of the first nanotechnology bills in Congress, the Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Advisory Board Act of 2002, which sought to establish a Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Advisory Board to advise the President on a range of policy matters. Such a board was recommended by the National Research Council in its review of the National nanotechnology Initiative, Small Wonders, Endless Frontiers.

In 2003, he worked with then-Science Committee Chairman Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), to introduce the Nanotechnology Research and Development Act of 2003.

This bill authorized federal investments in nanotechnology research and development, restructured the National Nanotechnology Initiative to improve interagency coordination and the level of input from outside experts in the field, and laid the path to address novel social, ethical, philosophical, legal, environmental health issues that might arise. H.R. 766 was passed overwhelmingly by the U.S. House of Representatives on May 7, 2003, signed into law on December 3, 2003, and to date has been funded at nearly $4 billion.

Honda continued his interest in nanotechnology by convening the Blue Ribbon Task Force on Nanotechnology with then-controller Steve Westly in 2005. This group met numerous times to discuss and develop strategies to promote the San Francisco Bay Area and all of California as the national and worldwide center for nanotechnology research, development and commercialization. Under the direction of Working Chair Scott Hubbard, then-Director of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration&#x27;s Ames Research Center, the Task Force spent a year developing recommendations that would assure California a leading position in what could be a trillion-dollar economic sector. The recommendations were included in the BRTFN report, Thinking Big About Thinking Small.

Honda developed two pieces of legislation based on the report: 1) the Nanomanufacturing Investment Act of 2005 and 2) the Nanotechnology Advancement and New Opportunities Act.

Many provisions of these bills were included in larger pieces of legislation, the National Nanotechnology Initiative Amendments Act of 2009 and the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act, that passed the House of Representatives in the 111th Congress.

Mike Honda was recognized by the Foresight Institute, which awarded him its Foresight Institute Government Prize in 2006.

===Research and development tax credit===
Congressman Honda has supported expanding and making permanent the Research and Development tax credit, and in the 113th Congress is a cosponsor of the bipartisan H.R. 4438, the American Research and Competitiveness Act of 2014. He has called the research credit, &quot;the best incentive in the tax code to ensure that companies continue to conduct their R&amp;D in the U.S.&quot;

===Seniors and retirement security===
Honda has been a vocal advocate for expanding the Social Security program. In the 113th Congress, Honda introduced H.R. 3118, the Strengthening Social Security Act, with Congresspersons Linda Sanchez (D-CA) and Rush Holt (D-NJ), which would increase benefits for current beneficiaries, eliminate the cap on how much of an individual&#x27;s earnings can be paid into Social Security, change the benefits formula to increase payments by about $70 a month, and adopt a higher cost of living adjustment called CPI-E, designed to reflect the cost of healthcare for seniors.

Also in the 113th Congress, Honda authored H.R. 4202, the CPI-E Act of 2014, which would apply CPI-E to index federal retirement programs other than Social Security, to include programs such as civil service retirement, military retirement, Supplemental Security Income, veterans pensions and compensations, and other retirement programs with COLAs triggered directly by Social Security or civil service retirement. As a member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus Budget Taskforce, Honda also inserted this CPI-E provision into the FY 2015 CPC Budget, entitled the &quot;Better Off Budget.&quot; Honda said during floor debate on the CPC budget, that the provision was intended to be a first step to applying CPI-E to all federal retirement programs, including Social Security.

===Veterans===
Honda has been a leading voice to overhaul and improve the current VA system. As an appropriator, he worked with his colleagues in both parties to not only call for change, but to provide funds to create a new electronic health record program between the Department of Defense and Veterans Affairs. He is also working to ensure that the government makes use of the knowledge and experience of health information technology experts, such as those in Silicon Valley, to ensure this new platform will eliminate the current backlog of claims. Honda helped obtain $2.8 million in grants to aid homeless and at-risk veterans and their families in Silicon Valley.

===Women&#x27;s rights===
Honda has a 100% legislative score from Planned Parenthood and from the National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL) and has been a long-time supporter of pro-choice legislation and for women&#x27;s health due to his voting record. Honda has supported Paycheck Fairness Act and voted for the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act — the first piece of legislation to be signed by President Barack Obama in 2009.

During the debate over the new health care bill, Honda voted against the Stupak–Pitts Amendment to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which would have prohibited the use of federal funds &quot;to pay for any abortion or to cover any part of the costs of any health plan that includes coverage of abortion&quot; except in cases of rape, incest or danger to the life of the mother. The amendment was dropped by its co-author Stupak in exchange for an executive order promised by President Obama which would address the Stupak-Pitts concerns.

In 2013, Honda voted for the reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), which included updated protections for Native American women, immigrant women, and provided specialized support and resources for LGBT, religious and ethnic communities. VAWA reauthorization also included the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, which Honda has also supported. Honda introduced the Domestic Violence Judicial Support Act of 2013, which would strengthen the judicial programs that comprise the basis of VAWA. To support full implementation of the Obama Administration&#x27;s Executive Order 13595 and the U.S. National Action Plan (NAP) on Women, Peace, and Security, and to secure Congressional oversight, Honda introduced the Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2013, along his female colleagues Congresswomen Jan Schakowsky, Eddie Bernice Johnson, and Niki Tsongas.

===Civilian body armor ban===
In July 2014, Honda introduced a bill to ban level 3 body armor for anyone not in law enforcement. In September, it was referred to the subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations. This bill would ban anyone except law enforcement and military personnel from obtaining level 3 body armor. He was quoted as saying: &quot;We should be asking ourselves, why is this armor available to just anyone, if it was designed to be used only by our soldiers to take to war?&quot;.

==Ethics investigation==
It has been alleged that Honda and key members of his congressional staff violated House rules by using taxpayer resources to bolster his 2014 re-election campaign. In September 2015, the House Ethics Committee decided to extend the review of the matter after the Office of Congressional Ethics (OCE) released its report on the allegation. The OCE report noted &quot;there is substantial reason to believe that Representative Honda improperly tied official events to past or potential campaign or political support.&quot; As of August 8, 2016, the House Ethics Committee had not decided whether Honda violated House rules.

==Personal life==
Honda&#x27;s wife, Jeanne, was a kindergarten teacher at Baldwin Elementary School in San José. She died in 2004. He has two children: Mark, an aerospace engineer, living in Torrance, and Michelle, a marketing and communications manager, in San Jose. Michelle is the mother of one daughter and two sons.

In February 2015, Honda&#x27;s announcement that he is a &quot;proud &quot;jiichan&quot;&quot;, or grandfather, of his transgender granddaughter Malisa, gained regional, national, and international coverage.

==Electoral history in the U.S. House of Representatives==





























==See also==

* List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress

==References==
==External links==

* Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, Mike Honda
* Sunlight Foundation&#x27;s OpenCongress profile of Mike Honda
* OpenSecrets.org profile of Mike Honda
* GovTrack.us profile of Mike Honda
* Peace Corps biography of Mike Honda


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q399621" start="0" end="20" title="Mike Honda" label="Michael Makoto Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="85" end="101" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="246" end="254" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q553502" start="261" end="274" title="Norman Mineta" label="Norman Mineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q110739" start="443" end="461" title="Santa Clara County" label="Santa Clara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175507" start="462" end="482" title="Board of Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="503" end="528" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="585" end="614" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518911" start="621" end="636" title="Terry McAuliffe" label="Terry McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="793" end="804" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="923" end="932" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889967" start="1029" end="1068" title="United States House Committee on Ethics" label="United States House Committee on Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339221" start="1220" end="1229" title="Ro Khanna" label="Ro Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="1280" end="1297" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q319128" start="1305" end="1311" title="sansei" label="sansei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819794" start="1353" end="1377" title="Walnut Grove, California" label="Walnut Grove, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q199889" start="1612" end="1620" title="Kumamoto" label="Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594121" start="1795" end="1806" title="Granada War Relocation Center" label="Camp Amache"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="1810" end="1843" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="Japanese-American internment camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="1932" end="1942" title="strawberry" label="strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="1943" end="1955" title="sharecropper" label="sharecropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928448" start="1960" end="1974" title="Blossom Valley" label="Blossom Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="1978" end="1986" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757302" start="2006" end="2032" title="Andrew P. Hill High School" label="Andrew P. Hill High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414454" start="2077" end="2098" title="San Jose High Academy" label="San Josė High Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="2111" end="2136" title="San Jose State University" label="San Josė State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="2200" end="2225" title="United States Peace Corps" label="United States Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="2229" end="2240" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2268" end="2275" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q553502" start="2745" end="2758" title="Norman Mineta" label="Norman Mineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q110739" start="2902" end="2920" title="Santa Clara County" label="Santa Clara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175507" start="2921" end="2941" title="Board of Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="2962" end="2987" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539372" start="3066" end="3119" title="2000 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2000 United States House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q553502" start="3215" end="3226" title="Norm Mineta" label="Norm Mineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q142759" start="3335" end="3339" title="2002 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539374" start="3341" end="3345" title="2004 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q696166" start="3347" end="3351" title="2006 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190410" start="3353" end="3357" title="2008 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472632" start="3359" end="3363" title="2010 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q142759" start="3369" end="3373" title="2002 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518911" start="3441" end="3456" title="Terry McAuliffe" label="Terry McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="3613" end="3624" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="3743" end="3752" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754650" start="3866" end="3911" title="California&amp;#x27;s 17th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 17th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q71871" start="3936" end="3950" title="113th Congress" label="113th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="3997" end="4011" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="4031" end="4045" title="Asian American" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q189471" start="4152" end="4161" title="Cupertino" label="Cupertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49220" start="4163" end="4170" title="Fremont, California" label="Fremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q927510" start="4172" end="4180" title="Milpitas" label="Milpitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q850812" start="4182" end="4188" title="Newark, California" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="4190" end="4201" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="4203" end="4211" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q208459" start="4217" end="4226" title="Sunnyvale, California" label="Sunnyvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890200" start="4261" end="4265" title="2014 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339221" start="4274" end="4283" title="Ro Khanna" label="Ro Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18635193" start="4317" end="4321" title="2016 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889981" start="4401" end="4463" title="United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology" label="United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889985" start="4559" end="4625" title="United States House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure" label="United States House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="4675" end="4687" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="4711" end="4758" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="United States House Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899544" start="4945" end="4967" title="House Budget Committee" label="House Budget Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="5059" end="5106" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="United States House Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889937" start="5110" end="5209" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies" label="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889944" start="5230" end="5346" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies" label="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160919" start="5349" end="5392" title="Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus" label="Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160917" start="5430" end="5464" title="Congressional Anti-Bullying Caucus" label="Congressional Anti-Bullying Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457804" start="5487" end="5507" title="LGBT Equality Caucus" label="LGBT Equality Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125994" start="5587" end="5619" title="Congressional Progressive Caucus" label="Congressional Progressive Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5652" end="5693" title="Democratic Caucus New Media Working Group" label="Democratic Caucus New Media Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5707" end="5736" title="Congressional Ethiopia Caucus" label="Congressional Ethiopia Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160918" start="5759" end="5802" title="Congressional-Executive Commission on China" label="Congressional-Executive Commission on China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873920" start="6017" end="6045" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit expansion" label="extension of the BART system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339221" start="6528" end="6537" title="Ro Khanna" label="Ro Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7931" end="7964" title="Original Living American Wage Act" label="Original Living American Wage Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7981" end="7990" title="WAGES Act" label="WAGES Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429862" start="8011" end="8032" title="Fair Minimum Wage Act" label="Fair Minimum Wage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735001" start="12364" end="12380" title="American Muslims" label="American Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="12397" end="12417" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272923" start="12873" end="12931" title="Quran oath controversy of the 110th United States Congress" label="Quran oath controversy of the 110th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q159684" start="12938" end="12950" title="Virgil Goode" label="Virgil Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q40589" start="13053" end="13066" title="Keith Ellison" label="Keith Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q471854" start="13811" end="13824" title="Jack Abramoff" label="Jack Abramoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160937" start="15115" end="15144" title="Congressional Hispanic Caucus" label="Congressional Hispanic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="16819" end="16861" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628835" start="17066" end="17088" title="Stupak–Pitts Amendment" label="Stupak–Pitts Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q809210" start="17413" end="17424" title="Bart Stupak" label="Bart Stupak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="20291" end="20312" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="20630" end="20653" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q291143" start="27125" end="27138" title="Linda Sanchez" label="Linda Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q528359" start="27150" end="27159" title="Rush D. Holt Jr." label="Rush Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="29031" end="29049" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160931" start="29063" end="29101" title="National Abortion Rights Action League" label="National Abortion Rights Action League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628835" start="29468" end="29490" title="Stupak–Pitts Amendment" label="Stupak–Pitts Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933122" start="29984" end="30010" title="Violence Against Women Act" label="Violence Against Women Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q440885" start="30760" end="30774" title="Jan Schakowsky" label="Jan Schakowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562391" start="32631" end="32714" title="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress" label="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
