<doc id="382736" wikidata="Q202006" url="?curid=382736" title="Olusegun Obasanjo">
<text>Chief Olusegun Matthew Okikiola Ogunboye Aremu Obasanjo (; ; born 5 March 1937) is a Nigerian general and statesman who served as Nigeria&#x27;s head of state from 1976 to 1979 and later as its president from 1999 to 2007. Ideologically a Nigerian nationalist, he was a member of the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) from 1998 to 2015, and since 2018.

Born in the village of Ibogun-Olaogun to a farming family of the Owu branch of the Yoruba, Obasanjo was educated largely in Abeokuta, Ogun State. He joined the Nigerian Army and specialised in engineering and served in the Congo, Britain, and India, rising to the rank of Major. In the late 1960s, he played a major role in combating Biafran separatists during the Nigerian Civil War, accepting their surrender in 1970. In 1975, a military coup established a junta with Obasanjo as part of its ruling triumvirate. After the triumvirate&#x27;s leader, Murtala Muhammed, was assassinated the following year, the Supreme Military Council appointed Obasanjo as Head of State. Continuing Murtala&#x27;s policies, Obasanjo oversaw budgetary cut-backs and an expansion of access to free school education. Increasingly aligning Nigeria with the United States, he also emphasised support for groups opposing white minority rule in southern Africa. Committed to restoring democracy, Obasanjo oversaw the 1979 election, after which he transferred control of Nigeria to the newly elected civilian president, Shehu Shagari. Obasanjo then retired to Ota, Ogun, where he became a farmer, published four books, and took part in international initiatives to end various African conflicts.

In 1993, Sani Abacha seized power in a military coup. Obasanjo was openly critical of Abacha&#x27;s administration and in 1995 was arrested and convicted of being part of a planned coup, despite protesting his innocence. While imprisoned, he became a born again Christian, with providentialism strongly influencing his subsequent worldview. He was released following Abacha&#x27;s death in 1998. Obasanjo entered electoral politics, becoming the PDP candidate for the 1999 presidential election which he won. As president, he de-politicised the military and both expanded the police and mobilised the army to combat widespread ethnic, religious, and secessionist violence. He withdrew Nigeria&#x27;s military from Sierra Leone and privatised various public enterprises to limit the country&#x27;s spiraling debt. He was re-elected in the 2003 election. Influenced by Pan-Africanist ideas, he was a keen supporter of the formation of the African Union and served as its chair from 2004 to 2006. Obasanjo&#x27;s attempts to change the constitution to abolish presidential term limits were unsuccessful and brought criticism. After retiring, he earned a PhD in theology from the National Open University of Nigeria.

Obasanjo has been described as one of the great figures of the second generation of post-colonial African leaders. He received praise both for overseeing Nigeria&#x27;s transition to representative democracy in the 1970s and for his Pan-African efforts to encourage cooperation across the continent. Critics maintain that he was guilty of corruption, that his administrations oversaw human rights abuses, and that as president he became too interested in consolidating and maintaining his personal power.

== Early life (1937–1958) ==
Olusegun Matthew Okikiola Aremu Obasanjo (or
Matthew Olusegun Aremu Obasanjo) was born in Ibogun-Olaogun, a village in southwest Nigeria. His later passport gave his date of birth as 5 March 1937, although this was a later estimate, with no contemporary records surviving. His father was Amos Adigun Obaluayesanjo &quot;Obasanjo&quot; Bankole and his mother was Bernice Ashabi Bankole. The first of nine children, only he and a sister (Adunni Oluwole Obasanjo) survived childhood. He was born to the Owu branch of the Yoruba people. The village church was part of a mission set up by the U.S. Southern Baptist Church and Obasanjo was raised Baptist. His village also contained Muslims and his sister later converted to Islam to marry a Muslim man.

Obasanjo&#x27;s father was a farmer and until he was eleven years old, the boy was involved in agricultural labour. Aged eleven, he joined the village primary school, and after three years, in 1951, he moved on to the Baptist Day School in Abeokuta&#x27;s Owu quarter. In 1952 he transferred to the Baptist Boys&#x27; High School, also in the town. His school fees were partly financed by state grants. Obasanjo did well academically, and at school became a keen Boy Scout. Although there is no evidence that he was then involved in any political groups, it was at secondary school that Obasanjo rejected his forename of &quot;Matthew&quot; as an anti-colonial act. 

Meanwhile, Obasanjo&#x27;s father had abandoned his wife and two children. Falling into poverty, Obasanjo&#x27;s mother had to operate in trading to survive. To pay his school fees, Obasanjo worked on cocoa and kola farms, fished, collected firewood, and sold sand to builders. During the school holidays he also worked at the school, cutting the grass and other manual jobs.

In 1956, Obasanjo took his secondary school exams, having borrowed money to pay for the entry fees. That same year, he began courting Oluremi Akinlawon, the Owu daughter of a station master. They were engaged to be married by 1958. Leaving school, he moved to Ibadan, where he took a teaching job. There, he sat for the entrance exam for University College Ibadan, but although he passed it he found that he could not afford the tuition fees. Obasanjo then decided to pursue a career as a civil engineer, and to access this profession, in 1958 answered an advert for officer cadet training in the Nigerian Army.

== Early military career (1958–1966) ==

=== Military training: 1958–1959 ===
In March 1958, Obasanjo enlisted in the Nigerian Army. He saw it as an opportunity to continue his education while earning a salary; he did not immediately inform his family, fearing that his parents would object. It was at this time that the Nigerian Army was being transferred to the control of the Nigerian colonial government, in preparation for an anticipated full Nigerian independence, and there were attempts afoot to get more native Nigerians into the higher ranks of its military.
He was then sent to a Regular Officers&#x27; Training School at Teshie in Ghana. When stationed abroad, he sent letters and presents to his fiancé in Nigeria. In September 1958, he was selected for six months of additional training at Mons Officer Cadet School in Aldershot, southern England. Obasanjo disliked it there, believing that it was a classist and racist institution, and found it difficult adjusting to the colder, wetter English weather. It reinforced his negative opinions of the British Empire and its right to rule over its colonised subjects. At Mons, he received a commission and a certificate in engineering. While Obasanjo was in England, his mother died. His father then died a year later.

In 1959, Obasanjo returned to Nigeria. There, he was posted to Kaduna as an infantry subaltern with the Fifth Battalion. His time in Kaduna was the first time that Obasanjo lived in a Muslim-majority area. It was while he was there, in October 1960, that Nigeria became an independent country.

=== Congo crisis: 1960–1961 ===
Shortly after, the Fifth Battalion were sent to the Congo as part of a United Nations peacekeeping force. There, the battalion were stationed in Kivu Province, with their headquarters at Bukavu. In the Congo, Obasanjo and others were responsible for protecting civilians, including the ethnic Belgian minority, against soldiers who had mutinied against Patrice Lumumba&#x27;s government. In February 1961, Obasanjo was captured by the mutineers while he was evacuating Roman Catholic missionaries from a station near Bukavu. The mutineers considered executing him but were ordered to release him. In May 1961, the Fifth Battalion left the Congo and returned to Nigeria. During the conflict, he had been appointed a temporary captain. He later noted that the time spent in the Congo strengthened the &quot;Pan-African fervour&quot; of his battalion.

=== Return from the Congo: 1961–1966 ===
On his return, Obasanjo bought his first car, and was hospitalised for a time with a stomach ulcer. On his recovery, he was transferred to the Army Engineering Corps. In 1962 he was stationed at the Royal College of Military Engineering in England. There, he excelled and was described as &quot;the best Commonwealth student ever&quot;. That year, he paid for Akinlawon to travel to London where she could join a training course. The couple married in June 1963 at the Camberwell Green Registry Office, only informing their families after the event. That year, Obasanjo was ordered back to Nigeria, although his wife remained in London for three more years to finish her course. Once in Nigeria, Obasanjo took command of the Field Engineering Squadron based at Kaduna. Within the military, Obasanjo steadily progressed through the ranks, becoming a major in 1965. He used his earning to purchase land, in the early 1960s obtaining property in Ibadan, Kaduna, and Lagos. In 1965, Obasanjo was sent to India. En route, he visited his wife in London. In India, he studied at the Defence Services Staff College in Wellington and then the School of Engineering in Poona. Obasanjo was appalled at the starvation that he witnessed in India although took an interest in the country&#x27;s culture, something that encouraged him to read books on comparative religion.

== Nigerian Civil War ==
=== Pre-Civil War career: 1966–1967 ===
Obasanjo flew back to Nigeria in January 1966 to find the country in the midst of a military coup led by Major Emmanuel Ifeajuna. Almost all of those involved in organising the coup were from the Igbo people of southern Nigeria. Obasanjo was among those warning that the situation could descend into civil war. He offered to serve as an intermediary between the coup plotters and the civilian government, which had transferred power to the military Commander-in-Chief Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi. As the coup failed, Olusegun met Ironsi in Lagos. Ironsi soon ended federalism in Nigeria through his unification decree in May 1966, something which inflamed ethnic tensions. In late July, a second coup took place. In Ibadan, troops of northern Nigerian origin rebelled and killed Ironsi, also massacring around two hundred Igbo soldiers. General Yakubu Gowon took power.

While this coup was taking place, Obasanjo was in Maiduguri. Hearing of it, he quickly returned to Kaduna. There, he found that northern troops from the Third Battalion were rounding up, torturing, and killing Igbo soldiers. The Governor of Northern Nigeria, Hassan Katsina, recognised that although Olusegun was not Igbo, as a southerner he was still in danger from the mutinous troops. To protect them, Katsina sent Olusegun and his wife back to Maiduguri for ten days, while the violence abated. After this, Obasanjo sent his wife to Lagos while returning to Kaduna himself, where he remained until January 1967. At this point he was the most senior Yoruba officer present in the north.

In January 1967, Obasanjo was posted to Lagos as the Chief Army Engineer. Tensions between the Igbo and northern ethnic groups continued to grow, and in May the Igbo military officer C. Odumegwu Ojukwu declared the independence of Igbo-majority areas in the southeast, forming the Republic of Biafra. On 3 July, Nigeria&#x27;s government posted Obasanjo to Ibadan to serve as commander of the Western State. The fighting between the Nigerian Army and the Biafran separatists broke out on 6 July. On 9 July, Ojukwu sent a column of Biafran troops over the Niger Bridge in an attempt to seize the Mid-West, a position from which it could attack Lagos. Obasanjo sought to block the roads leading to the city. The Yoruba commander Victor Banjo, who was leading the Biafran attack force, tried to convince Obasanjo to let them through, but he declined.

=== Civil War command: 1967–1970 ===
Obasanjo was then appointed the rear commander of Murtala Muhammed&#x27;s Second Division, which was operating in the Mid-West. Based at Ibadan, Obasanjo was responsible for ensuring that the Second Division was kept supplied. In the city, Obasanjo taught a course in military science at the University of Ibadan and built his contacts in the Yoruba elite. During the war, there was popular unrest in the Western State, and to avoid responsibility for these issues, Obasanjo resigned from the Western State Executive Council. While Obasanjo was away from Ibadan in November 1968, armed villagers mobilised by the farmers&#x27; Agbekoya Association attacked the Ibadan City Hall. Troops retaliated, killing ten of the rioters. When Obasanjo returned he ordered a court of inquiry into the events.

Gowon decide to replace Colonel Benjamin Adekunle, who was leading the attack on Biafra, but needed another senior Yoruba. He chose Obasanjo, despite the latter&#x27;s lack of combat experience. Obasanjo arrived at Port Harcourt to take up the new position on 16 May 1969; he was now in charge of between 35,000 and 40,000 troops. He spent his first six weeks repelling a Biafran attack on Aba. He toured every part of the front, and was wounded while doing so. These actions earned him a reputation for courage among his men. In December, Obasanjo launched Operation Finishing Touch, ordering his troops to advance towards Umuahia, which they took on Christmas Day. This cut Biafra in half. On 7 January 1970, he then launched Operation Tail-Wind, capturing the Uli airstrip on 12 January. At this, the Biafran leaders agreed to surrender.

On 13 January, Obasanjo met with Biafran military commander Philip Effiong. Obasanjo insisted that Biafran troops surrender their arms and that a selection of the breakaway state&#x27;s leaders go to Lagos and formally surrender to Gowon. The next day, Obasanjo spoke on regional radio, urging citizens to stay in their homes and guaranteeing their safety. Many Biafrans and foreign media sources feared that the Nigerian Army would commit widespread atrocities against the defeated population, although Obasanjo was keen to prevent this. He ordered his troops in the region to remain within their barracks, maintain that the local police should take responsibility for law and order. The Third Division, which was more isolated, did carry out reprisal attacks on the local population. Obasanjo was tough on the perpetrators, having those guilty of looting flogged and those guilty of rape shot. Gowon&#x27;s government made Obasanjo responsible for reintegrating Biafra into Nigeria, in which position he earned respect for emphasising magnanimity. As an engineer, he emphasised restoration of the water supply; by May 1970 all major towns in the region were reconnected to the water supply. Obasanjo&#x27;s role in ending the war made him a war hero and a nationally known figure in Nigeria.

=== Post-Civil War career: 1970–1975 ===
In June 1970, Obasanjo returned to Abeokuta, where crowds welcomed him as a returning hero. He was then posted to Lagos as the Brigadier commanding the Corps of Engineers. In October, Gowon announced that the military government would transfer authority to a civilian administration in 1976. In the meantime, a ban on political parties remained in forces; Gowon made little progress towards establishing a civilian government. Under the military government, Obasanjo sat on the decommissioning committee which recommended dramatic reductions of troop numbers in the Nigerian Army over the course of the 1970s. In 1974 Obasanjo went to the UK for a course at the Royal College of Defence Studies. On returning, in January 1975 Gowon appointed him as the Commissioner for Works and Housing, a position he held for seven months, during which he was largely responsible for building military barracks.

In 1970, Obasanjo bought a former Lebanese company in Ibadan, employing an agent to manage it. In 1973 he registered a business, Temperance Enterprises Limited, through which he could embark on commercial ventures after retiring from the military. He also continued to invest in property; by 1974 he owned two houses in Lagos and one each in Ibadan and Abeokuta. Rumours arose that Obasanjo engaged in the corruption that was becoming increasingly widespread in Nigeria, although no hard evidence of this ever emerged. His marriage with Oluremi became strained as she opposed his relationships with other women. In the mid-1970s their marriage was dissolved. In 1976 he married Stella Abebe in a traditional Yoruba ceremony.

== In Murtala&#x27;s government ==

=== Coup d&#x27;état of 1975 and aftermath ===

In July 1975, a coup led by Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua and Joseph Garba ousted Gowon, who fled to Britain. They had not informed Obasanjo of their plans as he was known to be critical of coups as an instrument of regime change. The coup plotters wanted to replace Gowon&#x27;s autocratic rule with a triumvirate of three brigadiers whose decisions could be vetoed by a Supreme Military Council. For this triumvirate, they convinced General Murtala Muhammed to become head of state, with Obasanjo as his second-in-command, and Danjuma as the third. Historian John Iliffe noted that of the triumvirate, Obasanjo was &quot;the work-horse and the brains&quot; and was the most eager for a return to civilian rule. Together, the triumvirate introduced austerity measures to stem inflation, established a Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau, replaced all military governors with new officers who reported directly to Obasanjo as Chief of Staff, and launched &quot;Operation Deadwood&quot; through which they fired 11,000 officials from the civil service.

=== Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters: 1975–76 ===
In October 1975, the government announced plans for an election which would result in civilian rule in October 1979. It also declared plans to create a committee to draft a new constitution, with Obasanjo largely responsible for selecting the 49 committee members. On the recommendation of the Irifeke Commission, the government also announced the creation of seven new states; at Obasanjo&#x27;s insistence, Abeokuta was to become the capital of one of these new states, Ogun. Also on the commission&#x27;s recommendation, it announced gradual plans to move the Nigerian capital from Lagos to the more central Abuja. In January 1976, both Obasanjo and Danjuma were promoted to the ranks of Lieutenant General.

Both Murtala and Obasanjo were committed to ending ongoing European colonialism and white minority rule in southern Africa, a cause reflected in their foreign policy choices. This cause increasingly became a preoccupation for Obasanjo. After Angola secured independence from Portugal, a civil war broke out in the country. Nigeria recognised the legitimacy of the government declared by the MPLA, a Marxist group backed by the Soviet Union, because the rival FNLA and UNITA were being assisted by the white minority government in South Africa. As well as providing material aid to the MPLA, Nigeria began lobbying other African countries to also recognise the MPLA administration, and by early 1976 most states in the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) had done so. In February 1976, Obasanjo led a Nigerian delegation to an MPLA anniversary celebration in Luanda, where he declared: &quot;This is a symbolic date, marking the beginning of the final struggle against colonialism, imperialism and racism in Africa.&quot;

=== Murtala&#x27;s assassination: 13 February 1976 ===
In February 1976, Colonel Buka Suka Dimka launched a coup against Nigeria&#x27;s government, during which General Murtala Muhammed was assassinated. An attempt was also made on Obasanjo&#x27;s life, but the wrong individual was killed. Dimka lacked widespread support among the military and his coup failed, forcing him to flee. Obasanjo did not attend Murtala&#x27;s funeral in Kano, but declared that the government would finance construction of a mosque on the burial site.

After the assassination, Obasanjo attended a meeting of the Supreme Military Council. He expressed his desire to resign from government, but the Council successfully urged him to replace Murtala as head of state. He therefore became the council&#x27;s chair. Concerned about further attempts on his life, Obasanjo moved into the Dodan Barracks, while 39 people accused of being part of Dimka&#x27;s coup were executed, generating accusations that Obasanjo&#x27;s response was excessive. As head of state, Obasanjo vowed to continue Murtala&#x27;s policies.

== Military Head of State (1976–1979) ==

=== Military triumvirate ===
Aware of the danger of alienating northern Nigerians, Obasanjo brought General Shehu Yar&#x27;Adua as his replacement and second-in-command as Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters completing the military triumvirate, with Obasanjo as head of state and General Theophilus Danjuma as Chief of Army Staff, the three went on to re-establish control over the military regime. Obasanjo encouraged debate and consensus among the Supreme Military Council. Many wondered why Obasanjo – as a Yoruba and a Christian – had appointed Yar&#x27;Adua, a member of the northern aristocracy, as his second-in-command, rather than a fellow Yoruba Christian.

Obasanjo emphasised national concerns over those of the regions; he encouraged both children and adults to recite the new national pledge and the national anthem. Interested in getting a broader range of perspectives, each Saturday he held an informal seminar on a topical issue to which people other than politicians and civil servants were invited. Among those whose advice he sought were Islamic scholars and traditional chiefs.

=== Economic policy ===

By the mid-1970s, Nigeria had an overheated economy with a 34% inflation rate. To deal with Nigeria&#x27;s economic problems, Obasanjo pursued austerity measures to reduce public expenditure. In his 1976 budget, Obasanjo proposed to reduce government expenditure by a sixth, curtailing prestige projects while spending more on education, health, housing, and agriculture. He also set up an anti-inflation task force, and within a year of Obasanjo taking office, inflation had fallen to 30%. Obasanjo was generally adverse to borrowing money, but with the support of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund Nigeria took out a $1 billion loan from a syndicate of banks. Leftist critics argued that doing so left the country subservient to Western capitalism. In the subsequent two years of Obasanjo&#x27;s government, Nigeria borrowed a further $4,983 million.

Nigeria was undergoing nearly 3% annual population growth during the 1970s, something which would double the country&#x27;s population in just over 25 years. Obasanjo later noted that he was unaware of this at the time, with his government having no policy on population control. Nigeria&#x27;s population growth contributed to rapid urbanisation and an urban housing shortage. To deal with this, Obasanjo&#x27;s 1976 budget outlined plans for the construction of 200,000 new housing units by 1980, although ultimately only 28,500 were built. In 1976, Obasanjo&#x27;s government also announced rent and price controls. To counteract the disruption of labour strikes, in 1976 Obasanjo&#x27;s government introduced legislation that defined most major industries as essential services, banned strikes within them, and authorised the detention of disruptive union leaders. In 1978 it merged 42 unions into the single Nigerian Labour Congress.

Obasanjo continued with three major irrigation schemes in northern Nigeria that were first announced under Murtala: the Kano River Project, the Bakalori Scheme, and the South Chad Irrigation Project. His government also continued the Agricultural Development Projects launched in Funtua, Gusau, and Gombe. Some reforestation projects were also initiated to stall the encroachment of the Sahara Desert in the north. To meet the country&#x27;s growing demand for electricity, Obasanjo oversaw the launch of two new hydroelectric projects and a thermal plant. The oil industry remained an important part of Nigeria&#x27;s economy and under Obasanjo the Ministry of Petroleum Resources was merged with the Nigerian National Oil Corporation to form the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC). Obasanjo also supported the creation of a liquefaction plant at Bonny, which was 62% financed by the NNPC; the project was abandoned by his successor amid spiralling cost increases. Obasanjo also continued the planning of the Ajaokuta integrated steel mill, an inherited project that many critics in the civil service argued was unviable.

In the mid-1970s, Nigeria also faced declining agricultural production, a process caused by successive governments finding it cheaper to import food than grow it domestically. In May 1976, Obasanjo launched Operation Feed the Nation, a project to revitalise small-scale farming and which involved students being paid to farm during the holidays. The project also involved abolishing duties on livestock feed and farm implements, subsidizing the use of fertilisers, and easing agricultural credit. In March 1978, Obasanjo issued the Land Use Decree which gave the state propriety rights over all land. This was designed to stop land hoarding and land speculation, and brought praise from the Nigerian left although was disliked by many land-owning families. Obasanjo saw it as one of his government&#x27;s main achievements.

=== Domestic policies ===
He (Obasanjo) continued the push for universal primary education across Nigeria, a policy inherited from Gowon. He introduced the Primary Education Act in the year 1976; between 1975–76 and 1979–80, enrolment in free but voluntary primary schooling grew from 6 million to 12.5 million, although there was a shortage of teachers and materials to cope with the demand. In the 1977–78 school year, Obasanjo introduced free secondary education in technical subjects, something extended to all secondary schooling in 1979–80.

Concomitantly, Nigeria cut back on university funding; in 1978 it ceased issuing student loans and trebled university food and accommodation charges. Student protests erupted in several cities, resulting in fatal shootings in Lagos and Zaria. In response to the unrest, Obasanjo closed several universities, banned political activity on campus, and proscribed the National Union of Nigerian Students. The severity of these measures was perhaps due to suspicions that the student unrest was linked to a planned military coup that was uncovered in February 1978. Obasanjo was frustrated at the protesting student&#x27;s behaviour, arguing that it reflected a turn away from traditional values such as respect for elders.

As a consequence of Nigeria&#x27;s state-directed development, the country saw a rapid growth in the public sector. Evidence emerged of extensive corruption in the country&#x27;s government, and while accusations were often made against Obasanjo himself, no hard evidence was produced. To hinder the image of corruption in the government, Obasanjo&#x27;s administration banned the use of Mercedes cars as government transport and instead introduced more modest Peugeot 504s. The import of champagne was also banned. Pushing for cut-backs in the military, Obasanjo&#x27;s government saw 12,000 soldiers demobilised over the course of 1976 and 1977. These troops went through new rehabilitation centres to assist them in adjusting to civilian life.

Obasanjo was also accused of being responsible for political repression. In one famous instance, the compound of the Nigerian musician and political activist Fela Kuti, Kalakuta Republic, was raided and burned to the ground after a member of his entourage was involved in an altercation with military personnel. Fela and his family were beaten and raped and his aged mother, the political activist and founding mother Chief Funmilayo Ransome Kuti, was thrown from a window. This resulted in serious injuries, and eventually led to her death. Fela subsequently carried a coffin to the then presidential residence at Dodan Barracks in Lagos as a protest against the government&#x27;s political repression.

=== Foreign policy ===
Obasanjo was eager to establish Nigeria as a prominent leader in Africa and under his tenure its influence in the continent increased. He revived Gowon&#x27;s plan to hold the second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture in Nigeria; it took place in Lagos in February 1977, although domestic critics argued that it was too expensive. Obasanjo gave low priority to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and angered many of its Francophone members after insisting that, as the largest financial contributor to the organisation, Nigeria should host the organisation&#x27;s headquarters in Lagos. Relations with nearby Ghana also declined; in 1979, Nigeria cut off oil supplies to the country to protest the execution of political opponents by Jerry Rawlings&#x27; new military junta.

Under Obasanjo, Nigeria loosened its longstanding ties with the United Kingdom and aligned more closely with the United States. Obasanjo was favourable to the administration of U.S. President Jimmy Carter, who was elected in 1976, because of Carter&#x27;s commitment to ensuring majority rule across southern Africa. Carter&#x27;s ambassador to Nigeria, Andrew Young, formed a close personal friendship with Obasanjo, while Carter visited Nigeria in 1978. However, the decision to shift allegiances was made for pragmatic rather than ideological reasons; the discovery of oil in the North Sea meant that the UK had become a competitor rather than a customer of Nigerian oil. Obasanjo&#x27;s government was also angry that the UK refused to extradite Gowon and suspected that the British government might have been involved in the coup against Murtala. For these reasons, in 1976 it considered suspending diplomatic relations with the UK, but ultimately did not. Obasanjo nevertheless refused to visit the UK and discouraged his officials from doing so. Relations were further damaged when Margaret Thatcher became British Prime Minister in 1979, initiating a warmer British approach to the white minority administrations of Rhodesia and South Africa. In response, Nigeria seized a British tanker that was believed to be transporting Nigerian oil to South Africa, banned British firms from competing for Nigerian contracts, and nationalised British Petroleum&#x27;s Nigerian operations.

Obasanjo was also eager to hasten the end of white minority rule in southern Africa; according to Iliffe, this became &quot;the centrepiece of his foreign policy&quot;. Nigeria gave grants to those fighting white minority rule in the region, allowed these groups to open offices in Lagos, and offered sanctuary to various refugees fleeing the governments of southern Africa. Taking a hard line against the apartheid regime in South Africa, Obasanjo announced that Nigeria would not take part in the 1976 Summer Olympics because New Zealand, which was competing, had sporting ties with South Africa, a country that was banned from competing due to apartheid. In 1977, Obasanjo barred any contractors with South African links from operating in Nigeria; the main companies that were hit were British Petroleum and Barclays Bank. That same year, Nigeria hosted the United Nations Conference for Action Against Apartheid in Lagos, while Obasanjo visited the U.S. in October where he urged the country to stop selling arms to South Africa. While in the country he addressed the United Nations General Assembly and two weeks later Nigeria received a seat on the United Nations Security Council.
Opposition to white minority rule in Rhodesia had sparked the Rhodesian Bush War and Obasanjo&#x27;s government maintained that armed struggle was the only option for overthrowing Rhodesia&#x27;s government. He encouraged unity among the various anti-government factions there, urging Robert Mugabe, the head of ZANU, to accept the leadership of his rival, Joshua Nkomo of ZAPU. In 1977, the UK and US drew up proposals for a transition to majority rule in Rhodesia, amid a period in which the country would be under the management of United Nations forces. Obasanjo backed the plan, and visited Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, and the Democratic Republic of Congo to urge their governments to do the same. However, after Thatcher became UK Prime Minister, Nigeria distanced itself from British efforts to end the Rhodesian Bush War and was excluded from any significant role in the UK-brokered process that led to multi-racial democratic elections in Rhodesia.

As head of state, Obasanjo attended OAU summits. At that held in July 1977, he proposed the formation of a standing committee to mediate disputes between OAU member states. At the 1978 conference, he warned of interference from both sides in the Cold War. At the next conference, he urged the formation of a Pan-African military which could engage in peace-keeping efforts on the continent. To promote Nigeria&#x27;s role internationally, Obasanjo involved himself in various mediation efforts across Africa. In 1977, he persuaded Benin and Togo to end their border dispute and reopen their frontier. He also attempted to mediate a quarrel among several East African states and thus prevent the collapse of the East African Community, but failed in this attempt. As the chair of the OAU mediation committee, he tried to mediate the Ogaden dispute between Ethiopia and Somalia but was again unsuccessful. He also failed to mend the breach that had emerged between Angola and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

On behalf of the OAU, Obasanjo held a conference at Kano to mediate the Chadian Civil War. Several factions agreed to a ceasefire, to form a government of national unity, and to allow Nigerian troops to act as peacekeepers. The war nevertheless continued and Nigeria responded by cutting off its oil supply to Chad. A second conference on the conflict took place in Lagos in August 1979, resulting in the formation of another short-lived transitional government. In the final year of his military government, he headed an OAU mission to resolve the conflict in Western Sahara.

===Transfer of power===
The military government has assembled a constituent drafting committee to devise a new constitution which could be used amid a transfer to civilian rule. The committee argued that Nigeria should change its governance system, which was based on the British parliamentary system, to one based on the U.S. presidential system whereby a single elected president would be both head of state and head of government. To avoid this president becoming a dictator, as had happened elsewhere in Africa, it argued for various checks on their power, including a federal structure whereby independent elected institutions would exist at the federal, state, and local level. The draft constitution was published in October 1976 and debated in public for the following year. A constituent assembly met to discuss the draft in October 1977. The assembly deadlocked over what role to give sharia law in the constitution. Obasanjo called the assembly together and warned them of the social impact of their decision, urging them to take a more conciliatory attitude. In September 1978, the Supreme Military Council announced the new constitution; it had made several amendments to the version put forward by the constituent assembly.

Along with the new constitution, Obasanjo lifted the ban on political parties. A variety of groups then formed to compete in the ensuing election, most notably the Unity Party of Yoruba, the Nigerian People&#x27;s Party, and the National Party of Nigeria. Obasanjo was angered that many of the politicians were making promises that they could not keep. The elections took place over the course of July and August 1979. Turnout was low, at between 30 and 40 percent of legally registered voters, and there was rigging on various sides, although it was peaceful. There was debate as to who won the presidential vote, and Obasanjo refused to adjudicate, insisting that the Electoral Commission take on that role. They declared that Shehu Shagari was the winner, something that the runner up, Obafemi Awolowo, unsuccessfully challenged at the Supreme Court. Shagari took office in October 1979; at his inauguration ceremony, Obasanjo presented Shagari with a copy of the new constitution. This marked the start of Nigeria&#x27;s Second Republic.

Obasanjo&#x27;s role in returning Nigeria to civilian rule would form the basis of the good reputation he retained for the next two decades. However, various domestic and foreign individuals, including the Zambian President Kenneth Kaunda and Togo President Gnassingbé Eyadéma, urged him to remain in power. His refusal to back Awolowo, a fellow Yoruba, earned him the enmity of much of the Yoruba elite. Awolowo accused Obasanjo of orchestrating Shagari&#x27;s victory, something Obasanjo strenuously denied.

== Pre-presidency (1979–1999) ==
Before he left office, in April 1979, Obasanjo promoted himself to the role of general; as a four-star general he continued to receive a salary from the state. Having left office in October, he returned to Abeokuta. Following a six-week course at an agricultural training college, Obasanjo then set himself up as a farmer, hoping to set an example in encouraging agricultural self-reliance. He obtained at least 230 hectares of land in Ota on which to establish his farm, there moving in to a brick farmhouse. There was local hostility to his obtaining so much land, and much litigation was brought against him because of it. His agricultural activities were organised through his Temperance Enterprises Limited, later renamed Obasanjo&#x27;s Farms Limited. He devoted particular attention to poultry farming; by the mid-1980s, his farm was hatching 140,000 chicks a week. He also set up farms in other southwestern cities, and by 1987 his farms had over 400 employees at eight locations. Like other popular Yoruba figures, Obasanjo sponsored poor students at his former school in Abeokuta.

Obasanjo grew critical of Shagari&#x27;s civilian government, deeming the president weak and ill-prepared. Nigeria entered economic recession due to fluctuations in global oil prices. In May 1983, senior military figures asked Obasanjo to take over control in the country again, but he declined. In December, they overthrew Shagari without Obasanjo&#x27;s involvement, in a coup that saw little violence. Muhammadu Buhari became the new military head of state. Obasanjo was initially supportive of Buhari&#x27;s government, stating that representative democracy had failed in Nigeria. He praised Buhari&#x27;s War Against Indiscipline, his halving of imports, and his restoration of a balanced budget. In August 1985, Buhari was also overthrown, with the Army Chief of Staff Ibrahim Babangida taking power. Obasanjo was critical of some of the economic reforms that Babangida introduced, including the devaluation of the naira. By 1992, his opposition to Babangida&#x27;s rule had led him to call for a re-democratisation of Nigeria. He also began to reject the economic indigenisation policies of the 1970s, arguing that the constitution should prohibit the confiscation of foreign investments. Instead, he thought the government should emphasise private-led development. He became increasingly concerned by rapid population growth, a topic he had ignored while in power, urging Nigerians to have smaller families &quot;in their own economic and national socio-economic interest&quot;.

During the eleven years after Obasanjo left office, he published four books. In 1980, Obasanjo was a Distinguished Fellow at the University of Ibadan, where he wrote &quot;My Command&quot;, an account of his experiences during the civil war; it was published in November that year. Some readers criticised what they saw as Obasanjo&#x27;s disloyalty to Murtala Muhammed, while Robert Adeyinka Adebayo, a senior Yoruba political figure, urged for the book to be withdrawn to prevent it sowing division. A more positive assessment was made by his friend, Ken Saro-Wiwa, who called it masterly but believed that it had involved much editorial assistance. In 1987, he published &quot;Nzeogwu&quot;, a memoir of his friend Chukwuma Nzeogwu, with whom he had served in the Congo. 1989 saw the publication of Obasanjo&#x27;s next book, &quot;Constitution for National Integration and Development&quot;, in which he warned against Babangida&#x27;s argument for instituting a two-party system in Nigeria. In 1990, his third book, &quot;Not My Will&quot;, was published. It provided an account of his time governing the country.

=== International activities: 1979–1993 ===
Seeking to retain influence on the global stage, Obasanjo launched the Africa Leadership Forum from his Ota farm. From 1981 to 1982, he also sat on the Palme Commission, a group chaired by the former Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme which discussed disarmament and international security. Obasanjo followed this with membership on similar panels for the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the Inter-Action Council of Former Heads of Government. When Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the UN Secretary-General, fell ill, Obasanjo was considered as a potential successor. After Pérez de Cuéllar announced his resignation, Obasanjo began campaigning to replace him. At a vote of the UN Security Council, he came third, with Egypt&#x27;s Boutros Boutros-Ghali taking on the role. He left his home on several visits; in 1986 he visited Japan, and in 1987 the U.S.

Amid a dispute in the Commonwealth of Nations over the UK&#x27;s more lenient view of South Africa, it was agreed that an Eminent Persons Group (EPG) would be formed to initiate dialogue with the South African government in the hope of encouraging it toward dismantling apartheid. At the recommendation of Nigeria&#x27;s Deputy Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, Emeka Anyaoku, Obasanjo was nominated to co-chair the group alongside former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. Obasanjo reluctantly agreed. In February 1986, he and Fraser travelled to Cape Town where they asked to meet with the imprisoned anti-apartheid activist Nelson Mandela, a prominent member of the banned African National Congress (ANC). Obasanjo alone was permitted to meet with Mandela; he later commented that he was greatly impressed by him. Obasanjo then met with senior ANC figures in exile in Lusaka.

In March 1986, the entirety of the EPG visited South Africa, during a period of growing domestic unrest and violence. There they met with senior government figures, including Prime Minister P. W. Botha, whom Obasanjo later described as the most intolerant man he had ever met. The EPG&#x27;s report stated that while a majority of South Africans desired a non-violent negotiated settlement between the government and anti-apartheid groups, the former was unwilling to contemplate this and had made no significant progress towards ending apartheid. The EPG thus proposed that further international pressure was necessary. A Commonwealth committee accepted the report&#x27;s findings, with the UK dissenting; this left Obasanjo further frustrated with Thatcher. The Commonwealth then commissioned him to head a committee to determine what the Frontline States needed to defend themselves from South African incursions.

After Botha was replaced by F. W. de Klerk, the latter freed Mandela from prison. One of Mandela&#x27;s first foreign trips was to Nigeria, where he visited Obasanjo at his home. Two months later, Obasanjo led a Nigerian delegation to South Africa for talks with prominent political figures. In September 1991, he visited again, where he urged the Zulu leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi to engage in negotiations with other factions to help end apartheid and hold a fully representative election.

Obasanjo also worked on developments elsewhere in Africa. He visited Angola twice during 1988, contributing to efforts to end the civil war there. He also visited Sudan three times between 1987 and 1989, unsuccessfully encouraging negotiations to end the Second Sudanese Civil War. He then served as an observer at the 1994 Mozambican general election. In 1994 and 1995, he visited Burundi, where he worked to calm tensions between the Hutu and Tutsi ethnic groups. He had begun calling for closer integration across Africa, proposing this could be achieved through the formation of six regional confederations. In June 1987, he had sketched out plans for an Africa Leadership Forum, which would help to provide skills and training for politicians from across the continent. It began holding meetings, known as the Farm House Dialogues, from Obasanjo&#x27;s home about six times a year. It also held quarterly international meetings and issued a quarterly magazine, &quot;Africa Forum&quot;, between 1991 and 1993.

===Opposing Abacha: 1992–1995===
Obasanjo voiced concern that, despite his professed claims to support a return to democracy, Babangida had no intention of stepping down as military head of state. After the presidential primaries were cancelled in 1992, Obasanjo and Anthony Enahoro launched the Association for Democracy and Good Governance in Nigeria. The group&#x27;s inaugural meeting brought together 31 domestic political figures at Ota in May 1993. An election followed in June 1993, which saw low turnout. Moshood Abiola of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) won, but Babangida then annulled the election result, promising a second election soon after. The SDP opposed any second election as they argued that their candidate had already won the first. Babangida then agreed to step down in favour of an interim civilian government, led by Ernest Shonekan, which took power in August 1993 and set out plans for new elections in February 1994.

Meanwhile, Sani Abacha consolidated his control of the military and in November 1993 pressured Shonekan into resigning, allowing himself to take power. Obasanjo had telephoned Abacha prior to the coup, urging him not to take this course of action. After Abacha had seized power, he asked Obasanjo to meet with him. The latter did, but refused to support Abacha&#x27;s government until it announced a date for its own departure. Abacha then abolished the existing political parties and democratic institutions and called for politicians from various backgrounds to join his Federal Executive Council; Obasanjo refused to nominate anyone for this council.

Obasanjo began warning that Nigeria was headed towards another civil war along ethnic divisions, and in May 1994 he and Yar&#x27;Adua launched the National Unity Promoters, a group dedicated to preventing this outcome. In June, Abiola unilaterally declared himself Nigeria&#x27;s president and was arrested for treason. Although Obasanjo refused to endorse Abiola&#x27;s claim, he did advise Abacha not to arrest him. He then led a group of traditional leaders at a meeting in which they attempted to initiate a dialogue between Abacha and Abiola. His refusal to support Abiola angered many Yoruba people and Obasanjo&#x27;s property in Yorubaland was attacked. Obasanjo was upset by what he saw as punishment for not backing Yoruba sectarian interests.

In March 1995, Obasanjo was in Denmark for a UN Summit on Social Development in Copenhagen. While there, he heard that Yar&#x27;Adua had been detained and that he would probably face the same fate if he returned to Nigeria. He nevertheless argued that he had done nothing wrong and thus decided to return. Once at Lagos Airport, his passport was confiscated and the next day, police picked him up from his Ota home. The police accused Obasanjo of links to a coup against Abacha being plotted by Colonel Lawan Gwadabe. Obasanjo was moved between various detention centres, while former US President Carter personally contacted Abacha requesting Obasanjo&#x27;s release. Obasanjo was then returned to Ota, where he was placed under house arrest for two months, during which time he was denied access to media, the telephone, or visitors.

Another of those accused of being involved in the plot, Colonel RSB Bello-Fadile, a military lawyer, had been tortured, during which he signed a statement that he had gone to Ota to inform Obasanjo about the coup as it was in preparation. This was used as evidence to charge Obasanjo with concealment of treason, a capital offense under Nigerian law. He was then taken to the State Security Interrogation Centre at Ikoyi. Abacha insisted that Obasanjo be tried before a military court, which took place on 19 June 1995. At the trial, Obasanjo denied that RSB Bello-Fadile had ever met with him. RSB Bello-Fadile also maintained that he had signed the statement implicating Obasanjo under duress, but the court rejected this retraction. On 14 July, the court sentenced Obasanjo to 25 years in prison; Yar&#x27;Adua and fourteen others also accused of being part of the conspiracy were sentenced to death. Obasanjo later called it his &quot;saddest day&quot;. After the US President Bill Clinton stated that his country would embargo Nigerian oil if these executions took place, Abacha commuted their sentences to imprisonment and reduced Obasanjo&#x27;s sentence to 15 years.

===Imprisonment: 1995–1998===
Obasanjo spent the next four months at the Ikoyi Centre, where he was initially chained up in solitary confinement. He was then transferred to Lagos&#x27; main prison, Kirikiri, where he spent time in the prison hospital for his hypertension and diabetes. Conditions in Kirikiri were overcrowded and unsanitary, with Obasanjo stating that he &quot;would not wish it on my worst enemy&quot;. There, RSB Bello-Fadile apologised to Obasanjo for having implicated him, at which Obasanjo forgave him. A note written by RSB Bello-Fadile explaining the situation was then smuggled out of the prison and published, helping to demonstrate Obasanjo&#x27;s innocence.

After several weeks, Obasanjo and the other alleged conspirators were moved to Jos prison in the central plateau, Plateau State where they spent several months. Obasanjo was initially given only the Bible and Quran to read, but gradually allowed a wider range of literature. Writing material was also granted to him, allowing him to correspond with various people and institutions, and eventually Stella was permitted to visit him once a month. Both Mandela and Pope John Paul II called for his release, with Indian and German foundations both awarding him international prizes. The Africa Leadership Forum produced two volumes of letters and essays written in his honour; the Forum itself had been forced to relocate to Accra in Ghana to avoid persecution from Abacha&#x27;s government.

In early 1996, Obasanjo was moved from Jos to the more remote prison at Yola, Adamawa State. There, he was allowed to cultivate a garden. Obasanjo related that in prison he deepened his Christian faith and grew closer to God, becoming a born-again Christian. From that point, Christianity played a much larger role in his personal world-view. At Yola, he preached 28 weekly sermons after visiting ministers were temporarily banned. He wrote these sermons down, allowing them to be published when he was released. Obasanjo also tried to reform some of the younger prisoners, following up on their progress once he became a free man. Obasanjo feared that he would be poisoned, particularly amid public speculation that Yar&#x27;adua&#x27;s death had been caused by deliberate poisoning. Abacha died suddenly in June 1998, after which the military commanders appointed Major General Abdulsalami Abubakar as his successor. A week later, Abubakar ordered Obasanjo&#x27;s release, sending a plane to return him to Ota. Eager to return Nigeria to civilian rule, Abubakar dissolved the country&#x27;s existing parties and institutions and announced a plan that would lead to a civilian president being installed in May 1999.

===Campaigning for the presidency: 1998–1999===
Now a free man, Obasanjo travelled to South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States, where he underwent medical treatment. New political parties were forming across Nigeria, one of the largest of which was the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), an umbrella group that sought to be sufficiently broad that if in power it would deter future coups. Prominent PDP members proposed Obasanjo as an ideal presidential candidate. They felt that he could command international respect and that as a military figure he could hold the country together against future coups and secessionist movements. They also argued that Nigeria needed a southern president to balance out its previous northern leadership and that Obasanjo had proved himself as a southerner who had no partisan prejudice against the north.

Friends and family urged him not to run, saying that he would damage his good reputation or be killed. Obasanjo appeared reluctant, but on 28 October he joined the PDP and a week later announced that he was putting himself forward to be the party&#x27;s presidential nominee. In his campaign, he emphasized his desire to restore what he deemed the legacy of good governance when he left office in 1979. At a fundraising dinner, he gained N356 million, of which N120 million had been donated by industrialist Aliko Dangote. Most of these donations came from military men and the new business class. He toured the country, giving speeches and seeking audiences with influential persons; courting state governors was a significant element of his approach. His campaign overshadowed that of his main rival, Alex Ekwueme, who was widely mistrusted by northerners and the military.

The PDP was gaining ground in Nigeria, proving the most successful party in the local government elections of December 1998, the state elections in January 1999, and the Senate and House of Representatives elections in February 1999. On 14 February 1999, a PDP convention was called to select its presidential candidate. Obasanjo received 1,658 votes, to 521 for Ekwueme, and 260 for the other five candidates. Seeking a northerner as the PDP&#x27;s vice presidential candidate, Obasanjo selected Atiku Abubakar. The presidential election took place on 27 February; Obasanjo&#x27;s sole opponent was the APP&#x27;s Olu Falae. About a quarter of those eligible to vote did so, and there was some rigging although no violence. The official tally gave Obasanjo 63 percent of the vote; he was the loser in all six states of his native Yorubaland.

== Presidency (1999–2007) ==

=== First term (1999–2003) ===
After having it exorcised, Obasanjo moved into the presidential complex at Aso Rock in May, 1999 after taking the presidential oath at the Eagle Square in Abuja. While appointing his new government, he selected an even number of ministers from the north and south of Nigeria, although the fact that a majority were Christian upset some Muslim northerners. Critics generally characterised Obasanjo&#x27;s cabinet as being too old and conservative, as well as lacking in experience, especially when dealing with economic matters. During his first administration the levels of freedom experienced by Nigerians increased; freedom of the press allowed for considerable criticism of the president.

In the initial months of his presidency, Obasanjo retired around 200 military officers, including all 93 who held political positions, thus making a coup by experienced officers less likely. He also moved the Defence Ministry from Lagos to Abuja, ensuring it was brought under more direct government control.

=== Second term (2003–2007) ===
Obasanjo was re-elected in a tumultuous 2003 election that had violent ethnic and religious overtones. His main opponent, fellow former military ruler General Muhammadu Buhari, was Muslim and drew his support mainly from the north. Capturing 61.8% of the vote, Obasanjo defeated Buhari by more than 11 million votes.

In November 2003, Obasanjo was criticized for his decision to grant asylum to the deposed Liberian president, Charles Taylor. On 12 June 2006, he signed the Greentree Agreement with Cameroonian President Paul Biya which formally put an end to the Bakassi peninsula border dispute. Even though the Nigerian Senate passed a resolution declaring that the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from the Bakassi Peninsula was illegal, Obasanjo gave the order for it to continue as planned.

In his second term, Obasanjo continued to ensure the expansion of the country&#x27;s police force, which rose to 325,000 in 2007.
Ongoing rural violence between Muslims and Christians in Plateau State led Obasanjo to declare a state of emergency there in May 2004, suspending the state government and installing six months of military rule. On 22 August 2005, the then governor of Abia State, Orji Uzor Kalu, submitted a petition alleging corrupt practices against Obasanjo to the EFCC.

=== Third term agenda ===
Obasanjo was embroiled in controversy regarding his &quot;Third Term Agenda&quot;, a plan to modify the constitution so he could serve a third, four-year term as president. This led to a political media uproar in Nigeria and the bill was not ratified by the National Assembly. Consequently, Obasanjo stepped down after the April 2007 general election. In an exclusive interview granted to Channels Television, Obasanjo denied involvement in what has been defined as &quot;Third Term Agenda&quot;. He said that it was the National Assembly that included tenure elongation amongst the other clauses of the Constitution of Nigeria that were to be amended. Obasanjo stated: &quot;I never toyed with the idea of a third term.&quot;

Obasanjo was condemned by major political players during the Third Term Agenda saga. Senator Ken Nnamani, former president of the Nigerian Senate, claimed Obasanjo informed him about the agenda shortly after he became senate president. He said: &quot;Immediately, I became senate president, he told me of his intentions and told me how he wanted to achieve it. I initially did not take him seriously until the events began to unfold.&quot; He also insinuated that Eight Billion Naira was spent to corrupt legislators to support the agenda, asking: &quot;How can someone talk like this that he didn&#x27;t know about it, yet money, both in local and foreign currencies, exchanged hands.&quot; Femi Gbajabiamila corroborated Nnamani&#x27;s account but put the figure differently, stating: &quot;The money totaled over N10 billion. How could N10bn be taken out of the national treasury for a project when you were the sitting President, yet that project was not your idea? Where did the money come from?&quot; In the following quotes, Nnamani said US president George W. Bush warned Obasanjo to desist from his plan to contest presidential election for the third term. He commented: &quot;If you want to be convinced that the man is only telling a lie, pick up a copy of the book written by Condoleezza Rice, a former US secretary of state. It is actually an autobiography by Rice. On page 628 or page 638, she discussed Obasanjo&#x27;s meeting with Bush, how he told the former American President that he wanted to see how he could amend the Constitution so that he could go for a third term. To his surprise, Bush told him not to try it. Bush told him to be patriotic and leave by 29 May 2007.&quot;

===Economic, social and foreign policies===

==== Economic policy ====
With the oil revenue, Obasanjo created the Niger Delta Development Commission and implemented the Universal Basic Education Program to enhance the literacy level of Nigerians. He constituted both the Independent Corrupt Practices Commission and the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission. Resuscitated the National Fertilizer Company in Kaduna and (Onne) Port Harcourt. Obasanjo increased the share of oil royalties and rents to the state of origin from 3 to 13 percent.

Before Obasanjo&#x27;s administration, Nigeria&#x27;s GDP growth had been painfully slow since 1987, and only managed 3 percent between 1999 and 2000. However, under Obasanjo, the growth rate doubled to 6 percent until he left office, helped in part by higher oil prices. Nigeria&#x27;s foreign reserves rose from $2 billion in 1999 to $43 billion on leaving office in 2007.

He was able to secure debt pardons from the Paris and London club amounting to some $18 billion and paid another $18 billion to be debt free. Most of these loans were accumulated from short-term trade arrears during the exchange control period. (Point of correction). Most of these loans were accumulated not out of corruption but during a period 1982–85 when Nigeria operated exchange control regime that vested all foreign exchange transactions on the central bank of Nigeria. When Obasanjo took office, Nigeria&#x27;s economy was in a poor state. Inflation had averaged about 30% a year throughout the 1990s, and by 2001 around 20% of Nigerian adults were unemployed. Poverty was widespread, with Obasanjo&#x27;s government seeking to alleviate this by paying N3,500 a month to around 200,000 people to conduct routine tasks such as sweeping and mending roads. This project was then replaced with a National Poverty Eradication Programme which focused on generating youth employment, rural infrastructure, and conservation. In 2000, Obasanjo&#x27;s government doubled the legal minimum wage.

He invited the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to review Nigeria&#x27;s economy and offer advice on how to improve it; they warned that the government was overspending. In 2001, Obasanjo declared himself &quot;a believer in market efficiency&quot; and related that he had seen the damage caused by &quot;public sector mismanagement&quot; first hand. However, while expressing his commitment to the Washington Consensus of free markets, privatisation, and limited state expenditure, government expenditure as a share of GDP rose from 29% in 1997 to 50% in 2001. In January 2000, Nigeria received a US$1 billion stand-by loan, which allowed the government to enter debt rescheduling negotiations with its creditors. Obasanjo&#x27;s government benefited from high international oil prices during his first presidential term. It planned both to increase Nigeria&#x27;s oil output and to produce increasing quantities of liquefied natural gas, which was first exported from the country in 1999.

Obasanjo was determined to abolish the petrol subsidy, increasing prices to commercial rates. The Nigerian Labour Congress called a general strike in protest for June 2000 and Obasanjo ultimately compromised, reducing the subsidy rather than abolishing it. This situation allowed Obasanjo to be portrayed as an &quot;enemy of the poor&quot; on the public imagination. To further reduce expenditure, Obasanjo turned to privatisation, forming a National Council on Privatisation in July 1999. When he took office, Nigeria&#x27;s federal government owned 588 public enterprises, accounting for over 55% of external debt, and Obasanjo hoped that many of these, although not those involved in oil production, could be sold off. Privatisation was not popular with Nigeria&#x27;s population, having only 35% support according to a 2000 opinion survey. Obasanjo was also keen to negotiate debt reduction. He insisted that Nigeria&#x27;s debts were so large as to be unpayable and that they threatened its economy and democracy. Although Canada, Italy, and the U.S. cancelled Nigeria&#x27;s debts, these were small, and the country&#x27;s major creditors, the largest of which was the UK, refused.

Obasanjo blamed many of Nigeria&#x27;s economic problems on endemic corruption; in 2000, Transparency International ranked it the world&#x27;s most corrupt country. Several days after taking office he presented an Anti-Corruption Bill to the National Assembly, although this aroused much opposition from critics who thought it gave the government excessive powers. Compromises were reached that watered-down Obasanjo&#x27;s proposals, allowing him to sign the new law in June 2000. There is no evidence that corruption declined in Nigeria in Obasanjo&#x27;s first term, and his government did nothing to check Nigeria&#x27;s endemic low-level corruption, which was widespread at the state and local government levels.

Public health was also a key issue in Nigeria. During the 1990s, Nigeria had spent about 0.2% of its GDP on public health services, the joint lowest percentage in the world. Obasanjo&#x27;s government increased this to over 0.4%. The most urgent health crisis impacting Nigeria was the HIV/AIDS epidemic, with Obasanjo immediately ordering a situation report on the topic after taking office. He then established a Presidential Committee on AIDS, which he headed as chair, and created a National Action Plan Committee to prepare a campaign for 2000–03 which would focus on publicity, training, counselling, and testing to combat the virus. To advance public health more broadly, he launched a new primary care campaign that used local government funds to try to build a clinic in every one of Nigeria&#x27;s 774 local government areas.
====Foreign policy==== 
One of Obasanjo&#x27;s major tasks, in which he succeeded, was to improve Nigeria&#x27;s international reputation, which had been tarnished under Abacha. He spent over a quarter of his first term abroad, having visited 92 countries by October 2002. In October 1999, Obasanjo launched a South African-Nigerian Bi-National Commission to discuss cooperation between the two countries, the largest powers on Sub-Saharan Africa. Obasanjo retained Nigeria&#x27;s close ties with the U.S., bringing in U.S. advisers to help train the Nigerian military. He had close ties with U.S. President Bill Clinton and also got on with Clinton&#x27;s successor George W. Bush; Bush visited Abuja in 2000, and Obasanjo visited Washington DC in 2006. Pursuing warmer relations with the U.K. than he had in the 1970s, he attended his first Commonwealth Conference in November 1999 and hosted that in December 2003, where he received an honorary knighthood from British Queen Elizabeth II.

On taking office, Obasanjo had vowed to withdraw Nigerian troops from Sierra Leone. In August 1999, he announced a schedule for their withdrawal, although this was suspended while a UN peacekeeping force was assembled, to which Nigeria provided 4000 troops. This force withdrew in 2005. Amid turmoil in Liberia, Obasanjo ordered Nigerian troops into the country in August 2003; they passed into a UN command two months later. Obasanjo granted Liberia&#x27;s ousted leader Charles Taylor refuge in Nigeria, although subsequently returned him to Liberia to face trial for war crimes at the request of new Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. 

Eager to keep Nigeria out of domestically unpopular conflicts, he refused requests for the Nigerian military to participate in an ECOMOG intervention in the Guinea-Bissau civil war and the 2002 peacekeeping mission to the Côte d&#x27;Ivoire. At the UK&#x27;s request, he assisted in a mediation with Robert Mugabe&#x27;s Zimbabwe government over the latter&#x27;s encouragement of the violent seizure of white-owned farms. Along with South African President Thabo Mbeki and Australian Prime Minister John Howard, he was part of a team tasked with dealing with Zimbabwe by the Commonwealth. Obasanjo and Mbeki visited Zimbabwe three times to work on quiet diplomacy, unsuccessfully urging Mugabe to either retire or form a power sharing government with the opposition Movement for Democratic Change.

====Confronting ethnic and religious tensions====

Shortly after Obasanjo&#x27;s election, the place of Islamic sharia law became a major debate in Nigerian politics. Since the country&#x27;s independence, sharia had been restricted to civil cases between Muslims in the northern states; criminal cases were not governed by sharia law, something that offended some Muslims. In September 1999, the Governor of Zamfara State, Ahmed Sani, announced the full introduction of sharia as the basis of that state&#x27;s penal code, although specified that it would only apply to Muslim residents and not the non-Islamic minority. This sparked alarm among Christian minorities across northern Nigeria, with protests and counter-protests generating violence, especially in Kaduna. Across Nigeria, Christian opinion was very hostile to the introduction of sharia as the basis of state penal systems. Both houses of the National Assembly urged Obasanjo to take the issue to the Supreme Court. He was eager to avoid this, not wanting the role of sharia to become a constitutional issue. Publicly he sought to distinguish what he called &quot;genuine sharia&quot; from &quot;political sharia&quot;, praising the former while insisting that the latter was a fad that would fizzle out. By refusing to intervene, Obasanjo drew criticism for a lack of courage from many southerners, while Muslim hardliners in the north mocked him. Amid popular demand from Muslim communities, four more northern states adopted sharia penal law in 2000 and seven more in 2001. Obasanjo later stated that the issue was the biggest challenge he ever faced as president.

When Obasanjo came to power, he was appalled that Nigeria was experiencing widespread unrest and violence, resulting in thousands of deaths. This violence was being exacerbated by a rapidly growing population which brought with it spiralling urbanisation and competition for scarce land in rural areas. To deal with this, Obasanjo doubled the country&#x27;s police force from 120,000 to 240,000 between 1999 and 2003. Little was done to deal with police brutality, with the torture of suspects remaining widespread under Obasanjo&#x27;s administration. Also fuelling the violence were ethnic tensions, with different ethnic and regional groups calling for greater autonomy, leading various commentators to predict the breakup of Nigeria. For Obasanjo, keeping the country united became a major priority. Only on select occasions would he turn to the military to quell unrest, preferring not to have to mobilise the army unless state governors requested it. In his words, &quot;we must utilise military force only when all else has failed. That is my own principle and philosophy.&quot; He saw greater value in forgiveness, amnesty, and reconciliation to achieve harmony than in retributive criminal justice of perpetrators. Under Obasanjo&#x27;s presidency, the levels of violence and disorder in Nigeria declined.
A major hub of secessionist sentiment was in the Niger Delta region, where indigenous groups wanted to retain a far greater proportion of the proceeds from the area&#x27;s lucrative oil reserves. In July 1999, Obasanjo sent the National Assembly a bill to create a Niger Delta Development Commission to formulate and implement a plan for dealing with the region, something he hoped would quell violence there. Amid much debate, the commission was finally launched in December 2000. In November 1999, he also sent two army battalions into the Niger Delta region to apprehend the Asawana Boys, an Ijaw group who had captured and killed police officers in Odi, Bayelsa State. The military destroyed most of the town; the government claimed that 43 had been killed, but a local NGO put the number of civilian deaths at 2,483. Obasanjo described the destruction as &quot;avoidable&quot; and &quot;regrettable&quot; and visited Odi in March 2001; he refused to condemn the army, apologise for the destruction, pay compensation or rebuild the town, although the Niger Delta Development Commission did the latter.

In 2000, Obasanjo banned the Oodua Peoples Congress (OPC), a Yoruba nationalist group involved in violence against other ethnicities, and ordered the arrest of its leaders. In September 2001, violence between indigenous Christians and northern Muslim traders in Plateau State resulted in around 500 deaths before the army moved in and regained control. Obasanjo then visited and urged reconciliation. In October 2001, Muslim demonstrators in Kano killed around 200 Igbo in response to Nigeria&#x27;s support for the U.S. bombing of Afghanistan. Obasanjo then visited to urge reconciliation but was booed by residents. Also in October, soldiers had been sent to calm tensions between the Jukun and Tiv communities along the borders between Benue and Taraba states; a Tiv militia then captured and killed them in Zaki-Biam. Obasanjo ordered the army in, where they rounded up and killed as many as 250 to 300 local men. Obasanjo visited the area in 2002 and apologised for the excessive use of force.

In January 2002, Obasanjo ordered the mobile police to break-up the Bakassi Boys, a vigilante group active primarily in Abia and Anambra states which was responsible for an estimated two thousand killings. He had hesitated doing so before due to the popular support that the group had accrued through fighting criminal gangs, but felt able to move against them after their popularity waned. That same month, an ammunition dump at the Ijeka barracks near Lagos exploded, potentially resulting in as many as a thousand deaths. Obasanjo visited immediately. Violent unrest had also continued in Lagos, and in February 2002, troops were sent into the city to restore stability. In April 2002, Obasanjo proposed legislation that would allow for the proscription of ethnic-based groups if they were deemed to promote violence, but the National Executive rejected this as an overreach of presidential power.

Some public officials like the Speaker of the House of Representatives and President of the Senate were involved in conflicts with the President, who battled many impeachment attempts from both houses. Obasanjo managed to survive impeachment and was renominated.

==Post-presidency (2007–present)==

=== Politics ===
He became chairman of the PDP Board of Trustees, with control over nominations for governmental positions and even policy and strategy. As one Western diplomat said, &quot;He intends to sit in the passenger seat giving advice and ready to grab the wheel if Nigeria goes off course.&quot; He voluntarily resigned as the chairman board of trustees of the PDP in April 2012. Afterwards, he withdrew from political activities with PDP.

In March 2008, Obasanjo was &quot;supposedly&quot; indicted by a committee of the Nigerian parliament for awarding $2.2bn-worth of energy contracts during his eight-year rule, without due process. The report of this probe was never accepted by the whole Nigerian parliament due to manipulation of the entire process by the leadership of the power probe committee. It is not on any official record that Chief Obasanjo was indicted.

In May 2014, Obasanjo wrote to President Goodluck Jonathan requesting that he should mediate on behalf of the Nigerian government for the release of the Chibok girls held by the Boko Haram militants.

On 16 February 2015, he quit the ruling party and directed a PDP ward leader to tear his membership card during a press conference. He was later to be known as the navigator of the newly formed opposition party, the APC.

On 24 January 2018, he wrote serving President Muhammadu Buhari highlighting his areas of weakness and advising him not to run for office in 2019. To date all his letters to incumbent presidents have preceded their downfall.

On 31 January 2018, he launched a political movement called &quot;Coalition for Nigeria Movement&quot; (CNM) in Abuja. On 10 May 2018, the movement adopts a political party, African Democratic Congress (ADC).

On 20 November 2018, Obasanjo officially announced his return to the main opposition party, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) during a book launch for &quot;My Transition Hours&quot;, written by former President Goodluck Jonathan.

On 22 January 2022, Obasanjo declared that he had retired from partisan politics, after receiving national delegates of the Peoples Democratic Party [PDP] in his residence in Ota, Ogun State, Nigeria

=== Diplomacy ===
Obasanjo was appointed Special Envoy by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the war-torn Democratic Republic of the Congo. He held separate meetings with DRC President Joseph Kabila and rebel leader Laurent Nkunda.

During the Zimbabwean election of July 2013, Obasanjo headed a delegation of African Union election observers.

In 2022, Obasanjo mediated peace talks between the Ethiopian government and the Tigray People&#x27;s Liberation Front under the auspices of the African Union, culminating in a ceasefire of the Tigray War on 2 November 2022. In 2025, Obasanjo was appointed as a mediator by the East African Community and the Southern African Development Community in the Democratic Republic of the Congo amid the M23 campaign (2022–present).

=== Further education ===
In December 2017, Obasanjo defended his Ph.D. thesis in theology at the National Open University of Nigeria.

=== Political ideology ===
Ideologically, Obasanjo is a Nigerian nationalist. He is committed to a form of Nigerian patriotism and the belief that Nigeria should be retained as a single nation-state, rather than being broken up along ethnic lines. In 2001, he stated that his long-term goal was &quot;the nullification of all forms of identification except Nigerian citizenship&quot;. He argued that dismantling Nigeria along ethnic lines would result in the ethnic cleansing and violence that had been seen during the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s. Iliffe argued that Obasanjo&#x27;s Nigerian nationalism was impacted both by his detachment from the Yoruba elite and by his time in the army, where he worked alongside soldiers from a broad range of ethnic backgrounds.

Iliffe noted that an emphasis on consensus politics was &quot;a guiding principle&quot; throughout Obasanjo&#x27;s career. While in power during the 1970s, Obasanjo expressed criticism of &quot;institutionalized opposition&quot; to the government. In his view this was &quot;profoundly incongruent with most African political culture and practice.&quot; Instead of constantly opposing the government, he believed that opposition parties should instead offer constructive criticism, and that politicians should pursue a search for consensus rather than engaging in constant competition. He thought that political competition had a destabilising effect that was particularly dangerous for a developing country such as Nigeria, and that stability should be preserved.

Frustrated with what he regarded as the failures of representative democratic rule during the early 1980s, Obasanjo began expressing support for a one-party state in Nigeria. He nevertheless insisted that this one-party state must facilitate general public participation in governance, respect human rights, and protect freedom of expression. Later in the 1980s, he warned against the proposed two-party state which Babangida was putting forward, believing that while Babangida envisioned a centre-left and centre-right party competing against each other, it would inevitably develop into one party representing the Christian south and the other representing the Muslim north. He instead argued that there should be no limit on the number of political parties that could be formed, although suggested that if this could not occur then Nigeria should become a one-party state. Amid the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s and the subsequent move towards multi-party politics across Africa, Obasanjo again became supportive of multi-party systems.

Iliffe noted that as a politician, Obasanjo displayed an &quot;open-minded pragmatism&quot;. A tactic employed by Obasanjo at various points was to deliberately polarise an issue so as to rally support for his perspective.
Iliffe thought that although Obasanjo had been too young to play a major role in the anti-colonialist struggle for Nigerian independence from British rule, he was &quot;marked for ever&quot; by the &quot;optimism and dedication&quot; of the independence movement.

In office, Obasanjo&#x27;s task was to ensure that Nigeria functioned both politically and economically. Over the course of his political career, Obasanjo moved from the belief in the advantages of state involvement in heavy industry, which was common in the 1970s, to a commitment to market liberalism that had become dominant in the 1990s. Iliffe thought that throughout his career, Obasanjo had always displayed an &quot;ambivalence&quot; about the level of state involvement in the economy. His general attitude was that poverty was caused by idleness. While campaigning for the 1999 presidential election, Obasanjo called himself a &quot;market-oriented social democrat&quot; although was vague on his proposed economic strategy. During his presidency, his government brought together figures who were committed to free markets, who favoured more protectionist economic strategies, and those sympathetic to socialism. Obasanjo was contemptuous of ideological arguments about capitalism and socialism. The decisions he took were usually based on political considerations rather than on legal or constitutional principles, something which was a source of concern for some of his critics. Derfler thought that during his first term in office, Obasanjo was a &quot;cautious reformer&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Obasanjo lived a polygamous lifestyle. Obasanjo married his first wife, Oluremi Akinlawon, in London in 1963; she gave birth to his first child, Iyabo, in 1967. Iyabo had a close relationship with her father. Oluremi was unhappy that Obasanjo maintained relationships with other women and alleged that he beat her. They divorced in the mid-1970s. That decade, Obasanjo began a common-law relationship with NTA reporter Gold Oruh who bore him two children. He married his second wife, Stella Abebe, in 1976, having met her on a visit to London. He married Stella in 1976 and they had three children. Obasanjo&#x27;s other partners include businesswoman Lynda Soares who was murdered by car thieves in 1986. On 23 October 2005, the President lost his wife, Stella Obasanjo, First Lady of Nigeria, after she died following an abdominoplasty in Spain. In 2009, the doctor, known only as &#x27;AM&#x27;, was sentenced to one year in jail for negligence in Spain and ordered to pay restitution to her son of about $176,000. He was largely private about his relationships with these women. Some of his children were resentful that he gave them no special privileges and treated their mothers poorly. One of his sons, Adeboye Obasanjo is a brigadier general in the Nigerian Army.

Ethnically, Obasanjo is Yoruba, a cultural identification he reflected in his speech and choice of clothing. However, he always foregrounded his Nigerian identity above his Yoruba one, repeatedly stating that &quot;I am a Nigerian who happens to be a Yoruba man. I am not a Yoruba man who happens to be a Nigerian.&quot;
Throughout his life he expressed a preference for rural over urban life. He has been a lifelong teetotaller. He has been characterised as having a sense of discipline and duty, and emphasised what he saw as the importance of leadership. He was meticulous at planning, and Iliffe called him an &quot;instinctively cautious man&quot;. Obasanjo always emphasised the importance of deferring to seniority, a value he had learned in childhood.
Iliffe described Obasanjo as a man with &quot;great physical and intellectual energy&quot; who &quot;exercised power with skill and ruthlessness, sometimes unscrupulously but seldom cruelly&quot;. Derfler similarly stated that, although Obasanjo could appear &quot;boorish and dull&quot;, he had a &quot;sharply perceptive mind&quot; and the capacity to be &quot;tough and ruthless&quot;. He had, according to Iliffe, a &quot;remarkable capacity for work&quot;. He was cautious with money, living modestly and seeking financial security by investing in property. He is softly-spoken.

In his sixties, Obasanjo would regularly work 18 to 20 hour days, getting very little sleep. He would start each day with prayers. Obasanjo suffers from diabetes and high blood-pressure. He enjoyed playing squash.

Obasanjo&#x27;s writings after his imprisonment reflected his commitment to Biblical literalism. He called the Darwinian theory of evolution a &quot;debasing, devaluing and dehumanising&quot; idea. After his release from prison his writings placed far less emphasis on traditional culture as a guide to morality, calling on fellow Nigerians to reject much of their pre-Christian &quot;way of life&quot;. Iliffe noted that Obasanjo&#x27;s born-again Christianity was &quot;strikingly orthodox&quot; and was aligned with Orthodox Pentecostal teaching. He rejected the prosperity gospel that was taught by some Pentecostalists in Nigeria. Providentialism also became a key part of his worldview after his imprisonment.

In addition to a variety of other chieftaincy titles, Chief Obasanjo is the holder of the title of the Olori Omo Ilu of Ibogun-Olaogun. A number of other members of his family hold or have held chieftaincies as well.

== Reception and legacy ==

John Iliffe described Obasanjo as &quot;the outstanding member of the second generation of independent African leaders who dedicated themselves to the consolidation of their postcolonial states&quot;. He thought that there were four major achievements of Obasanjo&#x27;s presidency: that he partially contained the domestic turmoil permeating Nigeria, that he kept control of the military, that he helped to form the African Union, and that he liquidated the country&#x27;s external debt.
In December 1999, his approval rating was at 84%; by 2001 it was at 72%; and by September 2003 it had fallen to 39%.

Obasanjo was repeatedly accused of corruption throughout his career, although he himself maintained that his dealings were honest.
Obasanjo&#x27;s critics believed that after his imprisonment in the 1990s, he increasingly perceived himself as a messianic figure, having lost his humility and become increasingly committed to the belief that it was his God-commanded destiny to rule Nigeria. Obasanjo&#x27;s critics believed that he had been corrupted by power and that, particularly during his second term in office, he became driven by the idea of indefinitely retaining power for himself.
During his first term as head of state, he earned some enmity from fellow Yoruba who believed that he should have done more to advance the interests of his own ethnic group in government.

After his imprisonment, Obasanjo claimed that criticism only served to confirm &quot;the rightness of my cause&quot; and demonstrated his critics&#x27; &quot;depravity in a fallen and perverted world&quot;.

== Books by Obasanjo ==
* &quot;My Watch Volume 1: Early Life and Military&quot;
* &quot;My Watch Volume 2: Political and Public Affairs&quot;
* &quot;My Watch Volume 3: Now and Then&quot;
* &quot;My Command&quot;
* &quot;Nzeogwu&quot;
* &quot;The Animal Called Man&quot;
* &quot;A New Dawn&quot;
* &quot;The Thabo Mbeki I know&quot;
* &quot;Africa Through the Eyes of A Patriot&quot;
* &quot;Making Africa Work: A handbook&quot;
* &quot;Forging a Compact in U.S. African Relations&quot;: The Fifth David M. Abshire Endowed Lecture, 15 December 1987.
* &quot;Africa in Perspective&quot;
* &quot;Letters to Change the World: From Pankhurst to Orwell&quot;.
* &quot;Not my Will&quot;
* &quot;Democracy Works: Re-Wiring Politics to Africa&#x27;s Advantage&quot;
* &quot;My Watch&quot;
* &quot;Challenges of Leadership in Africa&quot;
* &quot;War Wounds: Development Costs of Conflict in Southern Sudan&quot;
* &quot;Guides to Effective Prayer&quot;
* &quot;The Challenges of Agricultural Production and Food Security in Africa&quot;
* &quot;Addressing Africa&#x27;s Youth Employment and food security Crisis: The Role of African Agriculture in Job Creation&quot;.
* &quot;Dust Suspended: A memoir of Colonial, Overseas and Diplomatic Service Life 1953 to 1986&quot;
* &quot;L&#x27;Afrique en Marche: un manuel pour la reussite économique&quot;
* &quot;Africa&#x27;s Critical Choices: A Call for a Pan-African Roadmap&quot;

== See also ==
*Olusegun Obasanjo Presidential Library

== Awards and Honours ==

* 1981-87,  Member, UNESCO Commission for Peace in the Minds of Men
* 1983-89 Member, Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security (the Olaf Palme Commission)
* 1983, Member WHO Committee of experts on the Effects of Nuclear Weapon
* 1986, Co-Chairman, Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group on South Africa
* 1986, Member, United Nations Panel on Eminent Person on the relationship between Disarmament and Development
* 1987-93, Director, Better World Society, Washington D.C.
* 1988-89, Founder and Chairman, African Leadership Forum and Chairman, Board of Directors, African Leadership Foundation Inc. New York
* 1988 (May), Chairman, Hearing on Namibia, the World Council of Churches, Washington D.C
* 1988-99, Special Adviser to the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan
* 1989, Honorary Member, Committee on the United Nations Population Award
* 1989, Member, Independent Group on Financial Development for Developing Countries (the Schmidt Commission)
* 1989 Member, Advisory Council, Parliamentarian Global Action
* 1989-99, Chairman, Advisory Council, Transparency International (TI)
* 1990, Member, Advisory Council, the Institute for Global Ethics
* Member, Board of Trustees, African American institute
* 1991-93, Publisher, African Forum Quarterly
* 1991, Member, Eminent Persons Council, International Negotiations Network, the Carter Centre of Emory University, Atlanta
* 1991, Member, Council of Advisers, The World Food Price, Des Monies Lowa
* 1992, Member, Advisory Group on United Nations Financing (Ford Foundation)
* 1993-95, Member, United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory Panel on Africa
* 1994 – Official Observer of the Elections in Mozambique at the invitation of the Government of Mozambique
* 1994-99 Member, Advisory Council, Carnegies Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflicts
* 1995-99, UNDP Human Development Ambassador
* Proprietor and chief Promoter, Bells University of Technology, Ota.

== References ==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
=== External links ===
*
*Faces of Africa
*General Olusegun Obasanjo Hands Power To Alhaji Shehu Shagari, October 1979
*Lt-General Olusegun Obasanjo Opening the First Lagos International Trade Fair, November 1977</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="0" end="5" title="Chieftain" label="Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="6" end="55" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Matthew Okikiola Ogunboye Aremu Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509851" start="145" end="158" title="List of heads of state of Nigeria" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="194" end="203" title="President of Nigeria" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079250" start="239" end="259" title="Nigerian nationalism" label="Nigerian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="284" end="308" title="Peoples Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Peoples Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734002" start="416" end="419" title="Owu Kingdom" label="Owu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="434" end="440" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="475" end="483" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082913" start="485" end="495" title="Ogun State University" label="Ogun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="511" end="524" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q618399" start="574" end="579" title="Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville)" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="581" end="588" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="594" end="599" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="685" end="691" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="716" end="734" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="782" end="795" title="military coup" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83204" start="852" end="863" title="triumvirate" label="triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="902" end="918" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645061" start="961" end="985" title="Supreme Military Council of Nigeria (1966–1979)" label="Supreme Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1171" end="1178" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1250" end="1269" title="Apartheid" label="white minority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033048" start="1345" end="1358" title="1979 Nigerian presidential election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="1447" end="1460" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320817" start="1487" end="1496" title="Ota, Ogun" label="Ota, Ogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="1633" end="1644" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="1875" end="1895" title="born again Christian" label="born again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298962" start="1902" end="1917" title="providentialism" label="providentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603123" start="2092" end="2118" title="1999 Nigerian presidential election" label="1999 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="2309" end="2350" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s military from Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318985" start="2462" end="2475" title="2003 Nigerian presidential election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="2491" end="2505" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2561" end="2574" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q946339" start="2593" end="2598" title="Chairperson of the African Union" label="chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="2694" end="2705" title="term limits" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="2782" end="2790" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974654" start="2800" end="2835" title="National Open University of Nigeria" label="National Open University of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="2922" end="2935" title="post-colonial" label="post-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="3021" end="3045" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="3502" end="3509" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734002" start="3873" end="3876" title="Owu Kingdom" label="Owu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="3891" end="3904" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="3966" end="3989" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="4014" end="4021" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="4092" end="4097" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="4362" end="4370" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047911" start="4421" end="4451" title="Baptist Boys&amp;#x27; High School" label="Baptist Boys&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952125" start="4585" end="4594" title="Boy Scouts" label="Boy Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="4769" end="4782" title="anti-colonialism" label="anti-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q107974699" start="5301" end="5318" title="Oluremi Obasanjo" label="Oluremi Akinlawon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="5427" end="5433" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="5505" end="5530" title="University of Ibadan" label="University College Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="5656" end="5670" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="6101" end="6114" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062602" start="6413" end="6419" title="Teshie" label="Teshie"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6423" end="6428" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902481" start="6584" end="6609" title="Mons Officer Cadet School" label="Mons Officer Cadet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="6613" end="6622" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6633" end="6640" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="6694" end="6702" title="classism" label="classist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="6707" end="6713" title="racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6842" end="6856" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6998" end="7005" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="7123" end="7129" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q618399" start="7439" end="7444" title="Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville)" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="7458" end="7472" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743993" start="7532" end="7545" title="Kivu" label="Kivu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q222279" start="7574" end="7580" title="Bukavu" label="Bukavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462901" start="7706" end="7731" title="1960 Force Publique mutinies" label="soldiers who had mutinied"/>
<link wikidata="Q161672" start="7740" end="7755" title="Patrice Lumumba" label="Patrice Lumumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7856" end="7870" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8477" end="8514" title="Royal College of Military Engineering" label="Royal College of Military Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025055" start="8747" end="8763" title="Camberwell Green" label="Camberwell Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="9241" end="9246" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9329" end="9334" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251267" start="9354" end="9384" title="Defence Services Staff College" label="Defence Services Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981341" start="9388" end="9398" title="Wellington Cantonment" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632682" start="9412" end="9433" title="College of Engineering, Pune" label="School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="9437" end="9442" title="Pune" label="Poona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075827" start="9615" end="9635" title="comparative religion" label="comparative religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205928" start="9785" end="9800" title="1966 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402445" start="9814" end="9831" title="Emmanuel Ifeajuna" label="Emmanuel Ifeajuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="9899" end="9910" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q379888" start="10171" end="10192" title="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi" label="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="10262" end="10272" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908992" start="10384" end="10408" title="1966 Nigerian counter-coup" label="a second coup took place"/>
<link wikidata="Q354695" start="10542" end="10554" title="Yakubu Gowon" label="Yakubu Gowon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221436" start="10618" end="10627" title="Maiduguri" label="Maiduguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076957" start="10797" end="10825" title="Governor of Northern Nigeria" label="Governor of Northern Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10985905" start="10827" end="10841" title="Hassan Katsina" label="Hassan Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q380670" start="11442" end="11460" title="C. Odumegwu Ojukwu" label="C. Odumegwu Ojukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="11540" end="11558" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988329" start="11652" end="11665" title="Western State (Nigeria)" label="Western State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005761" start="11986" end="11998" title="Victor Banjo" label="Victor Banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="12195" end="12211" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119029" start="12219" end="12234" title="2 Division (Nigeria)" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="12413" end="12429" title="military science" label="military science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691651" start="12772" end="12792" title="Agbekoya" label="Agbekoya Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888183" start="12974" end="12991" title="Benjamin Adekunle" label="Benjamin Adekunle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="13157" end="13170" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q202162" start="13332" end="13335" title="Aba, Abia" label="Aba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13500" end="13525" title="Operation Finishing Touch" label="Operation Finishing Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q203301" start="13566" end="13573" title="Umuahia" label="Umuahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="13594" end="13607" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097608" start="13670" end="13689" title="Operation Tail-Wind" label="Operation Tail-Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878935" start="13705" end="13708" title="Uli, Anambra" label="Uli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511351" start="13844" end="13858" title="Philip Effiong" label="Philip Effiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q30703595" start="14473" end="14487" title="3rd Division (Nigeria)" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="15027" end="15035" title="war hero" label="war hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170999" start="15782" end="15814" title="Royal College of Defence Studies" label="Royal College of Defence Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511520" start="16454" end="16488" title="Corruption in Nigeria" label="increasingly widespread in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q469880" start="16697" end="16709" title="Stella Obasanjo" label="Stella Abebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q66741952" start="16843" end="16849" title="1975 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="16857" end="16881" title="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q282519" start="16886" end="16898" title="Joseph Garba" label="Joseph Garba"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="17267" end="17283" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700554" start="17385" end="17396" title="John Iliffe (historian)" label="John Iliffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18228" end="18246" title="Irifeke Commission" label="Irifeke Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="18406" end="18410" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="18762" end="18768" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="18888" end="18894" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055176" start="18931" end="18967" title="Angolan Civil War" label="a civil war broke out in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q28551" start="19037" end="19041" title="MPLA" label="MPLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="19045" end="19052" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19073" end="19085" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q907051" start="19105" end="19109" title="National Liberation Front of Angola" label="FNLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28699" start="19114" end="19119" title="UNITA" label="UNITA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="19364" end="19393" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="19504" end="19510" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511542" start="19749" end="19764" title="Buka Suka Dimka" label="Buka Suka Dimka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724676" start="19765" end="19814" title="1976 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="launched a coup against Nigeria&amp;#x27;s government"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="19837" end="19853" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="20102" end="20106" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645061" start="20261" end="20285" title="Supreme Military Council (Nigeria 1966)" label="Supreme Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287698" start="20530" end="20544" title="Dodan Barracks" label="Dodan Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="20909" end="20928" title="Shehu Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625960" start="20973" end="21009" title="Vice President of Nigeria" label="Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782290" start="21090" end="21108" title="Theophilus Danjuma" label="Theophilus Danjuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351737" start="21112" end="21131" title="Chief of Army Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of Army Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="21184" end="21199" title="Nigerian military juntas of 1966–79 and 1983–99" label="military regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="21391" end="21402" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332326" start="21961" end="21979" title="overheating (economics)" label="overheated economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="22071" end="22080" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="22168" end="22178" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="22498" end="22508" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="22513" end="22540" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764961" start="23055" end="23073" title="population control" label="population control"/>
<link wikidata="Q495604" start="23708" end="23732" title="Nigerian Labour Congress" label="Nigerian Labour Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364186" start="23855" end="23873" title="Kano River Project" label="Kano River Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23879" end="23894" title="Bakalori Scheme" label="Bakalori Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23904" end="23933" title="South Chad Irrigation Project" label="South Chad Irrigation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056264" start="24015" end="24021" title="Funtua" label="Funtua"/>
<link wikidata="Q600405" start="24023" end="24028" title="Gusau" label="Gusau"/>
<link wikidata="Q376241" start="24034" end="24039" title="Gombe State" label="Gombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="24122" end="24135" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671299" start="24483" end="24522" title="Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation" label="Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q604978" start="24595" end="24600" title="Bonny, Nigeria" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509230" start="24757" end="24765" title="Ajaokuta" label="Ajaokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070375" start="25078" end="25103" title="Operation Feed the Nation" label="Operation Feed the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q147975" start="26480" end="26485" title="Zaria" label="Zaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025279" start="26608" end="26643" title="National Union of Nigerian Students" label="National Union of Nigerian Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="27065" end="27078" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="27352" end="27360" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="27425" end="27436" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="27453" end="27462" title="champagne" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="27870" end="27879" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743182" start="27881" end="27898" title="Kalakuta Republic" label="Kalakuta Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q226122" start="28136" end="28158" title="Funmilayo Ransome Kuti" label="Funmilayo Ransome Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287698" start="28327" end="28341" title="Dodan Barracks" label="Dodan Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040886" start="28623" end="28675" title="FESTAC 77" label="World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="28823" end="28864" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="29212" end="29226" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="29446" end="29458" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="29608" end="29620" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="29837" end="29846" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="30343" end="30360" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="30391" end="30398" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="30478" end="30486" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="30491" end="30503" title="Republic of South Africa (1961-1994)" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="30694" end="30711" title="British Petroleum" label="British Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="31147" end="31156" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="31240" end="31260" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="31552" end="31565" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31602" end="31656" title="United Nations Conference for Action Against Apartheid" label="United Nations Conference for Action Against Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="31813" end="31844" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="31896" end="31927" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="31991" end="32009" title="Rhodesian Bush War" label="Rhodesian Bush War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="32214" end="32227" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q203427" start="32241" end="32245" title="ZANU" label="ZANU"/>
<link wikidata="Q470290" start="32286" end="32298" title="Joshua Nkomo" label="Joshua Nkomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203423" start="32302" end="32306" title="ZAPU" label="ZAPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="32464" end="32478" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096500" start="32842" end="32887" title="1980 Southern Rhodesian general election" label="multi-racial democratic elections in Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="33136" end="33144" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="33601" end="33623" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q137555" start="33722" end="33728" title="Ogaden" label="Ogaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q782474" start="33971" end="33988" title="Chadian Civil War (1965–1979)" label="Chadian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="34460" end="34474" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="34873" end="34886" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="34891" end="34909" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="34946" end="34954" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="35372" end="35378" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158704" start="35525" end="35537" title="Conciliatory Resolution" label="conciliatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509418" start="35895" end="35901" title="Yoruba culture" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033003" start="35907" end="35935" title="Nigerian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Nigerian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974818" start="35945" end="35970" title="National Party of Nigeria" label="National Party of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033048" start="36312" end="36329" title="1979 Nigerian presidential election" label="presidential vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="36445" end="36458" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="36505" end="36520" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Obafemi Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="36983" end="36997" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="37017" end="37035" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320817" start="37739" end="37742" title="Ota, Ogun" label="Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="38800" end="38816" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637404" start="39005" end="39029" title="War Against Indiscipline" label="War Against Indiscipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="39170" end="39187" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q203567" start="39316" end="39321" title="Nigerian naira" label="naira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="40012" end="40032" title="University of Ibadan" label="University of Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341367" start="40260" end="40283" title="Robert Adeyinka Adebayo" label="Robert Adeyinka Adebayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316292" start="40436" end="40449" title="Ken Saro-Wiwa" label="Ken Saro-Wiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116061" start="40601" end="40617" title="Chukwuma Nzeogwu" label="Chukwuma Nzeogwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="41270" end="41280" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="41422" end="41447" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41457" end="41507" title="Inter-Action Council of Former Heads of Government" label="Inter-Action Council of Former Heads of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259" start="41514" end="41537" title="Javier Pérez de Cuéllar" label="Javier Pérez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="41543" end="41563" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="UN Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="41735" end="41754" title="United Nations Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257" start="41789" end="41810" title="Boutros Boutros-Ghali" label="Boutros Boutros-Ghali"/>
<link wikidata="Q959577" start="42282" end="42295" title="Emeka Anyaoku" label="Emeka Anyaoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="42385" end="42399" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="42554" end="42568" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="42603" end="42628" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="42798" end="42804" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q212286" start="42997" end="43008" title="P. W. Botha" label="P. W. Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q151813" start="43753" end="43767" title="F. W. de Klerk" label="F. W. de Klerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q554131" start="44085" end="44105" title="Mangosuthu Buthelezi" label="Mangosuthu Buthelezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q842380" start="44472" end="44497" title="Second Sudanese Civil War" label="Second Sudanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q933054" start="44520" end="44528" title="Election monitoring" label="observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053513" start="44536" end="44568" title="1994 Mozambican general election" label="1994 Mozambican general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q192647" start="44653" end="44657" title="Hutu" label="Hutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="44662" end="44667" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689570" start="44876" end="44899" title="Africa Leadership Forum" label="Africa Leadership Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772460" start="45500" end="45515" title="Anthony Enahoro" label="Anthony Enahoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033051" start="45692" end="45722" title="1993 Nigerian presidential election" label="election followed in June 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528125" start="45747" end="45761" title="Moshood Abiola" label="Moshood Abiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550561" start="45769" end="45792" title="Social Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q471351" start="46079" end="46094" title="Ernest Shonekan" label="Ernest Shonekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="46194" end="46205" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503563" start="48096" end="48109" title="Lawan Gwadabe" label="Lawan Gwadabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="48323" end="48335" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132612" start="48494" end="48510" title="RSB Bello-Fadile" label="RSB Bello-Fadile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132612" start="48985" end="49001" title="RSB Bello-Fadile" label="RSB Bello-Fadile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132612" start="49025" end="49041" title="RSB Bello-Fadile" label="RSB Bello-Fadile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="49411" end="49423" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25060214" start="49804" end="49812" title="Kirikiri Maximum Security Prison" label="Kirikiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132612" start="50034" end="50050" title="RSB Bello-Fadile" label="RSB Bello-Fadile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132612" start="50150" end="50166" title="RSB Bello-Fadile" label="RSB Bello-Fadile"/>
<link wikidata="Q503928" start="50408" end="50421" title="Plateau State" label="Plateau State"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="50756" end="50773" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="51320" end="51340" title="born-again Christian" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q262346" start="51963" end="51983" title="Abdulsalami Abubakar" label="Abdulsalami Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="52569" end="52593" title="Peoples Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Peoples Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394965" start="53663" end="53676" title="Aliko Dangote" label="Aliko Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977060" start="53958" end="53970" title="Alex Ekwueme" label="Alex Ekwueme"/>
<link wikidata="Q755878" start="54529" end="54543" title="Atiku Abubakar" label="Atiku Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773638" start="54647" end="54656" title="Olu Falae" label="Olu Falae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="54953" end="54962" title="exorcism" label="exorcised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033006" start="54988" end="55008" title="Aso Villa" label="presidential complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500817" start="55012" end="55020" title="Aso Rock" label="Aso Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610352" start="55076" end="55097" title="Eagle Square, Abuja" label="Eagle Square in Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="55555" end="55575" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318985" start="56012" end="56025" title="2003 Nigerian presidential election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="56131" end="56147" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="56380" end="56387" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="56400" end="56414" title="Charles Taylor (Liberia)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991256" start="56447" end="56466" title="Greentree Agreement" label="Greentree Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272" start="56494" end="56503" title="Paul Biya" label="Paul Biya"/>
<link wikidata="Q804272" start="56537" end="56544" title="Bakassi" label="Bakassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="56587" end="56602" title="Senate of Nigeria" label="Nigerian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q738816" start="57161" end="57175" title="Orji Uzor Kalu" label="Orji Uzor Kalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="57386" end="57398" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="57540" end="57557" title="National Assembly of Nigeria" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q177483" start="57605" end="57632" title="2007 Nigerian general election" label="April 2007 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858956" start="57671" end="57690" title="Channels TV" label="Channels Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="57886" end="57909" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Constitution of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388239" start="58103" end="58114" title="Ken Nnamani" label="Ken Nnamani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376676" start="58123" end="58155" title="president of the Nigerian Senate" label="president of the Nigerian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442793" start="58702" end="58719" title="Femi Gbajabiamila" label="Femi Gbajabiamila"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="59068" end="59082" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="59298" end="59314" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="59366" end="59379" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="60675" end="60680" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="60685" end="60691" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q948495" start="62127" end="62147" title="Washington Consensus" label="Washington Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q495604" start="62818" end="62842" title="Nigerian Labour Congress" label="Nigerian Labour Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="63999" end="64025" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="64915" end="64923" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="66073" end="66085" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="66132" end="66146" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="66443" end="66455" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="66930" end="66944" title="Charles Taylor (Liberian politician)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43179" start="67080" end="67101" title="Ellen Johnson Sirleaf" label="Ellen Johnson Sirleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="67235" end="67241" title="ECOMOG" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781457" start="67262" end="67285" title="Guinea-Bissau civil war" label="Guinea-Bissau civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="67405" end="67418" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="67563" end="67574" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="67605" end="67616" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146616" start="67872" end="67902" title="Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai" label="Movement for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="68017" end="68027" title="sharia law" label="sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q145793" start="68314" end="68327" title="Zamfara State" label="Zamfara State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510720" start="68329" end="68339" title="Ahmed Sani" label="Ahmed Sani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850911" start="71362" end="71414" title="Odi massacre" label="sent two army battalions into the Niger Delta region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71432" end="71444" title="Asawana Boys" label="Asawana Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="71449" end="71453" title="Ijaw people" label="Ijaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71507" end="71510" title="Odi, Nigeria" label="Odi"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="71512" end="71525" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043439" start="71990" end="72012" title="Oodua Peoples Congress" label="Oodua Peoples Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q503928" start="72223" end="72236" title="Plateau State" label="Plateau State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="72477" end="72504" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="U.S. bombing of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664002" start="72648" end="72653" title="Jukun people (West Africa)" label="Jukun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="72658" end="72661" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q429908" start="72700" end="72705" title="Benue State" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q463959" start="72710" end="72716" title="Taraba State" label="Taraba"/>
<link wikidata="Q98139655" start="72772" end="72781" title="Zaki-Biam" label="Zaki-Biam"/>
<link wikidata="Q804255" start="73029" end="73041" title="Bakassi Boys" label="Bakassi Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574275" start="73894" end="73933" title="Speaker of the House of Representatives of Nigeria" label="Speaker of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376676" start="73938" end="73961" title="President of the Senate of Nigeria" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345680" start="74206" end="74227" title="PDP Board of Trustees" label="PDP Board of Trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q57380" start="75086" end="75103" title="Goodluck Jonathan" label="Goodluck Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60143323" start="75868" end="75895" title="African Democratic Congress" label="African Democratic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="75996" end="76020" title="Peoples Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Peoples Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57380" start="76113" end="76130" title="Goodluck Jonathan" label="Goodluck Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="76413" end="76424" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="76441" end="76473" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57416" start="76520" end="76533" title="Joseph Kabila" label="Joseph Kabila"/>
<link wikidata="Q152809" start="76551" end="76565" title="Laurent Nkunda" label="Laurent Nkunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="76645" end="76658" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q115124248" start="76707" end="76718" title="Ethiopia–Tigray peace agreement" label="peace talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="76731" end="76739" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699287" start="76760" end="76797" title="TPLF" label="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="76824" end="76837" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q101231200" start="76873" end="76883" title="Tigray War" label="Tigray War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="76957" end="76979" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="76988" end="77026" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q112628065" start="77076" end="77103" title="M23 campaign (2022–present)" label="M23 campaign (2022–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974654" start="77204" end="77239" title="National Open University of Nigeria" label="National Open University of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079250" start="77298" end="77318" title="Nigerian nationalism" label="Nigerian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="77761" end="77774" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="78043" end="78061" title="consensus politics" label="consensus politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17955" start="78468" end="78490" title="constructive criticism" label="constructive criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="78923" end="78938" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="79677" end="79689" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="81175" end="81188" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="81275" end="81286" title="Ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q107974699" start="81707" end="81724" title="Oluremi Obasanjo" label="Oluremi Akinlawon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140704" start="81780" end="81785" title="Iyabo Obasanjo" label="Iyabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341382" start="82041" end="82044" title="Nigerian Television Authority" label="NTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q469880" start="82390" end="82405" title="Stella Obasanjo" label="Stella Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453160" start="82407" end="82428" title="First Lady of Nigeria" label="First Lady of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q811133" start="82458" end="82472" title="abdominoplasty" label="abdominoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="82867" end="82884" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="82892" end="82905" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q655189" start="85034" end="85051" title="prosperity gospel" label="prosperity gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="85076" end="85091" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298962" start="85104" end="85119" title="Providentialism" label="Providentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789094" start="85219" end="85230" title="Nigerian Chieftaincy" label="chieftaincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23541136" start="88463" end="88501" title="Olusegun Obasanjo Presidential Library" label="Olusegun Obasanjo Presidential Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382737" wikidata="Q12646464" url="?curid=382737" title="Rowan">
<text>The rowans ( or ) or mountain-ashes are shrubs or trees in the genus &quot;Sorbus&quot; of the rose family, Rosaceae. They are native throughout the cool temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere, with the highest species diversity in the Himalaya, southern Tibet and parts of western China, where numerous apomictic microspecies occur. The name &quot;rowan&quot; was originally applied to the species &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; and is also used for other species in the genus &quot;Sorbus&quot;.

Natural hybrids, often including &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; and the whitebeam, &quot;Aria edulis&quot; (syn. &quot;Sorbus aria&quot;), give rise to many endemic variants in the UK.

==Names==

The Latin name &quot;sorbus&quot; was borrowed into Old English as &quot;syrfe&quot;. The Latin name &quot;sorbus&quot; is from a root for &quot;red, reddish-brown&quot; (PIE &quot;*sor-/*ser-&quot;); English &quot;sorb&quot; is attested from the 1520s in the sense &quot;fruit of the service tree&quot;, adopted via French &quot;sorbe&quot; from Latin &quot;sorbum&quot; &quot;service-berry&quot;.
&quot;Sorbus domestica&quot; is also known as &quot;whitty pear&quot;, the adjective whitty meaning &quot;pinnate&quot;. The name &quot;mountain-ash&quot; for &quot;Sorbus domestica&quot; is due to a superficial similarity of the rowan leaves to those of the ash, not to be confused with &quot;Fraxinus ornus&quot;, a true ash that is also known as &quot;mountain ash&quot;. &quot;Sorbus torminalis&quot; is also known as &quot;chequer tree&quot;; its fruits, formerly used to flavour beer, are called &quot;chequers&quot;, perhaps from the spotted pattern of the fruit.

The traditional name rowan was applied to the species &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot;. The name &quot;rowan&quot; is recorded from 1804, detached from an earlier rowan-tree, rountree, attested from the 1540s in northern dialects of English and Scots. It is often thought to be from a North Germanic source, perhaps related to Old Norse &quot;reynir&quot; (c.f. Norwegian &quot;rogn&quot;, Danish &quot;røn&quot;, Swedish &quot;rönn&quot;), ultimately from the Germanic verb &quot;*raud-inan&quot; &quot;to redden&quot;, in reference to the berries (as is the Latin name &quot;sorbus&quot;). 
Various dialectal variants of &quot;rowan&quot; are found in English, including &quot;ran&quot;, &quot;roan&quot;, &quot;rodan&quot;, &quot;royan&quot;, &quot;royne&quot;, &quot;round&quot;, and &quot;rune&quot;.

The Old English name of the rowan is &quot;cwic-beám&quot;, which survives in the name quickbeam (also quicken, quicken-tree, and variants). This name by the 19th century was reinterpreted as connected to the word witch, from a dialectal variant &quot;wick&quot; for quick and names such as wicken-tree, wich-tree, wicky, and wiggan-tree, giving rise to names such as witch-hazel and witch-tree.

The tree has two names in Welsh, &quot;cerdinen&quot; and &quot;criafol&quot;. Criafol may be translated as &quot;The Lamenting Fruit&quot;, likely derived from the Welsh tradition that the Cross of Christ was carved from the wood of this tree, and the subsequent association of the Rowan&#x27;s red fruit with the blood of Christ.

The Old Irish name is &quot;cairtheand&quot;, reflected in Modern Irish &quot;caorthann&quot;. The &quot;arboreal&quot; &quot;Bríatharogam&quot; in the &quot;Book of Ballymote&quot; associates the rowan with the letter &quot;luis&quot;, with the gloss &quot;delightful to the eye (&quot;li sula&quot;) is &quot;luis&quot;, i.e. rowan (&quot;caertheand&quot;), owing to the beauty of its berries&quot;. Due to this, &quot;delight of the eye&quot; (vel sim.) has been reported as a &quot;name of the rowan&quot; by some commentators.

The most common Scots Gaelic name is &quot;caorann&quot; (), which appears in numerous Highland place names such as Beinn a&#x27; Chaorainn and Loch a’ Chaorainn. Rowan was also the clan badge of the Malcolms and McLachlans. There were strong taboos in the Highlands against the use of any parts of the tree save the berries, except for ritual purposes. For example, a Gaelic threshing tool made of rowan and called a buaitean was used on grain meant for rituals and celebrations.

In the Canadian provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia, this species is commonly referred to as a &quot;dogberry&quot; tree. 
In German, &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; is known as the &quot;Vogelbeerbaum&quot; (&quot;bird-berry tree&quot;) or as &quot;Eberesche&quot;. The latter is a compound of the name of the ash tree (&quot;Esche&quot;) with what is contemporarily the name of the boar (&quot;Eber&quot;), but in fact the continuation of a Gaulish name, &quot;eburo-&quot; (also the name for a dark reddish-brown colour, cognate with Greek &quot;orphnos&quot;, Old Norse &quot;iarpr&quot; &quot;brown&quot;); like &quot;sorbus&quot;, &quot;eburo-&quot; seems to have referred to the colour of the berries; it is also recorded as a Gaulish name for the yew (which also has red berries), see also &quot;Eburodunum (disambiguation)&quot;.

==Botany==

Rowans are mostly small deciduous trees tall, though a few are shrubs. Rowans are unrelated to the true ash trees of the genus &quot;Fraxinus&quot;, family Oleaceae. Though their leaves are superficially similar, those of &quot;Sorbus&quot; are alternate, while those of &quot;Fraxinus&quot; are opposite. Rowan leaves are arranged alternately, and are pinnate, with (7–)11–35 leaflets. A terminal leaflet is always present. The flowers are borne in dense corymbs; each flower is creamy white, and across with five petals. The fruit is a small pome diameter, bright orange or red in most species, but pink, yellow or white in some Asian species. The fruit are soft and juicy, which makes them a very good food for birds, particularly waxwings and thrushes, which then distribute the rowan seeds in their droppings. Due to their small size the fruits are often referred to as berries, but a true berry is a simple fruit produced from a single ovary, whereas a pome is an accessory fruit.

Rowan is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species; see Lepidoptera that feed on &quot;Sorbus&quot;.

The best-known species is the European rowan &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot;, a small tree typically tall growing in a variety of habitats throughout northern Europe and in mountains in southern Europe and southwest Asia. Its berries are a favourite food for many birds and are a traditional wild-collected food in Britain and Scandinavia. It is one of the hardiest European trees, occurring to 71° north in Vardø Municipality in the far northern part of Arctic Norway, and has also become widely naturalised in northern North America.

The greatest diversity of form as well as the largest number of rowan species is in Asia, with very distinctive species such as Sargent&#x27;s rowan &quot;Sorbus sargentiana&quot; with large leaves long and broad and very large corymbs with 200–500 flowers, and at the other extreme, small-leaf rowan &quot;Sorbus microphylla&quot; with leaves long and broad. While most are trees, the dwarf rowan &quot;Sorbus reducta&quot; is a low shrub to tall. Several of the Asian species are widely cultivated as ornamental trees.

North American native species in the genus &quot;Sorbus&quot; include the American mountain-ash &quot;Sorbus americana&quot; and Showy mountain-ash &quot;Sorbus decora&quot; in the east and Sitka mountain-ash &quot;Sorbus sitchensis&quot; in the west.

Numerous hybrids, mostly behaving as true species reproducing by apomixis, occur between rowans and whitebeams; these are variably intermediate between their parents but generally more resemble whitebeams and are usually grouped with them (q.v.).

==Uses==

Rowans are excellent small ornamental trees for parks, gardens and wildlife areas. Several of the Asian species, such as white-fruited rowan (&quot;Sorbus oligodonta&quot;) are popular for their unusual fruit colour, and Sargent&#x27;s rowan (&quot;Sorbus sargentiana&quot;) for its exceptionally large clusters of fruit. Numerous cultivars have also been selected for garden use, several of them, such as the yellow-fruited &quot;Sorbus&quot; &#x27;Joseph Rock&#x27;, of hybrid origin. They are very attractive to fruit-eating birds, which is reflected in the old name &quot;bird catcher&quot;.

The wood is dense and used for carving and turning and for tool handles and walking sticks. Rowan fruit are a traditional source of tannins for mordanting vegetable dyes. In Finland, it has been a traditional wood of choice for horse sled shafts and rake spikes. 

The fruit of European rowan (&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot;) can be made into a slightly bitter jelly which in Britain is traditionally eaten as an accompaniment to game, and into jams and other preserves either on their own or with other fruit. The fruit can also be a substitute for coffee beans, and has many uses in alcoholic beverages: to flavour liqueurs and cordials, to produce country wine, and to flavour ale. In Austria a clear rowan schnapps is distilled which is called by its German name &quot;Vogelbeerschnaps&quot;, Czechs also make a rowan liquor called &quot;jeřabinka&quot;, the Polish Jarzębiak is rowan-flavoured vodka, and the Welsh used to make a rowan wine called &quot;diodgriafel&quot;.

Rowan cultivars with superior fruit for human food use are available but not common; mostly the fruits are gathered from wild trees growing on public lands.

Rowan fruit contains sorbic acid, and when raw also contains parasorbic acid (about 0.4%–0.7% in the European rowan), which causes indigestion and can lead to kidney damage, but heat treatment (cooking, heat-drying etc.) and, to a lesser extent, freezing, renders it nontoxic by changing it to the benign sorbic acid. They are also usually too astringent to be palatable when raw. Collecting them after first frost (or putting in the freezer) cuts down on the bitter taste as well.

==Mythology and folklore==
===Mythology===
In Sami mythology, the goddess Ravdna is the consort of the thunder-god Horagalles. Red berries of rowan were holy to Ravdna, and the name &quot;Ravdna&quot; resembles North Germanic words for the tree (for example, Old Norse &quot;reynir&quot;).

In Norse mythology, the goddess Sif is the wife of the thunder god Thor, who has been linked with Ravdna. According to &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; the rowan is called &quot;the salvation of Thor&quot; because Thor once saved himself by clinging to it. It has been hypothesized that Sif was once conceived in the form of a rowan to which Thor clung.

In the Fianna Cycle of Irish mythology, The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Grainne sees the couple eloping, trying to escape the vengeance of the legendary leader Fionn Mac Cumhaill, whom Grainne had spurned. The pair came to a forest guarded by the giant Searbhán. Searbhán allowed the pair to rest and hunt in his forest, as long as they did not eat the berries of his magical rowan tree. The pregnant Grainne desired the berries, and Diarmuid was compelled to kill Searbhán to obtain them. His mortal weapons being powerless against Searbhán, he used the giant&#x27;s own iron club to kill him. The pair climbed high into the rowan tree to eat the sweetest berries, then rested in the tree afterwards. This was in violation of the advice of Aengus, the god of love, who had warned the couple that they should &quot;not sleep in a cave with one opening, or a house with one door, or a tree with one branch, and that they would never be able to eat where they cooked, or sleep where they ate.&quot; Fionn Mac Cuimhaill tracked the couple to the rowan tree and tricked Diarmuid into revealing himself through a game of chess. Aengus spirited Grainne away and Diarmuid leapt to safety, and the pursuit continued.

===Folk magic===
The European Rowan (&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot;) has a long tradition in European mythology and folklore. It was thought to be a magical tree and give protection against malevolent beings. The tree was also called &quot;wayfarer&#x27;s tree&quot; or &quot;traveller&#x27;s tree&quot; because it supposedly prevents those on a journey from getting lost. It was said in England that this was the tree on which the Devil hanged his mother.

British folklorists of the Victorian era reported the folk belief in apotropaic powers of the rowan-tree, in particular in the warding off of witches. Such a report is given by Edwin Lees (1856) for the Wyre Forest in the English West Midlands. Sir James Frazer (1890) reported such a tradition in Scotland, where the tree was often planted near a gate or front door.

According to Frazer, birds&#x27; droppings often contain rowan seeds, and if such droppings land in a fork or hole where old leaves have accumulated on a larger tree, such as an oak or a maple, they may result in a rowan growing as an epiphyte on the larger tree. Such a rowan is called a &quot;flying rowan&quot; and was thought of as especially potent against witches and black magic, and as a counter-charm against sorcery. In 1891, Charles Godfrey Leland also reported traditions of rowan&#x27;s apotropaic powers against witches in English folklore, citing the &quot;Denham Tracts&quot; (collected between 1846 and 1859). Rowan also serves as protection against fairies. For example, according to Thomas Keightley mortals could safely witness fairy rades (mounted processions held by the fairies each year at the onset of summer) by placing a rowan branch over their doors.

===Pagan revivalism===
In Neo-Druidism, the rowan is known as the &quot;portal tree&quot;. It is considered the threshold, between this world and otherworld, or between here and wherever one may be going, for example, it was placed at the gate to a property, signifying the crossing of the threshold between the path or street and the property of someone. According to Elen Sentier, &quot;Threshold is a place of both &quot;ingress&quot; (the way in) and &quot;egress&quot; (the way out). Rowan is a portal, threshold tree offering you the chance of &#x27;going somewhere ... and leaving somewhere.&quot;

===Weather-lore===

In Newfoundland, popular folklore maintains that a heavy crop of fruit means a hard or difficult winter. Similarly, in Finland and Sweden, the number of fruit on the trees was used as a predictor of the snow cover during winter, but here the belief was that the rowan &quot;will not bear a heavy load of fruit and a heavy load of snow in the same year&quot;, that is, a heavy fruit crop predicted a winter with little snow.

However, as fruit production for a given summer is related to weather conditions the previous summer, with warm, dry summers increasing the amount of stored sugars available for subsequent flower and fruit production, it has no predictive relationship to the weather of the next winter.

In Malax, Finland, the reverse was thought. If the rowan flowers were plentiful then the rye harvest would also be plentiful. Similarly, if the rowan flowered twice in a year there would be many potatoes and many weddings that autumn. And in Sipoo people are noted as having said that winter had begun when the waxwings (&quot;Bombycilla garrulus&quot;) had eaten the last of the rowan fruit.

In Sweden, it was also thought that if the rowan trees grew pale and lost colour, the autumn and winter would bring much illness.

===Popular culture===
References to the rowan fruit&#x27;s red color and the flowers&#x27; beauty are common in Celtic music. For example, the song &quot;Marie&#x27;s Wedding&quot; contains the verse

&lt;poem&gt;Red her cheeks as rowans are,
bright her eyes as any star,
fairest of them all by far,
is our darling Marie.&lt;/poem&gt;

J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s novel &quot;The Two Towers&quot; employs rowans as the signature tree for the Ent, Quickbeam. The forest of Fangorn, where Quickbeam and other Ents live, is populated with numerous rowans that were said to have been planted by male Ents to please the female Entwives. Quickbeam declares his fondness for the tree by saying that no other &quot;people of the Rose ... are so beautiful to me,&quot; a reference to the rowan&#x27;s membership in the family Rosaceae.

== See also ==
* Rowntree, an English surname derived from &quot;rowan tree&quot;
* &quot;G&quot;enus &quot;Aria&quot; (formerly considered as a subgenus in the genus Sorbus)
* &quot;G&quot;enus &quot;Micromeles&quot; (formerly considered as a subgenus in the genus Sorbus)
* &quot;G&quot;enus &quot;Cormus&quot; (formerly considered as a subgenus in the genus Sorbus)
* &quot;G&quot;enus &quot;Torminalis&quot; (formerly considered as a subgenus in the genus Sorbus)
* &quot;G&quot;enus &quot;Chamaemespilus&quot; (formerly considered as a subgenus in the genus Sorbus)

== Explanatory footnotes ==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="4" end="10" title="Rowan" label="rowans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="21" end="35" title="Rowan" label="mountain-ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157964" start="75" end="81" title="Sorbus" label="Sorbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="108" end="116" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="179" end="198" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="242" end="250" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="261" end="266" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q528033" start="310" end="319" title="apomictic" label="apomictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="411" end="427" title="Sorbus aucuparia" label="Sorbus aucuparia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41068995" start="586" end="597" title="Aria edulis" label="Aria edulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41068995" start="616" end="627" title="Sorbus aria" label="Sorbus aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="654" end="661" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="746" end="757" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="865" end="868" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="PIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="1199" end="1206" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="1352" end="1355" title="Fraxinus" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q161421" start="1387" end="1401" title="Fraxinus ornus" label="Fraxinus ornus"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="1725" end="1741" title="Sorbus aucuparia" label="Sorbus aucuparia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1906" end="1911" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="1946" end="1960" title="North Germanic" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2122" end="2130" title="Common Germanic" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2142" end="2147" title=":wikt:Appendix:Proto-Germanic/raudaz" label="*raud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2147" end="2152" title=":wikt:Appendix:Proto-Germanic/-inōną" label="-inan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2472" end="2483" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616828" start="2682" end="2687" title="witch (word)" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q148463" start="2836" end="2847" title="witch-hazel" label="witch-hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2891" end="2896" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="3055" end="3070" title="Christian cross" label="Cross of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="3202" end="3211" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981843" start="3324" end="3336" title="Bríatharogam" label="Bríatharogam"/>
<link wikidata="Q892979" start="3356" end="3373" title="Book of Ballymote" label="Book of Ballymote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700220" start="3423" end="3427" title="Luis (letter)" label="luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881345" start="3847" end="3870" title="Beinn a&amp;#x27; Chaorainn (disambiguation)" label="Beinn a&amp;#x27; Chaorainn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664862" start="3875" end="3892" title="Loch A&amp;#x27; Chaorainn" label="Loch a’ Chaorainn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="4220" end="4237" title="Canadian province" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="4242" end="4267" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="4272" end="4283" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4358" end="4364" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="4540" end="4548" title="ash tree" label="ash tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="4672" end="4679" title="Gaulish" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038225" start="4984" end="4987" title="yew" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332116" start="5033" end="5060" title="Eburodunum (disambiguation)" label="Eburodunum (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="5105" end="5114" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="5115" end="5119" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="5144" end="5149" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="5202" end="5207" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="5214" end="5222" title="Fraxinus" label="Fraxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155966" start="5237" end="5245" title="Oleaceae" label="Oleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="5393" end="5399" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="5434" end="5441" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="5510" end="5516" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322325" start="5537" end="5543" title="corymb" label="corymb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="5608" end="5613" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41274" start="5625" end="5629" title="pome" label="pome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5795" end="5799" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q208940" start="5815" end="5822" title="waxwing" label="waxwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="5828" end="5836" title="thrush (bird)" label="thrushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="5870" end="5874" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="5971" end="5981" title="Berry (botany)" label="true berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28791169" start="5987" end="5999" title="simple fruit" label="simple fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41274" start="6040" end="6044" title="pome" label="pome"/>
<link wikidata="Q147545" start="6051" end="6066" title="accessory fruit" label="accessory fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="6106" end="6111" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="6121" end="6132" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="6516" end="6527" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108983" start="6597" end="6615" title="Vardø Municipality" label="Vardø Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q214041" start="6644" end="6657" title="Arctic Norway" label="Arctic Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="6686" end="6697" title="naturalisation (biology)" label="naturalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038550" start="6881" end="6899" title="Sorbus sargentiana" label="Sorbus sargentiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15528215" start="7033" end="7051" title="Sorbus microphylla" label="Sorbus microphylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q13954074" start="7130" end="7144" title="Sorbus reducta" label="Sorbus reducta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="7160" end="7165" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q285587" start="7350" end="7366" title="Sorbus americana" label="Sorbus americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q966130" start="7402" end="7415" title="Sorbus decora" label="Sorbus decora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938471" start="7463" end="7480" title="Sorbus sitchensis" label="Sorbus sitchensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="7510" end="7517" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q528033" start="7566" end="7574" title="apomixis" label="apomixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132291970" start="7601" end="7611" title="whitebeams" label="whitebeams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="8090" end="8098" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="8488" end="8494" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5857145" start="8500" end="8507" title="mordant" label="mordant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="8634" end="8648" title="European rowan" label="European rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="9339" end="9347" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q407131" start="9512" end="9523" title="sorbic acid" label="sorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104991451" start="9552" end="9567" title="parasorbic acid" label="parasorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q735329" start="10020" end="10034" title="Sami shamanism" label="Sami mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902515" start="10048" end="10054" title="Ravdna" label="Ravdna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902515" start="10089" end="10099" title="Horagalles" label="Horagalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="10268" end="10283" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q211613" start="10297" end="10300" title="Sif" label="Sif"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="10332" end="10336" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902515" start="10363" end="10369" title="Ravdna" label="Ravdna"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="10390" end="10404" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382460" start="10621" end="10633" title="Fianna Cycle" label="Fianna Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="10637" end="10652" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209165" start="10654" end="10689" title="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Grainne" label="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Grainne"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="10770" end="10788" title="Fionn Mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn Mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551263" start="10795" end="10802" title="Grainne" label="Grainne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209163" start="11044" end="11052" title="Diarmuid Ua Duibhne" label="Diarmuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q544389" start="11351" end="11357" title="Aengus" label="Aengus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267256" start="12263" end="12273" title="devil&amp;#x27;s grandmother" label="his mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="12303" end="12316" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="12345" end="12355" title="apotropaic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048793" start="12453" end="12463" title="Edwin Lees" label="Edwin Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040451" start="12479" end="12490" title="Wyre Forest" label="Wyre Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48038" start="12506" end="12519" title="West Midlands (region)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="12521" end="12537" title="Sir James Frazer" label="Sir James Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="12823" end="12826" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="12832" end="12837" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="12880" end="12888" title="epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="13019" end="13030" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064562" start="13081" end="13103" title="Charles Godfrey Leland" label="Charles Godfrey Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256996" start="13217" end="13230" title="Denham Tracts" label="Denham Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="13312" end="13319" title="fairies" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525280" start="13347" end="13363" title="Thomas Keightley" label="Thomas Keightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541838" start="13551" end="13563" title="Neo-Druidism" label="Neo-Druidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="14154" end="14166" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886842" start="14867" end="14872" title="Malax" label="Malax"/>
<link wikidata="Q986320" start="15106" end="15111" title="Sipoo" label="Sipoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208940" start="15175" end="15183" title="waxwings" label="waxwings"/>
<link wikidata="Q26135" start="15191" end="15210" title="Bombycilla garrulus" label="Bombycilla garrulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736930" start="15543" end="15563" title="Marie&amp;#x27;s Wedding" label="Marie&amp;#x27;s Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="15725" end="15741" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q332388" start="15761" end="15775" title="The Two Towers" label="The Two Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667893" start="15827" end="15830" title="Ent" label="Ent"/>
<link wikidata="Q754477" start="15857" end="15864" title="Treebeard" label="Fangorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="16202" end="16210" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372262" start="16230" end="16238" title="Rowntree (disambiguation)" label="Rowntree"/>
<link wikidata="Q132291970" start="16321" end="16325" title="Whitebeam" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550433" start="16414" end="16424" title="Micromeles" label="Micromeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159558" start="16513" end="16519" title="Cormus (plant)" label="Cormus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10383359" start="16608" end="16618" title="Torminalis" label="Torminalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163546" start="16701" end="16727" title="Sorbus chamaemespilus" label="&amp;quot;Chamaemespilus&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382739" wikidata="Q2075556" url="?curid=382739" title="William Bell Scott">
<text>William Bell Scott (12 September 1811 – 22 November 1890) was a Scottish artist in oils and watercolour and occasionally printmaking. He was also a poet and art teacher, and his posthumously published reminiscences give a chatty and often vivid picture of life in the circle of the Pre-Raphaelites; he was especially close to Dante Gabriel Rossetti. After growing up in Edinburgh, he moved to London, and from 1843 to 1864 was principal of the government School of Art in Newcastle upon Tyne, where he added industrial subjects to his repertoire of landscapes and history painting. He was one of the first British artists to extensively depict the processes of the Industrial Revolution. He returned to London, working for the Science and Art Department until 1885.

He painted a cycle of historical subjects mixed with scenes from modern industry for Wallington Hall in Northumberland (now National Trust), his best known works, and a purely historical cycle for Penkill Castle in Ayrshire in Scotland. 

He did not paint many portraits, but his striking portrait of his friend Algernon Charles Swinburne is the iconic image of the poet. His etchings were mostly designed to illustrate his books.

==Life==

The son of Robert Scott (1777–1841), the engraver, and brother of David Scott, the painter, he was born in Edinburgh. While a young man he studied art and assisted his father, and he published verses in the Scottish magazines.

In 1837, Scott went to London. There he became sufficiently well known as an artist to be appointed in 1844 master of the government school of design at Newcastle-on-Tyne. He held the post for twenty years, and did work in organizing art-teaching and examining under the Science and Art Department. In Newcastle, Scott was visited by all the Rossetti family, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti painted Maria Leathart&#x27;s portrait at Scott&#x27;s house 14 St Thomas&#x27; Crescent (plaque erected 2005). Algernon Charles Swinburne, who wrote two poems to Scott, spent much time with him in Newcastle after being sent down from Oxford.

After 1870 Scott was much in London, where he bought a house in Chelsea, and he was an intimate friend of Dante Gabriel Rossetti and in high repute as an artist and an author. He was, however, at daggers drawn with John Ruskin.

He resigned his appointment under the Science and Art Department in 1885, and from then until his death he was mainly occupied in writing his reminiscences, &quot;Autobiographical Notes&quot;, which were published posthumously in 1892, with a memoir by Professor Minto. It is for his connection with Rossetti&#x27;s circle that Bell Scott will be chiefly remembered.
==Artwork==
In addition to oil paintings, Bell Scott did much decorative work, notably at Wallington Hall. There Pauline, Lady Trevelyan commissioned him, after coming across his 1850 &quot;Memoir&quot; of his brother David Scott. He produced eight large pictures illustrating Northumbrian history, with life-size figures, supplemented by eighteen pictures on &quot;The Ballad of Chevy Chase&quot; in the spandrels of the arches of the hall. For Penkill Castle he executed a similar series, illustrating James I&#x27;s poem &quot;The Kingis Quair&quot;.

==Writings==
Scott&#x27;s poetry, which he published at intervals (notably &quot;Poems&quot;, 1875, illustrated by etchings by himself and Alma-Tadema), recalled William Blake and Percy Bysshe Shelley, and was considerably influenced by Rossetti. He also wrote artistic and literary criticism, and edited John Keats, Letitia Elizabeth Landon, Lord Byron, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Shelley, William Shakespeare and Sir Walter Scott.

==Family==
In 1839 Scott married Letitia Margery Norquoy (1813–1898); the marriage was childless. In Newcastle he had as a pupil Alice Boyd, the sister of the then-laird of Penkill Castle in Scotland. In 1860, Bell Scott visited Penkill Castle and began a liaison with Alice that would last until his death at Penkill in 1890. Although unhappily married, Bell Scott refused to cause a scandal by leaving his wife, and a workable ménage à trois was established: Alice spent winters with William and Letitia in London, while they came to Penkill in the summers.

==References==
== External links ==

*William Bell Scott biography
*William Bell Scott at Future Museum, South West Scotland.
* 
*Works by William Bell Scott at Project Gutenberg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2075556" start="0" end="18" title="William Bell Scott" label="William Bell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="92" end="103" title="watercolour" label="watercolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="121" end="132" title="printmaking" label="printmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="282" end="297" title="Pre-Raphaelites" label="Pre-Raphaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="326" end="348" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="370" end="379" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="472" end="491" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="564" end="580" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="665" end="686" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963113" start="852" end="867" title="Wallington Hall" label="Wallington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="871" end="885" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="891" end="905" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163069" start="964" end="978" title="Penkill Castle" label="Penkill Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="982" end="990" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="1079" end="1105" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="1143" end="1150" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349658" start="1220" end="1232" title="Robert Scott (engraver)" label="Robert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239590" start="1275" end="1286" title="David Scott (painter)" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1316" end="1325" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="1590" end="1607" title="Newcastle-on-Tyne" label="Newcastle-on-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="1800" end="1822" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="1935" end="1961" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="2131" end="2138" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="2173" end="2195" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="2282" end="2293" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015671" start="2549" end="2564" title="William Minto" label="Professor Minto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963113" start="2753" end="2768" title="Wallington Hall" label="Wallington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154968" start="2776" end="2799" title="Pauline, Lady Trevelyan" label="Pauline, Lady Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985773" start="3029" end="3054" title="The Ballad of Chevy Chase" label="The Ballad of Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="3068" end="3076" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="3167" end="3174" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744647" start="3193" end="3209" title="The Kingis Quair" label="The Kingis Quair"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="3333" end="3340" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="3357" end="3368" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="3380" end="3393" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="3398" end="3418" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="3523" end="3533" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="3535" end="3559" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="3561" end="3571" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="3573" end="3596" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3607" end="3626" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3631" end="3647" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q19698370" start="3779" end="3789" title="Alice Boyd" label="Alice Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163069" start="3823" end="3837" title="Penkill Castle" label="Penkill Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159593" start="4079" end="4093" title="ménage à trois" label="ménage à trois"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="4372" end="4389" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382742" wikidata="Q1410948" url="?curid=382742" title="Nauru Pacific Line">
<text>The Nauru Pacific Line (NPL) is the national shipping line of the Republic of Nauru, founded in 1969. Its fleet consists of five owned and two leased ships, which travel throughout all of Oceania. It is loss-making and gets subventions from the state.

It is a member of the Pacific Forum Line, a joint venture between several national shipping lines established in 1977 after a dispute between the NPL and the Maritime Union of New Zealand.

==See also==
* Economy of Nauru
* Nauru Phosphate Corporation 
* Pacific Forum Line
* Republic of Nauru
*Nauru Maritime Port Authority

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1410948" start="4" end="28" title="Nauru Pacific Line" label="Nauru Pacific Line (NPL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="66" end="83" title="Republic of Nauru" label="Republic of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="188" end="195" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q240260" start="275" end="293" title="Pacific Forum Line" label="Pacific Forum Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765854" start="411" end="440" title="Maritime Union of New Zealand" label="Maritime Union of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q974648" start="458" end="474" title="Economy of Nauru" label="Economy of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="477" end="504" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q240260" start="508" end="526" title="Pacific Forum Line" label="Pacific Forum Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="529" end="546" title="Republic of Nauru" label="Republic of Nauru"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382743" wikidata="Q240260" url="?curid=382743" title="Pacific Forum Line">
<text>Pacific Forum Line (PFL) is a regional shipping line in Polynesia. Established in 1976 by the Pacific Islands Forum to ensure a regional shipping service, it was purchased in 2012 by the government of Samoa. It is currently operated as a joint venture with Neptune Pacific Line.

==History==
The Pacific Forum Line was born from concern over the deterioration of traditional island tramp services due to containerisation. At the South Pacific Forum in Nauru in 1976 pacific nations agreed to establish a shipping line to ensure regular shipping services for the islands and encourage development. The initial memorandum of understanding required the line to be incorporated in Samoa, operate a viable shipping service and attempt to make a profit, with any profit allocated between founding nations. The initial owners - the governments of the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, and Tonga - all had an equal say in governance of the line, though each had a different financial stake. Tuvalu, the Marshall Islands and Niue later became shareholders.

The first services began in May 1978, with a ship serving Australia, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, and New Zealand. The company was immediately in financial trouble, and by 1981 was in danger of collapse. Losses in the first three years of operations were more than US$16 million, and it continued to be supported by member nations. The line finally became profitable in the late 1980&#x27;s. By 1998, twenty years after being established, it was seen as an example of successful regionalism and had finally begun paying dividends.

In 2007 the Forum received an apparently unsolicited bid from Pacific International Lines to buy the company. This was followed by bids from Swire Shipping and Fiji Water-Neptune Pacific Line. An extraordinary shareholders&#x27; meeting in March 2008 rejected any proposal to sell the company. Following the meeting, leaked emails showed that CEO John MacLennan had actively promoted the sale.

===Purchase by Samoa===

Heavy losses in 2011 caused several of the owner countries to consider selling their stake in 2012. Following a bid by Singaporean company Sofrana, the Samoan government bought out the other countries in October 2012. In September 2013 it sold a 50 percent stake in the company to Neptune Pacific Line, a subsidiary of Roll Global. The deal required PFL to continue to serve every Forum country except Tuvalu, Niue and the Marshall Islands.

In 2016 the company merged with Polynesian Shipping Line.

==Operations==

Pacific Forum Line Limited the parent, is registered in Apia, Samoa and the operating arm – Pacific Forum Line (N.Z) Limited is located in Auckland, New Zealand. Pacific Forum Line has also set up agency divisions in many of the ports they service. 

Pacific Forum Line vessels operate on five routes that connect the Pacific Islands to New Zealand and Australia and provide an important South Pacific Inter-island link. PFL carries containerised and break-bulk cargo on the New Zealand and Australian trade vessels. In addition, to and from Australia bulk liquids are also carried in purpose built tanks.

===Current fleet===
PFL&#x27;s current vessels include:
* &quot;Capitaine Tasman&quot;
* &quot;Capitaine Dampier&quot;
* &quot;Southern Moana&quot;
* &quot;Kokopo Chief&quot;
* &quot;Southern Trader&quot;

==Accidents==
In April 2004 the captain of the &quot;Forum Fiji II&quot; died after being washed overboard 320 km south of Tonga.

In August 2009 the &quot;Forum Samoa II&quot; ran aground on the reef at Apia harbour after suffering engine trouble. It was freed in September.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240260" start="0" end="24" title="Pacific Forum Line" label="Pacific Forum Line (PFL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="56" end="65" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="94" end="115" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="201" end="206" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="844" end="856" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="858" end="862" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="864" end="872" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="874" end="879" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="881" end="892" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="894" end="910" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="912" end="917" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="919" end="934" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="940" end="945" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="1041" end="1047" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="1053" end="1069" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="1074" end="1078" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360876" start="2369" end="2380" title="The Wonderful Company" label="Roll Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="2623" end="2627" title="Apia" label="Apia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="2706" end="2714" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="3584" end="3588" title="Apia" label="Apia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382749" wikidata="Q836100" url="?curid=382749" title="Polydivisible number">
<text>In mathematics a polydivisible number (or magic number) is a number in a given number base with digits &quot;abcde...&quot; that has the following properties:

# Its first digit &quot;a&quot; is not 0.
# The number formed by its first two digits &quot;ab&quot; is a multiple of 2.
# The number formed by its first three digits &quot;abc&quot; is a multiple of 3.
# The number formed by its first four digits &quot;abcd&quot; is a multiple of 4.
# etc.

==Definition==
Let formula_1 be a positive integer, and let formula_2 be the number of digits in &quot;n&quot; written in base &quot;b&quot;. The number &quot;n&quot; is a polydivisible number if for all formula_3,
: formula_4. 

; Example

For example, 10801 is a seven-digit polydivisible number in base 4, as 
: formula_5
: formula_6
: formula_7
: formula_8
: formula_9
: formula_10
: formula_11

==Enumeration==
For any given base formula_12, there are only a finite number of polydivisible numbers.

===Maximum polydivisible number===
The following table lists maximum polydivisible numbers for some bases &quot;b&quot;, where represent digit values 10 to 35.
===Estimate for &quot;Fb&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) and Σ(&quot;b&quot;)===
Let formula_1 be the number of digits. The function formula_14 determines the number of polydivisible numbers that has formula_1 digits in base formula_12, and the function formula_17 is the total number of polydivisible numbers in base formula_12.

If formula_19 is a polydivisible number in base formula_12 with formula_21 digits, then it can be extended to create a polydivisible number with formula_1 digits if there is a number between formula_23 and formula_24 that is divisible by formula_1. If formula_1 is less or equal to formula_12, then it is always possible to extend an formula_21 digit polydivisible number to an formula_1-digit polydivisible number in this way, and indeed there may be more than one possible extension. If formula_1 is greater than formula_12, it is not always possible to extend a polydivisible number in this way, and as formula_1 becomes larger, the chances of being able to extend a given polydivisible number become smaller. On average, each polydivisible number with formula_21 digits can be extended to a polydivisible number with formula_1 digits in formula_35 different ways. This leads to the following estimate for formula_36:

:formula_37

Summing over all values of n, this estimate suggests that the total number of polydivisible numbers will be approximately

:formula_38

==Specific bases==
All numbers are represented in base formula_12, using A−Z to represent digit values 10 to 35.

===Base 2===
===Base 3===
===Base 4===
===Base 5===
The polydivisible numbers in base 5 are 
:1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 13, 20, 22, 24, 31, 33, 40, 42, 44, 110, 113, 132, 201, 204, 220, 223, 242, 311, 314, 330, 333, 402, 421, 424, 440, 443, 1102, 1133, 1322, 2011, 2042, 2200, 2204, 2231, 2420, 2424, 3113, 3140, 3144, 3302, 3333, 4022, 4211, 4242, 4400, 4404, 4431, 11020, 11330, 13220, 20110, 20420, 22000, 22040, 22310, 24200, 24240, 31130, 31400, 31440, 33020, 33330, 40220, 42110, 42420, 44000, 44040, 44310, 110204, 113300, 132204, 201102, 204204, 220000, 220402, 223102, 242000, 242402, 311300, 314000, 314402, 330204, 333300, 402204, 421102, 424204, 440000, 440402, 443102, 1133000, 1322043, 2011021, 2042040, 2204020, 2420003, 2424024, 3113002, 3140000, 3144021, 4022042, 4211020, 4431024, 11330000, 13220431, 20110211, 20420404, 24200031, 31400004, 31440211, 40220422, 42110202, 44310242, 132204314, 201102110, 242000311, 314000044, 402204220, 443102421, 1322043140, 2011021100, 3140000440, 4022042200

The smallest base 5 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:1, 11, 110, 1102, 11020, 110204, 1133000, 11330000, 132204314, 1322043140, none...

The largest base 5 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:4, 44, 443, 4431, 44310, 443102, 4431024, 44310242, 443102421, 4022042200, none...

The number of base 5 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:4, 10, 17, 21, 21, 21, 13, 10, 6, 4, 0, 0, 0...

===Base 10===
The polydivisible numbers in base 10 are
:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50, 52, 54, 56, 58, 60, 62, 64, 66, 68, 70, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 84, 86, 88, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 102, 105, 108, 120, 123, 126, 129, 141, 144, 147, 162, 165, 168, 180, 183, 186, 189, 201, 204, 207, 222, 225, 228, 243, 246, 249, 261, 264, 267, 282, 285, 288... 

The smallest base 10 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:1, 10, 102, 1020, 10200, 102000, 1020005, 10200056, 102000564, 1020005640, 10200056405, 102006162060, 1020061620604, 10200616206046, 102006162060465, 1020061620604656, 10200616206046568, 108054801036000018, 1080548010360000180, 10805480103600001800, ... 

The largest base 10 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:9, 98, 987, 9876, 98765, 987654, 9876545, 98765456, 987654564, 9876545640, 98765456405, 987606963096, 9876069630960, 98760696309604, 987606963096045, 9876062430364208, 98485872309636009, 984450645096105672, 9812523240364656789, 96685896604836004260, ... 

The number of base 10 polydivisible numbers with &quot;n&quot; digits are
:9, 45, 150, 375, 750, 1200, 1713, 2227, 2492, 2492, 2225, 2041, 1575, 1132, 770, 571, 335, 180, 90, 44, 18, 12, 6, 3, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, ... 

==Programming example==
The example below searches for polydivisible numbers in Python. 

def find_polydivisible(base: int) -&gt; list[int]:
 &quot;&quot;&quot;Find polydivisible number.&quot;&quot;&quot;
 numbers = []
 previous = [i for i in range(1, base)]
 new = []
 digits = 2
 while not previous == []:
 numbers.append(previous)
 for n in previous:
 for j in range(0, base):
 number = n * base + j
 if number % digits == 0:
 new.append(number)
 previous = new
 new = []
 digits = digits + 1
 return numbers
==Related problems==
Polydivisible numbers represent a generalization of the following well-known problem in recreational mathematics:

: &quot;Arrange the digits 1 to 9 in order so that the first two digits form a multiple of 2, the first three digits form a multiple of 3, the first four digits form a multiple of 4 etc. and finally the entire number is a multiple of 9.&quot;

The solution to the problem is a nine-digit polydivisible number with the additional condition that it contains the digits 1 to 9 exactly once each. There are 2,492 nine-digit polydivisible numbers, but the only one that satisfies the additional condition is

:381 654 729

Other problems involving polydivisible numbers include:

* Finding polydivisible numbers with additional restrictions on the digits - for example, the longest polydivisible number that only uses even digits is 

:48 000 688 208 466 084 040

* Finding palindromic polydivisible numbers - for example, the longest palindromic polydivisible number is

:30 000 600 003

* A common, trivial extension of the aforementioned example is to arrange the digits 0 to 9 to make a 10 digit number in the same way, the result is 3816547290. This is a pandigital polydivisible number.

==References==
==External links==
* YouTube - a pandigital number that is also polydivisible</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q836100" start="17" end="37" title="Polydivisible number" label="polydivisible number"/>
<link wikidata="Q836100" start="42" end="54" title="Polydivisible number" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="61" end="67" title="natural number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="79" end="90" title="number base" label="number base"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="96" end="102" title="numerical digit" label="digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q303727" start="754" end="760" title="base 4" label="base 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="5505" end="5511" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410503" start="6046" end="6070" title="recreational mathematics" label="recreational mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q754831" start="6842" end="6853" title="palindromic number" label="palindromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659695" start="7128" end="7138" title="pandigital" label="pandigital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382750" wikidata="Q364463" url="?curid=382750" title="Giulio Douhet">
<text>General Giulio Douhet (30 May 1869 – 15 February 1930) was an Italian general and air power theorist. He was a key proponent of strategic bombing in aerial warfare. He was a contemporary of the air warfare advocates Walther Wever, Billy Mitchell, and Hugh Trenchard.

== Biography ==
Born in Caserta, Campania, Italy, from a family of Savoyard exiles who had migrated there after the cession of Savoy to France he attended the Military Academy of Modena and was commissioned into the artillery of the Italian Army in 1882. Later he attended the Polytechnic Institute in Turin where he studied science and engineering.

Assigned to the General Staff, after the beginning of the new century, Douhet published lectures on military mechanization. With the arrival of dirigibles and then fixed-wing aircraft in Italy, he quickly recognized the military potential of the new technology. Douhet saw the pitfalls of allowing air power to be fettered by ground commanders and began to advocate the creation of a separate air arm commanded by airmen. He teamed up with the young aircraft engineer Gianni Caproni to extol the virtues of air power in the years ahead.

In 1911, Italy went to war against the Ottoman Empire for control of Libya. During the war, aircraft operated for the first time in reconnaissance, transport, artillery spotting and even limited bombing roles. Douhet wrote a report on the aviation lessons learned in which he suggested high altitude bombing should be the primary role of aircraft. In 1912, Douhet assumed command of the Italian aviation battalion at Turin and wrote a set of &quot;Rules for the Use of Airplanes in War&quot; (&quot;Regole per l&#x27;uso degli aeroplani in guerra&quot;) — one of the first doctrine manuals of its kind. However, Douhet&#x27;s preaching on air power marked him as a radical. After an incident in which he ordered construction of Caproni bombers without authorization, he was exiled to the infantry.

When World War I began, Douhet began to call for Italy to launch a massive military build-up, particularly in aircraft. &quot;To gain command of the air,&quot; he said, was to render an enemy &quot;harmless&quot;. When Italy entered the war in 1915 Douhet was shocked by the army&#x27;s incompetence and unpreparedness. He proposed a force of 500 bombers that could drop 125 tons of bombs daily to break the bloody stalemate with Austria, but he was ignored. He corresponded with his superiors and government officials, criticising the conduct of the war and advocating an air power solution. Douhet was court-martialed and was imprisoned for one year for criticizing Italian military leaders in a memorandum to the cabinet.

Douhet continued to write about air power from his cell, finishing a novel on air power and proposing a massive Allied fleet of aircraft in communications to ministers. He was released and returned to duty shortly after the disastrous Battle of Caporetto in 1917. Douhet was recalled to service in 1918 to serve as head of the Italian Central Aeronautic Bureau.

He was exonerated in 1920 and promoted to general officer in 1921. The same year, he completed a hugely-influential treatise on strategic bombing, &quot;The Command of the Air&quot; (&quot;Il dominio dell&#x27;aria&quot;), and retired from military service soon after. Except for a few months as the head of aviation in Benito Mussolini&#x27;s government in 1922, Douhet spent much of the rest of his life theorizing about the impact of military air power.

Douhet died of a heart attack in 1930 in Rome, Italy.

== Aerial strategy ==

In his book Douhet argued that air power was revolutionary because it operated in the third dimension. Aircraft could fly over surface forces, relegating them to secondary importance. The vastness of the sky made defense almost impossible, so the essence of air power was the offensive. The only defense was a good offense. The air force that could achieve command of the air by bombing the enemy air arm into extinction would doom its enemy to perpetual bombardment. Command of the air meant victory.

Douhet believed in the morale effects of bombing. Air power could break a people&#x27;s will by destroying a country&#x27;s &quot;vital centers&quot;. Armies became superfluous because aircraft could overfly them and attack these centers of the government, military and industry with impunity, a principle later called &quot;The bomber will always get through&quot;. Targeting was central to this strategy and he believed that air commanders would prove themselves by their choice of targets. These would vary from situation to situation, but Douhet identified the five basic target types as: industry, transport infrastructure, communications, government and &quot;the will of the people&quot;.

The last category was particularly important to Douhet, who believed in the principle of total war.

The chief strategy laid out in his writings, the Douhet model, is pivotal in debates regarding the use of air power and bombing campaigns. The Douhet model rests on the belief that in a conflict, the infliction of high costs from aerial bombing can shatter civilian morale. This would unravel the social basis of resistance, and pressure citizens into asking their governments to surrender. The logic of this model is that exposing large portions of civilian populations to the terror of destruction or the shortage of consumer goods would damage civilian morale into submission. By smothering the enemy&#x27;s civilian centers with bombs, Douhet argued the war would become so terrible that the common people would rise against their government, overthrow it with revolution, then sue for peace.

This emphasis on the strategic offensive would blind Douhet to the possibilities of air defense or tactical support of armies. In his second edition of &quot;The Command of the Air&quot; he maintained such aviation was &quot;useless, superfluous and harmful&quot;. He proposed an independent air force composed primarily of long-range load-carrying bombers. He believed interception of these bombers was unlikely, but allowed for a force of escort aircraft to ward off interceptors. Attacks would not require great accuracy. On a tactical level he advocated using three types of bombs in quick succession; explosives to destroy the target, incendiaries to ignite the damaged structures, and poison gas to keep firefighters and rescue crews away.

The entire population was in the front line of an air war and they could be terrorized with urban bombing. In his book &quot;The War of 19--&quot; he described a fictional war between Germany and a Franco-Belgian alliance in which the Germans launched massive terror bombing raids on the populace, reducing their cities to ashes before their armies could mobilize. Because bombing would be so terrible, Douhet believed that wars would be short. As soon as one side lost command of the air it would capitulate rather than face the terrors of air attack. In other words, the enemy air force was the primary target. A decisive victory here would hasten the end of the war.

=== Critical reception ===
Though the initial response to &quot;The Command of the Air&quot; was muted, the second edition generated virulent attacks from his military peers, particularly those in the navy and army. Douhet&#x27;s was an apocalyptic vision that gripped the popular imagination. his theories were unproven and unchallengeable for another 20 years. In many cases, he had hugely exaggerated the effects of bombing. His calculations for the amount of bombs and poison gas required to destroy a city were ludicrously optimistic. In &quot;&quot; in July 1928, he wrote that he believed that 300 tons of bombs over the most important cities would end a war in less than a month.

== See also ==

* Aerial warfare
* Strategic bombing
* Amedeo Mecozzi

== Further reading ==
* Giulio Douhet, &quot;Command of the Air&quot;, 1942 translation
* Thomas Hippler. &quot;Bombing the People: Giulio Douhet and the Foundations of Air-Power Strategy, 1884-1939&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2013) 294pp. online review
* David MacIsaac, &quot;Voices from the Central Blue: The Air Power Theorists,&quot; in &quot;Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age&quot;, ed. P. Paret, G. Craig, and F. Gilbert (Princeton University Press, 1986) 
* Robert A. Pape, &quot;Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War&quot; (Cornell University Press, 1996)
* Louis A. Sigaud, &quot;Air Power and Unification: Douhet&#x27;s Principles of Warfare and Their Application to the United States&quot;, The Military Service Publishing Co., 1949

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="8" end="21" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="62" end="69" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="70" end="77" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="82" end="91" title="air power" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="128" end="145" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="149" end="163" title="aerial warfare" label="aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q62236" start="216" end="229" title="Walther Wever (General)" label="Walther Wever"/>
<link wikidata="Q863201" start="231" end="245" title="Billy Mitchell" label="Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="251" end="265" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906" start="292" end="299" title="Caserta" label="Caserta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="301" end="309" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="311" end="316" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="335" end="340" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="384" end="410" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="cession of Savoy to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934874" start="427" end="453" title="Military Academy of Modena" label="Military Academy of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="462" end="474" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="484" end="493" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q392897" start="545" end="575" title="Polytechnic Institute in Turin" label="Polytechnic Institute in Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="763" end="773" title="airship" label="dirigibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q501316" start="1087" end="1101" title="Gianni Caproni" label="Gianni Caproni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1196" end="1210" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1226" end="1231" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1961" end="1972" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136905" start="2175" end="2196" title="Military history of Italy during World War I" label="Italy entered the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="2917" end="2936" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Battle of Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="3173" end="3190" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="3365" end="3381" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3544" end="3548" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="4107" end="4113" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="4409" end="4443" title="The bomber will always get through" label="The bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="4870" end="4879" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="7805" end="7819" title="Aerial warfare" label="Aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="7822" end="7839" title="Strategic bombing" label="Strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q689429" start="7842" end="7856" title="Amedeo Mecozzi" label="Amedeo Mecozzi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382754" wikidata="Q1059083" url="?curid=382754" title="Chain Home">
<text>Chain Home, or CH for short, was the codename for the ring of coastal early warning radar stations built by the Royal Air Force (RAF) before and during the Second World War to detect and track aircraft. Initially known as RDF, and given the official name Air Ministry Experimental Station Type 1 (AMES Type 1) in 1940, the radar units were also known as Chain Home for most of their life. Chain Home was the first early warning radar network in the world and the first military radar system to reach operational status. Its effect on the war made it one of the most powerful systems of what became known as the &quot;Wizard War&quot;.

In late 1934, the Tizard Committee asked radio expert Robert Watson-Watt to comment on the repeated claims of radio death rays and reports suggesting Germany had built some sort of radio weapon. His assistant, Arnold Wilkins, demonstrated that a death ray was impossible but suggested radio could be used for long-range detection. In February 1935, a successful demonstration was arranged by placing a receiver near a BBC short wave transmitter and flying an aircraft around the area. Using commercial short wave radio hardware, Watt&#x27;s team built a prototype pulsed transmitter and by June 1935 it detected an aircraft that happened to be flying past. Basic development was completed by the end of the year, with detection ranges on the order of .

In 1936 attention was focused on a production version, and early 1937 saw the addition of height finding. The first five stations, covering the approaches to London, were installed by 1937 and began full-time operation in 1938. Over the next two years, additional stations were built while the problem of disseminating the information to the fighter aircraft led to the first integrated ground-controlled interception network, the Dowding system. By the time the war started, most of the east and south coasts had radar coverage.

Chain Home proved important during the Battle of Britain in 1940. CH systems could detect enemy aircraft while they were forming over France, giving RAF commanders ample time to marshal their aircraft in the path of the raid. This had the effect of multiplying the effectiveness of the RAF to the point that it was as if they had three times as many fighters, allowing them to defeat frequently larger German forces. The Chain Home network was continually expanded, with over 40 stations operational by the war&#x27;s end, including mobile versions for use overseas. Late in the war, when the threat of &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; bombing had ended, the CH systems were used to detect V2 missile launches. UK radar systems were wound down after the war but the start of the Cold War led to the Chain Home radars being pressed into service in the new ROTOR system until replaced by newer systems in the 1950s. Only a few of the original sites remain.

==Development==

===Prior experiments===
From the earliest days of radio technology, signals had been used for navigation using the radio direction finding (RDF) technique. RDF can determine the bearing to a radio transmitter, and several such measurements can be combined to produce a radio fix, allowing the receiver&#x27;s position to be calculated. Given some basic changes to the broadcast signal, it was possible for the receiver to determine its location using a single station. The UK pioneered one such service in the form of the Orfordness Beacon.

Through the early period of radio development it was widely known that certain materials, especially metal, reflected radio signals. This led to the possibility of determining the location of objects by broadcasting a signal and then using RDF to measure the bearing of any reflections. Such a system saw patents issued to Germany&#x27;s Christian Hülsmeyer in 1904, and widespread experimentation with the basic concept was carried out from then on. These systems revealed only the bearing to the target, not the range, and due to the low power of radio equipment of that era, they were useful only for short-range detection. This led to their use for iceberg and collision warning in fog or bad weather, where all that was required was the rough bearing of nearby objects.

The use of radio detection specifically against aircraft was first considered in the early 1930s. Teams in the UK, US, Japan, Germany and others had all considered this concept and put at least some amount of effort into developing it. Lacking ranging information, such systems remained of limited use in practical terms; two angle measurements could be used, but these took time to complete using existing RDF equipment and the rapid movement of the aircraft during the measurement would make coordination difficult.

===Radio research in the UK===
Since 1915, Robert Watson-Watt had been working for the Met Office in a lab that was colocated at the National Physical Laboratory&#x27;s (NPL) Radio Research Section (RRS) at Ditton Park in Slough. Watt became interested in using the fleeting radio signals given off by lightning as a way to track thunderstorms, but existing RDF techniques were too slow to allow the direction to be determined before the signal disappeared. In 1922, he solved this by connecting a cathode-ray tube (CRT) to a directional Adcock antenna array, originally built by the RRS but now unused. The combined system, later known as huff-duff (from HF/DF, high frequency direction finding), allowed the almost instantaneous determination of the bearing of a signal. The Met Office began using it to produce storm warnings for aviators.

During this period, Edward Appleton of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge was carrying out experiments that would lead to him winning the Nobel Prize in Physics. Using a BBC transmitter set up in 1923 in Bournemouth and listening for its signal with a receiver at Oxford University, he was able to use changes in wavelength to measure the distance to a reflective layer in the atmosphere then known as the Heaviside layer. After the initial experiments at Oxford, an NPL transmitter at Teddington was used as a source, received by Appleton in an out-station of King&#x27;s College in the East End of London. Watt learned of these experiments and began conducting the same measurements using his team&#x27;s receivers in Slough. From then on, the two teams interacted regularly and Watt coined the term ionosphere to describe the multiple atmospheric layers they discovered.

In 1927 the two radio labs, at the Met Office and NPL, were combined to form the Radio Research Station (with the same acronym, RRS), run by the NPL with Watt as the Superintendent. This provided Watt with direct contact to the research community, as well as the chief signals officers of the British Army, Royal Navy and Royal Air Force. Watt became a well-known expert in the field of radio technology. This began a long period where Watt agitated for the NPL to take a more active role in technology development, as opposed to its pure research role. Watt was particularly interested in the use of radio for long-range aircraft navigation, but the NPL management at Teddington was not receptive and these proposals went nowhere.

===Detection of aircraft===
In 1931, Arnold Frederic Wilkins joined Watt&#x27;s staff in Slough. As the &quot;new boy&quot;, he was given a variety of menial tasks to complete. One of these was to select a new shortwave receiver for ionospheric studies, a task he undertook with great seriousness. After reading everything available on several units, he selected a model from the General Post Office (GPO) that worked at (for that time) very high frequencies. As part of their tests of this system, in June 1932 the GPO published a report, No. 232 &quot;Interference by Aeroplanes&quot;. The report recounted the GPO testing team&#x27;s observation that aircraft flying near the receiver caused the signal to change in intensity, an annoying effect known as fading.

The stage was now set for the development of radar in the UK. Using Wilkins&#x27; knowledge that shortwave signals bounced off aircraft, a BBC transmitter to light up the sky as in Appleton&#x27;s experiment, and Watt&#x27;s RDF technique to measure angles, a complete radar could be built. While such a system could determine the angle to a target, it could not determine its range and provide a location in space. To do so, two such measurements would have to be made from different locations. Watt&#x27;s huff-duff technique solved the problem of making rapid measurements, but the issue of coordinating the measurement at two stations remained, as did any inaccuracies in measurement or differences in calibration between the two stations.

The missing technique that made radar practical was the use of pulses to determine range by measuring the time between the transmission of the signal and reception of the reflected signal. This would allow a single station to measure angle and range simultaneously. In 1924, two researchers at the Naval Research Laboratory in the United States, Merle Tuve and Gregory Briet, decided to recreate Appleton&#x27;s experiment using timed pulsed signals instead of the changing wavelengths. The application of this technique to a detection system was not lost on those working in the field, and such a system was prototyped by W. A. S. Butement and P. E. Pollard of the British Signals Experimental Establishment (SEE) in 1931. The War Office proved uninterested in the concept and the development remained little known outside SEE.

===&quot;The bomber will always get through&quot;===
At the same time, the need for such a system was becoming increasingly pressing. In 1932, Winston Churchill and his friend, confidant and scientific advisor Frederick Lindemann travelled by car in Europe, where they saw the rapid rebuilding of the German aircraft industry. It was in November of that year that Stanley Baldwin gave his famous speech, stating that &quot;The bomber will always get through&quot;.

In the early summer of 1934, the RAF carried out large-scale exercises with up to 350 aircraft. The forces were split, with bombers attempting to attack London, while fighters, guided by the Observer Corps, attempted to stop them. The results were dismal. In most cases, the vast majority of the bombers reached their target without ever seeing a fighter. To address the one-sided results, the RAF gave increasingly accurate information to the defenders, eventually telling the observers where and when the attacks would be taking place. Even then, 70 per cent of the bombers reached their targets unhindered. The numbers suggested any targets in the city would be destroyed. Squadron Leader P. R. Burchall summed up the results by noting that &quot;a feeling of defencelessness and dismay, or at all events of uneasiness, has seized the public.&quot; In November, Churchill gave a speech on &quot;The threat of Nazi Germany&quot; in which he pointed out that the Royal Navy could not protect Britain from an enemy who attacked by air.

Through the early 1930s, a debate raged within British military and political circles about strategic airpower. Baldwin&#x27;s famous speech led many to believe the only way to prevent the bombing of British cities was to make a strategic bomber force so large it could, as Baldwin put it, &quot;kill more women and children more quickly than the enemy.&quot; Even the highest levels of the RAF came to agree with this policy, publicly stating that their tests suggested that &quot;&#x27;The best form of defence is attack&#x27; may be all-too-familiar platitudes, but they illustrate the only sound method of defending this country from air invasion. It is attack that counts.&quot; As it became clear the Germans were rapidly rearming the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, the fear grew RAF could not meet the objective of winning such a tit-for-tat exchange and many suggested they invest in a massive bomber building exercise.

Others felt advances in fighters meant the bomber was increasingly vulnerable and suggested at least exploring a defensive approach. Among the latter group was Lindemann, test pilot and scientist, who noted in &quot;The Times&quot; in August 1934 that &quot;To adopt a defeatist attitude in the face of such a threat is inexcusable until it has definitely been shown that all the resources of science and invention have been exhausted.&quot;

===Tales of destructive &quot;rays&quot;===
In 1923–24 inventor Harry Grindell Matthews repeatedly claimed to have built a device that projected energy over long ranges and attempted to sell it to the War Office, but it was deemed to be fraudulent. His attempts spurred on many other inventors to contact the British military with claims of having perfected some form of the fabled electric or radio &quot;death ray&quot;. Some turned out to be frauds and none turned out to be feasible.

Around the same time, a series of stories suggested another radio weapon was being developed in Germany. The stories varied, with one common thread being a death ray, and another that used the signals to interfere with an engine&#x27;s ignition system to cause the engine to stall. One commonly repeated story involved an English couple who were driving in the Black Forest on holiday and had their car fail in the countryside. They claimed they were approached by soldiers who told them to wait while they conducted a test, and were then able to start their engine without trouble when the test was complete. This was followed shortly thereafter by a story in a German newspaper with an image of a large radio antenna that had been installed on Feldberg in the same area.

Although highly skeptical about claims of engine-stopping rays and death rays, the Air Ministry could not ignore them as they were theoretically possible. If such systems could be built, it might render bombers useless. If this were to happen, the night bomber deterrent might evaporate overnight, leaving the UK open to attack by Germany&#x27;s ever-growing air fleet. Conversely, if the UK had such a device, the population could be protected.

In 1934, along with a movement to establish a scientific committee to examine these new types of weapons, the RAF offered a £1,000 prize to anyone who could demonstrate a working model of a death ray that could kill a sheep at 100 yards; it went unclaimed.

===Tizard committee===
The need to research better forms of air defense prompted Harry Wimperis to press for the formation of a study group to consider new concepts. Lord Londonderry, then Secretary of State for Air, approved the formation of the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence in November 1934, asking Henry Tizard to chair the group, which thus became better known to history as the Tizard Committee.

When Wimperis sought an expert in radio to help judge the death-ray concept, he was naturally directed to Watt. He wrote to Watt &quot;on the practicability of proposals of the type colloquially called &#x27;death ray&#x27;&quot;. The two met on 18 January 1935, and Watt promised to look into the matter. Watt turned to Wilkins for help but wanted to keep the underlying question a secret. He asked Wilkins to calculate what sort of radio energy would be needed to raise the temperature of of water at a distance of from . To Watt&#x27;s bemusement, Wilkins immediately surmised this was a question about a death ray. He made a number of back-of-the-envelope calculations demonstrating the amount of energy needed would be impossible given the state of the art in electronics.

According to R. V. Jones, when Wilkins reported the negative results, Watt asked, &quot;Well then, if the death ray is not possible, how can we help them?&quot; Wilkins recalled the earlier report from the GPO, and noted that the wingspan of a contemporary bomber aircraft, about , would be just right to form a half-wavelength dipole antenna for signals in the range of 50 m wavelength, or about 6 MHz. In theory, this would efficiently reflect the signal and could be picked up by a receiver to give an early indication of approaching aircraft.

=== &quot;Less unpromising&quot; ===

Watt wrote back to the committee saying the death ray was extremely unlikely, but added:

The letter was discussed at the first official meeting of the Tizard Committee on 28 January 1935. The utility of the concept was evident to all attending, but the question remained whether it was actually possible. Albert Rowe and Wimperis both checked the maths and it appeared to be correct. They immediately wrote back asking for a more detailed consideration. Watt and Wilkins followed up with a 14 February secret memo entitled &quot;Detection and Location of Aircraft by Radio Means&quot;. In the new memo, Watson-Watt and Wilkins first considered various natural emanations from the aircraft – light, heat and radio waves from the engine ignition system – and demonstrated that these were too easy for the enemy to mask to a level that would be undetectable at reasonable ranges. They concluded that radio waves from their own transmitter would be needed.

Wilkins gave specific calculations for the expected reflectivity of an aircraft. The received signal would be only 10−19 times as strong as the transmitted one, but such sensitivity was considered to be within the state of the art. To reach this goal, a further improvement in receiver sensitivity of two times was assumed. Their ionospheric systems broadcast only about 1 kW, but commercial shortwave systems were available with 15 amp transmitters (about 10 kW) that they calculated would produce a signal detectable at about . They went on to suggest that the output power could be increased as much as ten times if the system operated in pulses instead of continuously, and that such a system would have the advantage of allowing range to the targets to be determined by measuring the time delay between transmission and reception on an oscilloscope. The rest of the required performance would be made up by increasing the gain of the antennas by making them very tall, focusing the signal vertically. The memo concluded with an outline for a complete station using these techniques. The design was almost identical to the CH stations that went into service.

===Daventry experiment===
The letter was seized on by the Committee, who immediately released £4,000 to begin development. They petitioned Hugh Dowding, the Air Member for Supply and Research, to ask the Treasury for another £10,000. Dowding was extremely impressed with the concept, but demanded a practical demonstration before further funding was released.

Wilkins suggested using the new 10 kW, 49.8 m BBC Borough Hill shortwave station in Daventry, Northamptonshire as a suitable &quot;ad hoc&quot; transmitter. The receiver and an oscilloscope were placed in a delivery van the RRS used for measuring radio reception around the countryside. On 26 February 1935, they parked the van in a field near Upper Stowe and connected it to wire antennas stretched across the field on top of wooden poles. A Handley Page Heyford made four passes over the area, producing clearly notable effects on the CRT display on three of the passes. A memorial stone was placed at the site of the test.

Observing the test were Watt, Wilkins, and several other members of the RRS team, along with Rowe representing the Tizard Committee. Watt was so impressed he later claimed to have exclaimed: &quot;Britain has become an island again!&quot;

Rowe and Dowding were equally impressed. It was at this point that Watt&#x27;s previous agitation over development became important; NPL management remained uninterested in practical development of the concept, and was happy to allow the Air Ministry to take over the team. Days later, the Treasury released £12,300 for further development, and a small team of the RRS researchers were sworn to secrecy and began developing the concept. A system was to be built at the RRS station, and then moved to Orfordness for over-water testing. Wilkins would develop the receiver based on the GPO units, along with suitable antenna systems. This left the problem of developing a suitable pulsed transmitter. An engineer familiar with these concepts was needed.

===Experimental system===
Edward George Bowen joined the team after responding to a newspaper advertisement looking for a radio expert. Bowen had previously worked on ionosphere studies under Appleton, and was well acquainted with the basic concepts. He had also used the RRS&#x27; RDF systems at Appleton&#x27;s request and was known to the RRS staff. After a breezy interview, Watson-Watt and Jock Herd stated the job was his if he could sing the Welsh national anthem. He agreed, but only if they would sing the Scottish one in return. They declined, and gave him the job.

Starting with the BBC transmitter electronics, but using a new transmitter valve from the Navy, Bowen produced a system that transmitted a 25 kW signal at 6 MHz (50 metre wavelength), sending out 25 μs long pulses 25 times a second. Meanwhile, Wilkins and L.H. Bainbridge-Bell built a receiver based on electronics from Ferranti and one of the RRS CRTs. They decided not to assemble the system at the RRS for secrecy reasons. The team, now consisting of three scientific officers and six assistants, began moving the equipment to Orfordness on 13 May 1935. The receiver and transmitter were set up in old huts left over from World War I artillery experiments, the transmitter antenna was a single dipole strung horizontally between two poles, and the receiver a similar arrangement of two crossed wires.

The system showed little success against aircraft, although echoes from the ionosphere as far as 1,000 miles away were noted. The group released several reports on these effects as a cover story, claiming that their ionospheric studies had been interfering with the other experiments at the RRS at Slough, and expressing their gratitude that the Air Ministry had granted them access to unused land at Orfordness to continue their efforts. Bowen continued increasing the voltage in the transmitter, starting with the 5000 volt maximum suggested by the Navy, but increasing in steps over several months to 12,000 V, which produced pulses of 200 kW. Arcing between the valves required the transmitter to be rebuilt with more room between them, while arcing on the antenna was solved by hanging copper balls from the dipole to reduce corona discharge.

By June the system was working well, although Bainbridge-Bell proved to be so skeptical of success that Watt eventually returned him to the RRS and replaced him with Nick Carter. The Tizard Committee visited the site on 15 June to examine the team&#x27;s progress. Watt secretly arranged for a Vickers Valentia to fly nearby, and years later insisted that he saw the echoes on the display, but no one else recalls seeing these.

Watt decided not to return to the RRS with the rest of the Tizard group and stayed with the team for another day. With no changes made to the equipment, on 17 June the system was turned on and immediately provided returns from an object at . After tracking it for some time, they watched it fly off to the south and disappear. Watt phoned the nearby Seaplane Experimental Station at Felixstowe and the superintendent stated that a Supermarine Scapa flying boat had just landed. Watt requested the aircraft return to make more passes. This event is considered the official birth date of radar in the UK.

Aircraft from RAF Martlesham Heath took over the job of providing targets for the system, and the range was continually pushed out. During a 24 July test, the receiver detected a target at and the signal was strong enough that they could determine the target was actually three aircraft in close formation. By September the range was consistently 40 miles, increasing to by the end of the year, and with the power improvements Bowen worked into the transmitter, was over by early 1936.

===Planning the chain===
In August 1935, Albert Rowe, secretary of the Tizard Committee, coined the term &quot;Radio Direction and Finding&quot; (RDF), deliberately choosing a name that could be confused with &quot;Radio Direction Finding&quot;, a term already in widespread use.

In a 9 September 1935 memo, Watson-Watt outlined the progress to date. At that time the range was about , so Watson-Watt suggested building a complete network of stations apart along the entire east coast. Since the transmitters and receivers were separate, to save development costs he suggested placing a transmitter at every other station. The transmitter signal could be used by a receiver at that site as well as the ones on each side of it. This was quickly rendered moot by the rapid increases in range. When the Committee next visited the site in October, the range was up to , and Wilkins was working on a method for height finding using multiple antennas.

In spite of its &quot;ad hoc&quot; nature and short development time of less than six months, the Orfordness system had already become a useful and practical system. In comparison, the acoustic mirror systems that had been in development for a decade were still limited to only range under most conditions, and were very difficult to use in practice. Work on mirror systems ended, and on 19 December 1935, a £60,000 contract for five RDF stations along the south-east coast was sent out, to be operational by August 1936.

The only person not convinced of the utility of RDF was Lindemann. He had been placed on the Committee at the insistence of his friend, Churchill, and proved unimpressed with the team&#x27;s work. When he visited the site, he was upset by the crude conditions, and apparently, by the box lunch he had to eat. Lindemann strongly advocated the use of infrared systems for detection and tracking and numerous observers have noted Lindemann&#x27;s continual interference with radar. As Bowen put it,

Churchill&#x27;s backing meant the other members&#x27; complaints about his behaviour were ignored. The matter was eventually referred back to Lord Swinton, the new Secretary of State for Air. Swinton solved the problem by dissolving the original Committee and reforming it with Appleton in Lindemann&#x27;s place.

As the development effort grew, Watt requested a central research station be established &quot;of large size and with ground space for a considerable number of mast and aerial systems&quot;. Several members of the team went on scouting trips with Watt to the north of Orfordness but found nothing suitable. Then Wilkins recalled having come across an interesting site about south of Orfordness, some time earlier while on a Sunday drive. He recalled it because it was some above sea level, which was unusual in that area. The large manor house on the property would have ample room for experimental labs and offices. In February and March 1936, the team moved to Bawdsey Manor and established the Air Ministry Experimental Station (AMES). When the scientific team left in 1939, the site became the operational CH site RAF Bawdsey.

While the &quot;ness team&quot; began moving to Bawdsey, the Orfordness site remained in use. This proved useful during one demonstration when the new system recently completed at Bawdsey failed. The next day, Robert Hanbury-Brown and the new recruit Gerald Touch started up the Orfordness system and were able to run the demonstrations from there. The Orfordness site was not closed until 1937.

===Into production===
The system was deliberately developed using existing commercially available technology to speed introduction. The development team could not afford the time to develop and debug new technology. Watt, a pragmatic engineer, believed &quot;third-best&quot; would do if &quot;second-best&quot; would not be available in time and &quot;best&quot; never available at all. This led to the use of the 50 m wavelength (around 6 MHz), which Wilkins suggested would resonate in a bomber&#x27;s wings and improve the signal. Unfortunately, this also meant that the system was increasingly blanketed by noise as new commercial broadcasts began taking up this formerly high-frequency spectrum. The team responded by reducing their own wavelength to 26 m (around 11 MHz) to get clear spectrum. To everyone&#x27;s delight, and contrary to Wilkins&#x27; 1935 calculations, the shorter wavelength produced no loss of performance. This led to a further reduction to 13 m, and finally the ability to tune between 10 and 13 m, (roughly 30-20 MHz) to provide some frequency agility to help avoid jamming.

Wilkins&#x27; method of height-finding was added in 1937. He had originally developed this system as a way to measure the vertical angle of transatlantic broadcasts while working at the RRS. The system consisted of several parallel dipoles separated vertically on the receiver masts. Normally the RDF goniometer was connected to two crossed dipoles at the same height and used to determine the bearing to a target return. For height finding, the operator instead connected two antennas at different heights and carried out the same basic operation to determine the vertical angle. Because the transmitter antenna was deliberately focused vertically to improve gain, a single pair of such antennas would only cover a thin vertical angle. A series of such antennas was used, each pair with a different centre angle, providing continuous coverage from about 2.5 degrees over the horizon to as much as 40 degrees above it. With this addition, the final remaining piece of Watt&#x27;s original memo was accomplished and the system was ready to go into production.

Industry partners were canvassed in early 1937, and a production network was organized covering many companies. Metropolitan-Vickers took over design and production of the transmitters, AC Cossor did the same for the receivers, the Radio Transmission Equipment Company worked on the goniometers, and the antennas were designed by a joint AMES-GPO group. The Treasury gave approval for full-scale deployment in August, and the first production contracts were sent out for 20 sets in November, at a total cost of £380,000. Installation of 15 of these sets was carried out in 1937 and 1938. In June 1938 a London headquarters was established to organize the rapidly growing force. This became the Directorate of Communications Development (DCD), with Watt named as the director. Wilkins followed him to the DCD, and A. P. Rowe took over AMES at Bawdsey. In August 1938, the first five stations were declared operational and entered service during the Munich crisis, starting full-time operation in September.

===Deployment===
During the summer of 1936, experiments were carried out at RAF Biggin Hill to examine what effect the presence of radar would have on an air battle. Assuming RDF would provide them 15 minutes&#x27; warning, they developed interception techniques putting fighters in front of the bombers with increasing efficiency. They found the main problems were finding their own aircraft&#x27;s location, and ensuring the fighters were at the right altitude.

In a similar test against the operational radar at Bawdsey in 1937, the results were comical. As Dowding watched the ground controllers scramble to direct their fighters, he could hear the bombers passing overhead. He identified the problem not as a technological one, but in the reporting. The pilots were being sent too many reports, often contradictory. This realization led to the development of the Dowding system, an extensive network of telephone lines reporting to a central &quot;filter room&quot; in London where the reports from the radar stations were collected and collated, and fed back to the pilots in a clear format. The system as a whole was enormously manpower intensive.

By the outbreak of war in September 1939, there were 21 operational Chain Home stations. After the Battle of France in 1940 the network was expanded to cover the west coast and Northern Ireland. The Chain continued to be expanded throughout the war, and by 1940 it stretched from Orkney in the north to Weymouth in the south. This provided radar coverage for the entire Europe-facing side of the British Isles, able to detect high-flying targets well over France. Calibration of the system was carried out initially using a flight of mostly civilian-flown, impressed Avro Rota autogyros flying over a known landmark, the radar then being calibrated so that the position of a target relative to the ground could be read off the CRT. The Rota was used because of its ability to maintain a relatively stationary position over the ground, the pilots learning to fly in small circles while remaining at a constant ground position, despite a headwind.

The rapid expansion of the CH network necessitated more technical and operational personnel than the UK could provide, and in 1940, a formal request was made by the British High Commission, Ottawa to the Canadian Government, appealing for men skilled in radio technology for the service of the defence of Great Britain. By the end of 1941, 1,292 trained personnel had enlisted and most were rushed to England to serve as radar mechanics.

===Battle of Britain===
During the battle, Chain Home stations – most notably the one at Ventnor, Isle of Wight – were attacked several times between 12 and 18 August 1940. On one occasion a section of the radar chain in Kent, including the Dover CH, was put out of action by a lucky hit on the power grid. Though the wooden huts housing the radar equipment were damaged, the towers survived owing to their open steel girder construction. Because the towers survived intact and the signals were soon restored, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; concluded the stations were too difficult to damage by bombing and left them alone for the remainder of the war.

===Upgrades===
Chain Home was the primary radar system of the UK for only a short time. By 1942, many of its duties had been taken over by the far more advanced AMES Type 7 ground-controlled interception (GCI) radar systems. Whereas CH scanned an area perhaps 100 degrees wide and required considerable effort to take measurements, the Type 7 scanned the entire 360-degree area around the station, and presented it on a plan position indicator, essentially a real-time two-dimensional map of the airspace around the station. Both fighters and bombers appeared on the display, and could be distinguished using Identification friend or foe (IFF) signals. The data from this display could be read directly to the intercepting pilots, without the need for additional operators or control centres.

With the deployment of GCI, CH became the early warning portion of the radar network. To further simplify operations and reduce manpower requirements, the job of plotting the targets became semi-automated. An analogue computer of some complexity, known as &quot;The Fruit Machine&quot;, was fed information directly from the operator console, reading the goniometer setting for bearing, and the range from the setting of a dial that moved a mechanical pointer along the screen until it lay over a selected target. When a button was pushed, the Fruit Machine read the inputs and calculated the X and Y location of the target, which a single operator could then plot on a map, or relay directly over the telephone.

The original transmitters were constantly upgraded, first from 100 kW of the Orfordness system to 350 kW for the deployed system, and then again to 750 kW during the war in order to offer greatly increased range. To aid in detection at long range, a slower 12.5 pulse per second rate was added. The four-tower transmitter was later reduced to three towers.

===Big Ben===
The British had no answer to the V-2 rocket bombardment that began in September 1944. The missiles flew too high and too fast to be detected during their approach, leaving no time even for an air raid warning to be sounded. Their supersonic speed meant that the explosions occurred without warning before the sound of their approach reached the target. The government initially tried to pass them off as explosions in the underground gas mains. It was clear this was not the case, and eventually, examples of the V-2 falling in its final plunge were captured on film.

In response, several CH stations were re-organized into the &quot;Big Ben&quot; system to report the V-2s during launch. No attempt was made to try to find the location of the launch; the radio-goniometer was simply too slow to use. Instead, each of the stations in the network, Bawdsey, Gt. Bromley, High St, Dunkirk and Swingate (Dover) were left set to their maximum range settings and in the altitude measuring mode. In this mode, the radar had several stacked &quot;lobes&quot; where they were sensitive to signals. As the missile ascended it would pass through these lobes in turn, causing a series of blips to fade in and out over time. The stations attempted to measure the ranges to the target as they flew through each of these lobes and forwarded that by telephone to a central plotting station.

At the station, these range measurements were plotted as arcs on a chart, known as &quot;range cuts&quot;. The intersections of the arcs defined the approximate area of the launcher. Since the missile approached the target as it climbed, each of these intersections would be closer to the target. Taking several of these, in turn, the trajectory of the missile could be determined to some degree of accuracy, and air raid warnings sent to likely areas.

Success in this task was aided by the missile fuselage profile, which acted as an excellent quarter-wave reflector for 12 m band HF radar. RAF Fighter Command was also informed of the launch in an effort to attack the sites. However, the German launch convoys were motorized, well camouflaged and highly mobile, making them extremely difficult to find and attack. The only known claim was made when Supermarine Spitfire pilots of No. 602 Squadron RAF squadron came across a V-2 rising from a wooded area, allowing a quick shot of unknown result.

===ROTOR===
The British radar defences were rapidly run down during the last years of the war, with many sites closed and others placed on &quot;care and maintenance&quot;. However, immediate postwar tensions with the Soviet Union resulted in recommissioning of some wartime radars as a stopgap measure. Specific radars were remanufactured to peacetime standards of quality and reliability, which gave significant increases in range and accuracy. These rebuilt systems were the first phase of Chain Home&#x27;s replacement system, ROTOR, which progressed through three phases from 1949 to 1958.

It had been pointed out from the start that due to the inherent timing of the interception task, about 23 minutes was required to carry out a single interception from initial detection. If the target was a high-speed jet bomber, this required about initial detection range. CH, even in its upgraded form, was barely capable of this under the best conditions. The GCI radars were not even close to this, and the entire ROTOR system relied on a new radar system becoming available by 1957 at the latest. In one of the few instances of this occurring, this requirement was actually beaten, with the first AMES Type 80 systems entering service in 1954.

The very last Chain Home Type 1 systems were retired in 1955 along with the wholesale demolition of most of the steel and timber towers.

===CH today===

Some of the steel transmitter towers remain, although the wooden receiver towers have all been demolished. The remaining towers have various new uses and in some cases are now protected as listed buildings by order of English Heritage. One such transmitter tower can now be found at the BAE Systems facility at Great Baddow in Essex, on the former Marconi Research Centre site. It originally stood at RAF Canewdon in Essex and was moved to Great Baddow in 1956. This is the only surviving Chain Home tower still in its original, unmodified form with cantilever platforms at 50 ft, 200 ft and 360 ft, and in 2019 was given Grade II listed status. Swingate transmitting station in Kent (originally AMES 04 Dover) has two original towers (three until 2010) which are used for microwave relay; the towers lost their platforms in the 1970s. RAF Stenigot in Lincolnshire has another, almost complete tower, without its top platforms; it is used for training aerial erectors.

The only original Chain Home site which is still used as a military radar station is RRH Staxton Wold in North Yorkshire, although there are no remnants of the 1937 equipment as it was completely cleared and remodelled for the ROTOR replacement, the Linesman/Mediator system, in 1964.

The 240-foot timber receiver towers were some of the tallest wooden structures ever built in Britain. Two of these wooden towers were still standing in 1955, at Hayscastle Cross. Unlike the transmitter tower pictured here, those at Hayscastle Cross were guyed. The wooden reception towers at Stoke Holy Cross were demolished in 1960. It is possible that a wooden tower standing at RAF Blakehill Farm, Wiltshire, in the 1970s or 1980s was a Chain Home survivor.

Wilkins would later repeat the Daventry Experiment for the 1977 BBC Television series &quot;The Secret War&quot; episode &quot;To See For a Hundred Miles&quot;.

==Description==

===Mechanical layout===
Chain Home radar installations were normally composed of two sites. One compound contained the transmitter towers with associated structures, and a second compound, normally within a few hundred metres distance, contained the receiver masts and receiver equipment block where the operators (principally WAAF, Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force) worked. The CH system was, by modern terminology, a &quot;bistatic radar&quot;, although modern examples normally have their transmitters and receivers far more widely separated.

The transmitter antenna consisted of four steel towers tall, set out in a line about apart. Three large platforms were stationed on the tower, at 50, 200 and 350 feet off the ground. A 600 ohm transmission cable was suspended from the top platform to the ground on either side of the platform (only on the inside of the end towers). Between these vertical feed cables were the antennas proper, eight half-wave dipoles strung between the vertical cables and spaced ½ of a wavelength apart. They were fed from alternating sides so the entire array of cables was in-phase, given their ½ wavelength spacing. Located behind each dipole was a passive reflector wire, spaced 0.18 wavelength back.

The resulting &quot;curtain array&quot; antenna produced a horizontally polarised signal that was directed strongly forward along the perpendicular to the line of the towers. This direction was known as the &quot;line of shoot&quot;, and was generally aimed out over the water. The broadcast pattern covered an area of about 100 degrees in a roughly fan-shaped area, with a smaller side lobe to the rear, courtesy of the reflectors, and much smaller ones to the sides. When the signal reflected off the ground it underwent a ½ wavelength phase-change, which caused it to interfere with the direct signal. The result was a series of vertically-stacked lobes about 5 degrees wide from 1 degree off the ground to the vertical. The system was later expanded by adding another set of four additional antennas closer to the ground, wired in a similar fashion.

The receiver consisted of an Adcock array consisting of four tall wooden towers arranged at the corners of a square. Each tower had three sets (originally two) of receiver antennas, one at 45, 95 and 215 feet off the ground. The mean height of the transmitter stack was 215 feet, which is why the topmost antenna was positioned at the same altitude in order to produce a reception pattern that was identical to the transmission. A set of motor-driven mechanical switches allowed the operator to select which antenna was active. The output of the selected antenna on each of the four towers was sent to a single radiogoniometer system (not Watt&#x27;s own huff-duff solution). By connecting the antennas together in X-Y pairs the horizontal bearing could be measured, while connecting together the upper and lower antennas allowed the same goniometer to be used to measure the vertical angle.

Two physical layout plans were used, either &#x27;East Coast&#x27; or &#x27;West Coast&#x27;. West Coast sites replaced the steel lattice towers with simpler guy-stayed masts, although they retained the same wooden towers for reception. East Coast sites had transmitter and receiver blocks protected with earth mounds and blast walls, along with separate reserve transmitter and receivers in small bunkers with attached 120 ft aerial masts. These reserves were in close proximity to the respective transmitter/receiver sites, often in a neighbouring field. West Coast sites relied on site dispersal for protection, duplicating the entire transmitter and receiver buildings.

===Transmitter details===

Operation began with the Type T.3026 transmitter sending a pulse of radio energy into the transmission antennas from a hut beside the towers. Each station had two T.3026&#x27;s, one active and one standby. The signal filled space in front of the antenna, flooding the entire area. Due to the transmission effects of the multiple stacked antennas, the signal was most strong directly along the line of shoot, and dwindled on either side. An area about 50 degrees to either side of the line was filled with enough energy to make detection practical.

The Type T.3026 transmitter was provided by Metropolitan-Vickers, based on a design used for a BBC transmitter at Rugby. A unique feature of the design was the &quot;demountable&quot; valves, which could be opened for service, and had to be connected to an oil diffusion vacuum pump for continual evacuation while in use. The valves were able to operate at one of four selected frequencies between 20 and 55 MHz, and switched from one to another in 15 seconds. To produce the short pulses of signal, the transmitter consisted of Hartley oscillators feeding a pair of tetrode amplifier valves. The tetrodes were switched on and off by a pair of mercury vapour thyratrons connected to a timing circuit, the output of which biased the control and screen grids of the tetrode positively while a bias signal kept it normally turned off.

Stations were arranged so their fan-shaped broadcast patterns slightly overlapped to cover gaps between the stations. However, it was found that the timers controlling the broadcasts could drift and the broadcasts from one station would begin to be seen at others, a phenomenon known as &quot;running rabbits&quot;. To avoid this, power from the National Grid was used to provide a convenient phase-locked 50 Hz signal that was available across the entire nation. Each CH station was equipped with a phase-shifting transformer that triggered it at a different point on the grid waveform. The output of the transformer was fed to a Dippy oscillator that produced sharp pulses at 25 Hz, phase-locked to the output from the transformer. The locking was &quot;soft&quot;, so short-term variations in the phase or frequency of the grid were filtered out.

During times of strong ionospheric reflection, especially at night, it was possible that the receiver would see reflections from the ground after one reflection. To address this problem, the system was later provided with a second pulse repetition frequency at 12.5 pps, which meant that a reflection would have to be from further than away before it would be seen during the next reception period.

===Receiver details===
In addition to triggering the broadcast signal, the output of the transmitter trigger signal was also sent to the receiver hut. Here it fed the input to a time base generator that drove the X-axis deflection plates of the CRT display. This caused the electron beam in the tube to start moving left-to-right at the instant that the transmission was completed. Due to the slow decay of the pulse, some of the transmitted signal was received on the display. This signal was so powerful it overwhelmed any reflected signal from targets, which meant that objects closer than about could not be seen on the display. To reduce this period even to this point required the receiver to be hand-tuned, selecting the decoupling capacitors and impedance of the power supplies.

The receiver system, built by A.C. Cossor to a TRE design, was a multiple-stage superheterodyne. The signal from the selected antennas on the receiver towers was fed through the radiogoniometer and then into a three-stage amplifier, with each stage housed in a metal screen box to avoid interference between the stages. Each stage used a Class B amplifier arrangement of EF8s, special low noise, &quot;aligned-grid&quot; pentodes. The output of the initial amplifier was then sent to the intermediate frequency mixer, which extracted a user-selectable amount of the signal, 500, 200 or 50 kHz as selected by a switch on the console. The first setting allowed most of the signal through, and was used under most circumstances. The other settings were available to block out interference, but did so by also blocking some of the signal which reduced the overall sensitivity of the system.

The output of the mixer was sent to the Y-axis deflection plates in a specially designed high-quality CRT. For reasons not well explained in the literature, this was arranged to deflect the beam downward with increasing signal. When combined with the X-axis signal from the time base generator, echoes received from distant objects caused the display to produce &quot;blips&quot; along the display. By measuring the centre point of the blip against a mechanical scale along the top of the display, the range to the target could be determined. This measurement was later aided by the addition of the &quot;calibrator unit&quot; or &quot;strobe&quot;, which caused additional sharp blips to be drawn every along the display. The markers were fed from the same electronic signals as the time base, so it was always properly calibrated.

===Distance and bearing measurement===

Determining the location in space of a given blip was a complex multi-step process. First the operator would select a set of receiver antennas using the motorized switch, feeding signals to the receiver system. The antennas were connected together in pairs, forming two directional antennas, sensitive primarily along the X and Y axes respectively, Y being the line of shoot. The operator would then &quot;swing the gonio&quot;, or &quot;hunt&quot;, back and forth until the selected blip reached its minimum deflection on this display (or maximum, at 90 degrees off). The operator would measure the distance against the scale, and then tell the plotter the range and bearing of the selected target. The operator would then select a different blip on the display and repeat the process. For targets at different altitudes, the operator might have to try different antennas to maximize the signal.

On the receipt of a set of polar coordinates from the radar operator, the plotter&#x27;s task was to convert these to X and Y locations on a map. They were provided with large maps of their operational area printed on lightweight paper so they could be stored for future reference. A rotating straightedge with the centrepoint at the radar&#x27;s location on the map was fixed on top, so when the operator called an angle the plotter would rotate the straightedge to that angle, look along it to pick off the range, and plot a point. The range called from the operator is the line-of-sight range, or &quot;slant range&quot;, not the over-ground distance from the station. To calculate the actual location over the ground, the altitude also had to be measured (see below) and then calculated using simple trigonometry. A variety of calculators and aids were used to help in this calculation step.

As the plotter worked, the targets would be updated over time, causing a series of marks, or &quot;plots&quot;, to appear that indicated the targets&#x27; direction of motion, or &quot;track&quot;. &quot;Track-tellers&quot; standing around the map would then relay this information via telephone to the filter room at RAF Bentley Priory, where a dedicated telephone operator relayed that information to plotters on a much larger map. In this way the reports from multiple stations were re-created into a single overall view.

Due to differences in reception patterns between stations, as well as differences in received signals from different directions even at a single station, the reported locations varied from the target&#x27;s real location by a varying amount. The same target as reported from two different stations could appear in very different locations on the filter room&#x27;s plot. It was the job of the filter room to recognize these were actually the same plot, and re-combine them into a single track. From then on each track was identified by a number, which would be used for all future communications. When first reported the tracks were given an &quot;X&quot; prefix, and then &quot;H&quot; for Hostile or &quot;F&quot; for friendly once identified. This data was then sent down the telephone network to the Group and Section headquarters where the plots were again re-created for local control over the fighters.

The data also went sideways to other defence units such as Royal Navy, Army anti-aircraft gun sites, and RAF barrage balloon operations. There was also comprehensive liaison with the civil authorities, principally Air Raid Precautions.

===Altitude measurement===
Due to the arrangement of the receiver antennas, the sensitive area had a number of side lobes that allowed reception at multiple vertical angles. Typically the operator would use the upper set of antennas at , which had the clearest view of the horizon. Due to the half-wave interference from the ground, the main lobe from this antenna was directed at about 2.5 degrees above the horizontal, with its sensitive region extending from about 1 to 3 degrees. At the ground the gain was zero, which allowed aircraft to escape detection by flying at low altitudes. The second lobe extended from about 6 to 12 degrees, and so on. This left a distinct gap in the reception pattern centred at about 5.2 degrees.

This reception pattern provided CH with a relatively accurate way to estimate the altitude of the target. To do this, the motorized switch in the receiver hut was used to disconnect the four receiver masts and instead select the two vertically displaced antennas on one mast. When connected to the radiogoniometer, the output on the display was now effected by the relative signal strength of the two lobes, rather than the relative strengths in X and Y in the horizontal plane. The operator &quot;swung&quot; the radiogoniometer looking for the peak or minimum reception, as before, and noted the angle.

The number reported by the operator was the line-of-sight range to the target, or &quot;slant range&quot;, which included components of both the horizontal distance and altitude. To convert this to the real range on the ground, the plotter used basic trigonometry on a right angle triangle; the slant range was the hypotenuse and the open angle was the measurement from the radiogoniometer. The base and opposite sides could then be calculated, revealing the distance and altitude. An important correction was the curvature of the Earth, which became significant at the ranges CH worked at. Once calculated, this allowed the range to be properly plotted, revealing the grid square for the target, which was then reported up the chain.

When the target was first detected at long range, the signal typically did not have enough of a return in the second lobe to perform height finding. This only became possible as the aircraft approached the station. Eventually this problem would recur as the target centred itself in the second lobe, and so forth. Additionally, it was not possible to determine the difference between a signal being compared between the first and second or second and third lobe, which caused some ambiguity at short ranges. However, as the altitude was likely determined long before this, this tended not to be a problem in practice.

This pattern left a set of distinct angles where reception in both lobes was very low. To address this, a second set of receiver antennas was installed at . When the lower antennas were used, the pattern was shifted upward, providing strong reception in the &quot;gaps&quot;, at the cost of diminished long-range reception due to the higher angles.

===Raid assessment===

Another critical function of the CH operators was to estimate the number and type of aircraft in a raid. A gross level of the overall size could be determined by the strength of the return. But a much more accurate determination could be made by observing the &quot;beat&quot; rate of the composite echoes, the way they grew and diminished over time as they entered into different sections of the antenna reception pattern. To aid this, the operator could reduce the pulse length to 6 microseconds (from 20) with a push-button. This improved the range resolution, spreading the blip out on the display at the cost of lower returned energy.

Raid assessment was largely an acquired skill and continued to improve with operator experience. In measured tests, experimenters found that acquired skill was so great that experienced operators could often pick out targets with returns less than the current signal-to-noise ratio. How this was accomplished was a great mystery at the time–the operators were spotting blips in static that were larger than the signal. It is currently believed this is a form of stochastic resonance.

===Fruit machine===
Operating a CH station was a manpower-intensive situation, with an operator in the transmitter hut, an operator and assistant in the receiver hut, and as many as six assistants in the receiver hut operating the plotters, calculators and telephone systems. In order to provide 24-hour service, multiple crews were needed, along with a number of service and support personnel. This was then multiplied by the reporting hierarchy, which required similar numbers of WAAFs at each level of the Dowding system hierarchy.

Plotting the angle of the target was a simple process of taking the gonio reading and setting a rotating straightedge to that value. The problem was determining where along that straightedge the target lay; the radar measured the slant range straight-line distance to the target, not the distance over the ground. That distance was affected by the target&#x27;s altitude, which had to be determined by taking the somewhat time-consuming altitude measurements. Additionally, that altitude was affected by the range, due to the curvature of the Earth, as well as any imperfections in the local environment, which caused the lobes to have different measurements depending on the target angle.

As no small part of the manpower required was dedicated to calculation and plotting, a great reduction could be made by using as much automation as possible. This started with the use of various mechanical aids; these were eventually replaced by the &quot;fruit machine&quot;, an electromechanical analogue computer of some complexity. It replicated all of these devices and tables in electrical form. An electrical repeater, or synchro, was added to the gonio dial. To measure the range, a new dial was added that moved a mechanical marker to a selected blip on the display. When a particular target was properly selected, the operator pushed a button to activate the fruit machine, which then read these inputs. In addition to the inputs, the fruit machine also had a series of local corrections for both angle and altitude, as measured by calibration flights and stored in the machine in telephone uniselectors. These corrections were automatically added to the calculation, eliminating the time-consuming lookup of these numbers from tables. The output was the altitude, which then allowed the plotters to determine the proper over-ground distance to the target.

Later versions of the fruit machine were upgraded to directly output the position of the aircraft with no manual operation. Using the same buttons to send settings to the machine, the operator simply triggered the system and the outputs were used to drive a T-square-like indicator on the chart, allowing the operator to read the calculated location directly. This reduced the number of people needed at the station and allowed the station to be reorganized into a much more compact form. No longer did the operator call readings out to the plotters; now they sat directly beside the plotting table so they could see if the results looked right, while the tellers could see the plot and call it into the area plotting room. A further upgrade allowed the data to be sent to the local plotting room automatically over the phone lines, further reducing the required manpower.

==Detection, jamming and counter-jamming==

===Early detection===
From May to August 1939 the LZ130 &quot;Graf Zeppelin II&quot; made flights along Britain&#x27;s North Sea coast to investigate the 100-metre-high radio towers that were being erected from Portsmouth to Scapa Flow. LZ130 performed a series of radiometric tests and took photographs. German sources report the 12 m Chain Home signals were detected and suspected to be radar; however, the chief investigator was not able to prove his suspicions. Other sources are said to report different results.

During the Battle of France, the Germans observed 12 m pulse signals on the western front without being able to recognize their origin and purpose. In mid-June 1940, the &quot;Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt&quot; (DVL, German Aeronautic Research Institute) set up a special group under the direction of Professor von Handel and found out that the signals originated from the installations on the coast of the English Channel.

Their suspicions were finally proven in the aftermath of the Battle of Dunkirk, when the British were forced to abandon a mobile gun-laying radar (GL Mk. I) station in Normandy. Wolfgang Martini&#x27;s team of specialists was able to determine the operation of the system. GL was a rather crude system of limited effectiveness, and this led the Germans to have a dim view of British radar systems. However, an effective system requires more than just the radar; plotting and reporting are equally important, and this part of the system was fully developed in Chain Home. The Germans&#x27; failure to realize the value of the system as a whole has been pointed to as one of their great failings during the war.

===Anti-jamming technologies===

The British had been aware that the Germans would determine the purpose of the system and attempt to interfere with it, and had designed in a variety of features and methods in order to address some of these issues even as the first stations were being built. The most obvious of these was CH&#x27;s ability to operate on different frequencies, which was added to allow the stations to avoid any sort of continuous-broadcast interference on their operating frequency. Additionally, the Interference Rejection Unit, or IFRU, allowed the output of the intermediate stages of the amplifiers to be clipped in an attempt to finely tune the receiver to the station&#x27;s own signals and help reject broadband signals.

More complex was a system built into the CH displays, implemented in order to remove spurious signals from unsynchronized jamming pulses. It consisted of two layers of phosphor in the CRT screen, a quick-reacting layer of zinc sulphide below, and a slower &quot;afterglow&quot; layer of zinc cadmium sulphide on top. During normal operation the bright blue signal from the zinc sulphide was visible, and its signal would activate the yellow zinc cadmium sulphide layer, causing an &quot;averaged&quot; signal to be displayed in yellow. To filter out jamming pulses, a yellow plastic sheet was placed in front of the display, rendering the blue display invisible and revealing the dimmer yellow averaged signal. This is the reason many radars from the War through to the 1960s have yellow displays.

Another method was to use range-only measurements from multiple CH stations to produce fixes on individual targets, the &quot;Chapman method&quot;. To aid this task, a second display would be installed that would be fed the Y-axis signal from a distant CH station over telephone lines. This way the operator could directly compare the two signals, eliminating the delays if this information was transmitted by voice. This system was never required.

===First attempts, halting follow-up===
When jamming was first attempted by the Germans it was in a much more clever fashion than had been anticipated. The observation that the transmissions of the individual stations were spread out in time, in order to avoid mutual interference, was exploited. A system was designed to send back spurious broadband pulses on a chosen CH station&#x27;s time slot. The CH operator could avoid this signal simply by changing their time slot slightly, so the jamming was not received. This caused the station&#x27;s signals to start overlapping another&#x27;s time slot, so that station would attempt the same cure, affecting another station in the network, and so forth.

A series of such jammers were set up in France starting in July 1940, and soon concentrated into a single station in Calais that affected CH for some time. However, the timing of these attempts was extremely ill-considered. The British quickly developed operational methods to counteract this jamming, and these had effectively eliminated the effect of the jamming by the opening of the Battle of Britain on 10 July. The Germans were well on their way to develop more sophisticated jamming systems, but these were not ready for operation until September. This meant that the CH system was able to operate unmolested throughout the Battle, and led to its well-publicized successes.

By the opening of the Battle in July the German &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; operational units were well aware of CH, and had been informed by the DVL that they could not expect to remain undetected, even in clouds. In spite of these warnings, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; did little to address this and treated the entire topic with some level of disdain. Their own radars were superior to CH in many ways, but had proven to be only marginally useful. During the Air Battle of the Heligoland Bight in 1939, a German Freya radar detected the raid while it was still an hour away from its target, yet had no way to report this to any of the fighter units that could intercept it. Getting the information from the radar to the pilots in a useful form appeared to be a difficult problem, and the Germans believed the British would have the same difficulty and thus radar would have little real effect.

Some desultory effort was put into attacking the CH stations, especially during the opening stages of the Battle. British engineers were able to quickly return these units to service, or in some cases simply pretend to do so in order to fool the Germans into thinking the attacks failed. As the pattern of these attacks became clear, the RAF began to counter them with increasing effectiveness. The Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers were subjected to catastrophic losses and had to be withdrawn from battle. The Germans gave up trying to attack CH directly on any reasonable scale.

Thus, CH was allowed to operate throughout the Battle largely unhindered. Although communications were indeed a serious problem, it was precisely this problem that the Dowding system had been set up to address, at great expense. The result was that every British fighter was roughly twice or perhaps more as effective than its German counterpart. Some raids were met with 100% of the fighters dispatched successfully engaging their targets, while German aircraft returned home over half the time never having seen the enemy. It is for this reason that Churchill credits Chain Home with winning the Battle.

===Spoofing jammers, jitter===

A second jamming system was eventually activated at Cap Gris Nez in September, using a system that triggered its signal in response to the reception of a pulse from CH. This meant that the system responded to the CH station even if it moved its time slot. These systems, known as &quot;Garmisch-Partenkirchen&quot;, were used during Operation Donnerkeil in 1941. Further improvements to the basic concept allowed multiple returns to be generated, appearing like multiple aircraft on the CH display.

Although these new jammers were relatively sophisticated, CH operators quickly adapted to them by periodically changing the pulse repetition frequency (PRF) of their station&#x27;s transmitter. This caused the synchronized jamming signals to briefly go out of synch with the station, and the blips from the jammers would &quot;jitter&quot; on the screen, allowing them to be visually distinguished. The &quot;Intentional Jitter Anti-Jamming Unit&quot;, IJAJ, performed this automatically and randomly, making it impossible for the German jammers to match the changes.

Another upgrade helped reject unsynchronized pulses, supplanting the two-layer display. This device, the &quot;Anti-Jamming Black-Out&quot; unit, AJBO, fed the Y-axis signal into a delay and then into the brightness control of the CRT. Short pulses that appeared and disappeared were muted, disappearing from the display. Similar techniques using acoustic delay lines, both for jamming reduction and filtering out noise, became common on many radar units during the war.

===Klein Heidelberg===

The Germans also made use of CH for their own passive radar system, known as &quot;Klein Heidelberg&quot;. This used CH&#x27;s transmissions as their source, and a series of antennas along the Channel coast as the receiver. By comparing the time of arrival of the signals from a selected aircraft, its range and direction could be determined with some accuracy. Since the system sent out no signals of its own, the allies were not aware of it until they overran the stations in 1944. Most of the stations had only just been built when they were overrun.

==Comparison with other systems==
Modern texts are often dismissive of Chain Home, viewing it as &quot;dead end technology with serious shortcomings&quot;.

In many respects, CH was a crude system, both in theory and in comparison with other systems of the era. This is especially true when CH is compared with its German counterpart, the Freya. Freya operated on shorter wavelengths, in the 2.5 to 2.3 m (120 to 130 MHz) band, allowing it to be broadcast from a much smaller antenna. This meant that Freya did not have to use the two-part structure of CH with a floodlight transmission, and could instead send its signal in a more tightly focused beam like a searchlight. This greatly reduced the amount of energy needed to be broadcast, as a much smaller volume was being filled with the transmission. Direction finding was accomplished simply by turning the antenna, which was small enough to make this relatively easy to arrange. Additionally, the higher frequency of the signal allowed higher resolution, which aided operational effectiveness. However, Freya had a shorter maximum range of , and could not accurately determine altitude.

It should be remembered that CH was deliberately designed specifically to use off-the-shelf components wherever possible. Only the receiver was truly new, the transmitter was adapted from commercial systems and this is the primary reason the system used such a long wavelength. CH stations were designed to operate at 20–50 MHz, the &quot;boundary area&quot; between high frequency and VHF bands at 30 MHz, although typical operations were at 20–30 MHz (the upper end of the HF band), or about a 12 m wavelength (25 MHz). The detection range was typically , but could be better.

The main limitation in use was that Chain Home was a fixed system, non-rotational, which meant it could not see beyond its sixty-degree transmission arc or behind it once the targets had flown overhead, and so raid plotting over land was down to ground observers, principally the Observer Corps (from April 1941 known as the Royal Observer Corps). Ground-based observation was acceptable during the day but useless at night and in conditions of reduced visibility. This problem was lessened on introduction of more advanced surveillance radars with 360-degree tracking and height-finding capability and, more importantly, aircraft fitted with Airborne Intercept radar (AI), which had been developed in parallel with Chain Home from 1936 onwards. This new equipment began to appear in late 1940 fitted to Bristol Blenheim, Bristol Beaufighter and Boulton Paul Defiant aircraft.

Even as the CH system was being deployed, a wide variety of experiments with newer designs was being carried out. By 1941 the Type 7 Ground Control Intercept Radar (GCI) on a wavelength of 1.5 m was entering production, and reached widespread service in 1942.

==Chain Home sites==

Radar site locations in this period are complicated due to the rapid growth in technology 1936–45 and the changing operational requirements. By 1945 there were 100+ radar sites in the UK. One of the primary objectives of post war ROTOR was to streamline and manage an unwieldy network that grew rapidly &#x27;as required&#x27; in the war years.

Individual sites are listed below:
==See also==
* History of radar
* Acoustic mirror
* Battle of the Beams
* British military history of World War II
* Chain Home Low
* Civilian Technical Corps
* Ground-controlled interception
* ROTOR
* RAF Air Defence Radar Museum
* Castles in the Sky (film)

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Batt, Reg., &quot;The Radar Army: Winning the War of the Airwaves&quot; (1991, Robert Hale, London) 
* Bragg, Michael., &quot;RDF1 The Location of Aircraft by Radio Methods 1935–1945&quot;, Hawkhead Publishing, Paisley 1988 The history of ground radar in the UK during World War II
* Brown, Louis., &quot;A Radar History of World War II&quot;, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 1999., 
* Latham, Colin &amp; Stobbs, Anne., &quot;Radar A Wartime Miracle&quot;, Sutton Publishing Ltd, Stroud 1996 A history of radar in the UK during World War II told by the men and women who worked on it.
* Latham, Colin &amp; Stobbs, Anne., &quot;Pioneers of Radar&quot; (1999, Sutton, England) 
* Scanlan, M.J.B., &quot;Chain Home Radar - A Personal Reminiscence&quot;, The General Electric Company, p.l.c., GEC Review, Vol. 8, No. 3, 1993, p171-183, 
* Zimmerman, David., &quot;Britain&#x27;s Shield: Radar and the Defeat of the Luftwaffe&quot;, Sutton Publishing Ltd, Stroud, 2001, 

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Early Radar Memories Memories of Sgt. Jean Semple, one of Britain&#x27;s pioneer radar operators
* RAF Bawdsey Chain Home Radar Station at Subterranean Britain
* RAF Radar Museum
* RAF High Street picture
* Life at Darsham – BBC
* Great Baddow Chain Home Mast &amp; Radar Anniversary
* Chain Home Radar – A Personal Reminiscence, M Scanlan, &quot;GEC Review&quot;, 1993
* Early radar development in the UK at purbeckradar.co.uk
* 60 (Signals) Group, Fighter Command (pdf)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="0" end="10" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="15" end="17" title="Chain Home" label="CH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905219" start="70" end="83" title="Early-warning radar" label="early warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="84" end="89" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="112" end="127" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="222" end="225" title="Chain Home" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="255" end="295" title="Chain Home" label="Air Ministry Experimental Station Type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698095" start="297" end="301" title="Air Ministry Experimental Station" label="AMES"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152989" start="654" end="670" title="Tizard Committee" label="Tizard Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="690" end="708" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638786" start="752" end="761" title="death ray" label="death ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795048" start="846" end="860" title="Arnold Wilkins" label="Arnold Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1054" end="1057" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="1058" end="1068" title="Shortwave radio" label="short wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="1732" end="1748" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610846" start="1777" end="1807" title="ground-controlled interception" label="ground-controlled interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253051" start="1821" end="1835" title="Dowding system" label="Dowding system"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1960" end="1977" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467476" start="2170" end="2199" title="force multiplication" label="multiplying the effectiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2530" end="2539" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="2600" end="2610" title="V2 missile" label="V2 missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2689" end="2697" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277424" start="2765" end="2770" title="ROTOR" label="ROTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="2933" end="2938" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="2998" end="3021" title="radio direction finding" label="radio direction finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357450" start="3152" end="3161" title="radio fix" label="radio fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101727" start="3405" end="3422" title="Orfordness Beacon" label="Orfordness Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273815" start="3684" end="3691" title="Bearing (navigation)" label="bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q67152" start="3763" end="3782" title="Christian Hülsmeyer" label="Christian Hülsmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="4807" end="4817" title="Met Office" label="Met Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="4853" end="4881" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280997" start="4895" end="4917" title="Radio Research Station (UK)" label="Radio Research Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283730" start="4927" end="4938" title="Ditton Park" label="Ditton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="4942" end="4948" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="5022" end="5031" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="5050" end="5062" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="5218" end="5234" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680954" start="5258" end="5272" title="Adcock antenna" label="Adcock antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q476152" start="5360" end="5369" title="huff-duff" label="huff-duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q153194" start="5584" end="5599" title="Edward Victor Appleton" label="Edward Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="5603" end="5633" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="5698" end="5720" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="5764" end="5775" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="5824" end="5841" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757813" start="5966" end="5981" title="Kennelly–Heaviside layer" label="Heaviside layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281721" start="6046" end="6056" title="Teddington" label="Teddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="6362" end="6372" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="6728" end="6740" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6742" end="6752" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6757" end="6772" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795048" start="7205" end="7228" title="Arnold Frederic Wilkins" label="Arnold Frederic Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="7378" end="7387" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="7548" end="7567" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196572" start="7926" end="7932" title="fading" label="fading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="8978" end="9003" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921901" start="9026" end="9036" title="Merle Tuve" label="Merle Tuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945300" start="9303" end="9320" title="W. A. S. Butement" label="W. A. S. Butement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9325" end="9338" title="P. E. Pollard" label="P. E. Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512789" start="9354" end="9388" title="Signals Research and Development Establishment" label="Signals Experimental Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="9408" end="9418" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9653" end="9670" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q335593" start="9720" end="9739" title="Frederick Lindemann, 1st Viscount Cherwell" label="Frederick Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="9874" end="9889" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="9933" end="9967" title="The bomber will always get through" label="The bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="10167" end="10181" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="12105" end="12115" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="12150" end="12159" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669310" start="12441" end="12464" title="Harry Grindell Matthews" label="Harry Grindell Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638786" start="12783" end="12792" title="death ray" label="death ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q248382" start="13102" end="13117" title="ignition system" label="ignition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="13227" end="13239" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q316401" start="13612" end="13620" title="Feldberg (Black Forest)" label="Feldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673446" start="14426" end="14440" title="Harry Wimperis" label="Harry Wimperis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333368" start="14511" end="14527" title="Charles Vane-Tempest-Stewart, 7th Marquess of Londonderry" label="Lord Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477296" start="14534" end="14560" title="Secretary of State for Air" label="Secretary of State for Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152989" start="14592" end="14642" title="Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence" label="Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="14668" end="14680" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152989" start="14750" end="14766" title="Tizard Committee" label="Tizard Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839010" start="15408" end="15440" title="back-of-the-envelope calculation" label="back-of-the-envelope calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329338" start="15514" end="15530" title="state of the art" label="state of the art"/>
<link wikidata="Q367200" start="15561" end="15572" title="Reginald Victor Jones" label="R. V. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q245097" start="15778" end="15786" title="wingspan" label="wingspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="15805" end="15820" title="bomber aircraft" label="bomber aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="15860" end="15890" title="Dipole antenna" label="half-wavelength dipole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711002" start="16440" end="16451" title="Albert Rowe (physicist)" label="Albert Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="17930" end="17942" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q854659" start="18016" end="18020" title="Gain (electronics)" label="gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="18392" end="18404" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698087" start="18410" end="18444" title="Air Member for Supply and Research" label="Air Member for Supply and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18660" end="18663" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483454" start="18664" end="18676" title="Borough Hill" label="Borough Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q641756" start="18698" end="18706" title="Daventry" label="Daventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898939" start="18958" end="18969" title="Upper Stowe" label="Upper Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499781" start="19057" end="19077" title="Handley Page Heyford" label="Handley Page Heyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="19981" end="19991" title="Orfordness" label="Orfordness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048530" start="20259" end="20278" title="Edward George Bowen" label="Edward George Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160036" start="20682" end="20703" title="Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" label="Welsh national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q965162" start="20744" end="20760" title="National anthem of Scotland" label="the Scottish one"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="20885" end="20890" title="Valve (electronics)" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407586" start="21130" end="21138" title="Ferranti" label="Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="21435" end="21446" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="21507" end="21513" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="21798" end="21809" title="disinformation" label="cover story"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="22136" end="22140" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="22445" end="22461" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925335" start="22758" end="22774" title="Vickers Valentia" label="Vickers Valentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441589" start="23243" end="23272" title="Seaplane Experimental Station" label="Seaplane Experimental Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000656" start="23276" end="23286" title="Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q262571" start="23324" end="23341" title="Supermarine Scapa" label="Supermarine Scapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="23342" end="23353" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295903" start="23511" end="23531" title="RAF Martlesham Heath" label="RAF Martlesham Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711002" start="24025" end="24036" title="Albert Percival Rowe" label="Albert Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q444789" start="25117" end="25132" title="acoustic mirror" label="acoustic mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="25804" end="25812" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421115" start="26095" end="26107" title="Philip Cunliffe-Lister, 1st Earl of Swinton" label="Lord Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="26800" end="26811" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873771" start="26931" end="26944" title="Bawdsey Manor" label="Bawdsey Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698095" start="26965" end="26998" title="Air Ministry Experimental Station" label="Air Ministry Experimental Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275163" start="27086" end="27097" title="RAF Bawdsey" label="RAF Bawdsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="28174" end="28197" title="Shortwave radio" label="high-frequency spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502853" start="28561" end="28578" title="frequency agility" label="frequency agility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065684" start="28904" end="28914" title="Radiogoniometer" label="goniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="29775" end="29795" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647052" start="29849" end="29858" title="AC Cossor" label="AC Cossor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711002" start="30476" end="30486" title="A. P. Rowe" label="A. P. Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="30611" end="30624" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431935" start="30746" end="30761" title="RAF Biggin Hill" label="RAF Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253051" start="31539" end="31553" title="Dowding system" label="Dowding system"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="31926" end="31942" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="32107" end="32113" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="32130" end="32138" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q564157" start="32394" end="32403" title="Cierva C.30" label="Avro Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q208708" start="32404" end="32412" title="autogyro" label="autogyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128430" start="32939" end="32970" title="British High Commission, Ottawa" label="British High Commission, Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026673" start="33302" end="33309" title="Ventnor" label="Ventnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="33311" end="33324" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738938" start="34024" end="34035" title="AMES Type 7" label="AMES Type 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610846" start="34068" end="34071" title="Ground control intercept" label="GCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840725" start="34283" end="34306" title="plan position indicator" label="plan position indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="34472" end="34500" title="Identification friend or foe" label="Identification friend or foe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="34866" end="34883" title="analogue computer" label="analogue computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="35776" end="35786" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q695738" start="35935" end="35951" title="air raid warning" label="air raid warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="37713" end="37732" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="37973" end="37993" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043665" start="38004" end="38024" title="No. 602 Squadron RAF" label="No. 602 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="38339" end="38351" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277424" start="38652" end="38657" title="ROTOR" label="ROTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q59607562" start="39319" end="39331" title="AMES Type 80" label="AMES Type 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="39710" end="39725" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="39739" end="39755" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="39808" end="39819" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896496" start="39832" end="39844" title="Great Baddow" label="Great Baddow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757792" start="39869" end="39892" title="Marconi Research Centre" label="Marconi Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254041" start="39926" end="39934" title="Canewdon" label="Canewdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658652" start="40167" end="40196" title="Swingate transmitting station" label="Swingate transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275598" start="40357" end="40369" title="RAF Stenigot" label="RAF Stenigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275596" start="40576" end="40592" title="RRH Staxton Wold" label="RRH Staxton Wold"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008247" start="40741" end="40758" title="Linesman/Mediator" label="Linesman/Mediator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275179" start="41158" end="41176" title="RAF Blakehill Farm" label="RAF Blakehill Farm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41331" end="41345" title="The Secret War (TV series)#Episode 2: &amp;quot;To See for a Hundred Miles&amp;quot; (12 January 1977)" label="The Secret War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="41751" end="41783" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625855" start="41843" end="41857" title="bistatic radar" label="bistatic radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534042" start="42676" end="42689" title="curtain array" label="curtain array"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="42715" end="42737" title="Polarisation (waves)" label="horizontally polarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040092" start="43038" end="43047" title="side lobe" label="side lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680954" start="43540" end="43552" title="Adcock array" label="Adcock array"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065684" start="44122" end="44137" title="radiogoniometer" label="radiogoniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="45769" end="45774" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="45839" end="45845" title="Valve (electronics)" label="valves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45912" end="45937" title="Diffusion pump#Oil diffusion pumps" label="oil diffusion vacuum pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q587500" start="46184" end="46202" title="Hartley oscillator" label="Hartley oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q176121" start="46314" end="46323" title="thyratron" label="thyratron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261121" start="46834" end="46847" title="National Grid (Great Britain)" label="National Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268223" start="47119" end="47135" title="Phase-shift oscillator" label="Dippy oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513113" start="47917" end="47936" title="time base generator" label="time base generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647052" start="48557" end="48568" title="A.C. Cossor" label="A.C. Cossor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332683" start="48607" end="48622" title="superheterodyne" label="superheterodyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48865" end="48882" title="Amplifier#Class B" label="Class B amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q244948" start="49015" end="49037" title="intermediate frequency" label="intermediate frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="51214" end="51231" title="polar coordinates" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538674" start="51793" end="51804" title="slant range" label="slant range"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="51991" end="52003" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275171" start="52402" end="52420" title="RAF Bentley Priory" label="RAF Bentley Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="53580" end="53590" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733252" start="53630" end="53645" title="barrage balloon" label="barrage balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q448717" start="53735" end="53755" title="Air Raid Precautions" label="Air Raid Precautions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040092" start="53869" end="53878" title="side lobe" label="side lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538674" start="55185" end="55196" title="slant range" label="slant range"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="55348" end="55360" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158688" start="55366" end="55386" title="right angle triangle" label="right angle triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q104962" start="55412" end="55422" title="hypotenuse" label="hypotenuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="57726" end="57747" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999781" start="57928" end="57948" title="stochastic resonance" label="stochastic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538674" start="58717" end="58728" title="slant range" label="slant range"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="59458" end="59475" title="electromechanical" label="electromechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="59476" end="59493" title="analogue computer" label="analogue computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256545" start="59607" end="59614" title="synchro" label="synchro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713498" start="60079" end="60091" title="Stepping switch" label="uniselectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559301" start="60604" end="60612" title="T-square" label="T-square"/>
<link wikidata="Q557119" start="61314" end="61348" title="LZ 130 Graf Zeppelin" label="LZ130 &amp;quot;Graf Zeppelin II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="61475" end="61485" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="61489" end="61499" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="61959" end="61997" title="Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt" label="Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="62279" end="62296" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Battle of Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639249" start="62347" end="62363" title="GL Mk. I radar" label="gun-laying radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q100341" start="62396" end="62412" title="Wolfgang Martini" label="Wolfgang Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072285" start="63963" end="63984" title="zinc cadmium sulphide" label="zinc cadmium sulphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435398" start="64244" end="64264" title="Color gel" label="yellow plastic sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="66017" end="66034" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861428" start="66766" end="66800" title="Battle of the Heligoland Bight (1939)" label="Air Battle of the Heligoland Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455960" start="66819" end="66830" title="Freya radar" label="Freya radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="67601" end="67614" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Junkers Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="67615" end="67626" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q531030" start="68469" end="68481" title="Cap Gris Nez" label="Cap Gris Nez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883953" start="68750" end="68770" title="Operation Donnerkeil" label="Operation Donnerkeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="69833" end="69852" title="acoustic delay line" label="acoustic delay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="70954" end="70957" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="72047" end="72061" title="high frequency" label="high frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="72066" end="72069" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="72585" end="72605" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="73064" end="73080" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q831463" start="73082" end="73101" title="Bristol Beaufighter" label="Bristol Beaufighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q895128" start="73106" end="73126" title="Boulton Paul Defiant" label="Boulton Paul Defiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610846" start="73271" end="73301" title="Ground control intercept" label="Ground Control Intercept Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517472" start="73817" end="73833" title="History of radar" label="History of radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q444789" start="73836" end="73851" title="Acoustic mirror" label="Acoustic mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="73854" end="73873" title="Battle of the Beams" label="Battle of the Beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="73876" end="73916" title="British military history of World War II" label="British military history of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067874" start="73919" end="73933" title="Chain Home Low" label="Chain Home Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124733" start="73936" end="73960" title="Civilian Technical Corps" label="Civilian Technical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610846" start="73963" end="73993" title="Ground-controlled interception" label="Ground-controlled interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277424" start="73996" end="74001" title="ROTOR" label="ROTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066774" start="74004" end="74032" title="RAF Air Defence Radar Museum" label="RAF Air Defence Radar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956081" start="74035" end="74060" title="Castles in the Sky (film)" label="Castles in the Sky (film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382755" wikidata="Q62389" url="?curid=382755" title="Icelandic Commonwealth">
<text>The Icelandic Commonwealth, also known as the Icelandic Free State, was the political unit existing in Iceland between the establishment of the Althing () in 930 and the pledge of fealty to the Norwegian king with the Old Covenant in 1262. With the probable exception of hermitic Irish monks known as Papar, Iceland was an uninhabited island until around 874.

The Icelandic Commonwealth had a unique political system whereby chieftains (&quot;goðar&quot;) established a common legal code and settled judicial disputes at the Althing, a national assembly. However, there was no executive body in Iceland that enforced the legal code. The Icelandic Commonwealth has consequently been characterized as a stateless society. During the 13th century, Iceland came under the control of the Kingdom of Norway.

==Goðorð system==

The medieval Icelandic state had a unique judicial structure. The first settlers of Iceland were greatly influenced by their Norwegian roots when creating their own form of government. They wanted to avoid the strong centralized authority of Harald Fairhair from which some of them had fled, but they also wanted to replicate the Norwegian tradition of laws and district legal assemblies (&quot;Þing&quot;). This created a unique structure.

The most powerful and elite leaders in Iceland were the chieftains (sing. &quot;goði&quot;, pl. &quot;goðar&quot;). The office of the &quot;goði&quot; was called the &quot;goðorð&quot;. The &quot;goðorð&quot; was not delimited by strict geographical boundaries. Thus, a free man could choose to support any of the &quot;goðar&quot; of his district. The supporters of the &quot;goðar&quot; were called &quot;Þingmenn&quot; (&quot;assembly people&quot;). In exchange for the &quot;goði&quot; protecting his interests, the &quot;Þingmaðr&quot; would provide armed support to his &quot;goði&quot; during feuds or conflicts. The &quot;Þingmenn&quot; were also required to attend regional and national assemblies.

On a regional level, the &quot;goðar&quot; of the thirteen district assemblies convened meetings every spring to settle local disputes. The &quot;goðar&quot; also served as the leaders of the Alþingi, the national assembly of Iceland. Today, the Alþingi is the oldest parliamentary institution in existence. It began with the regional assembly at Kjalarness established by Þorsteinn Ingólfsson, son of the first settler. The leaders of the Kjalarnessþing appointed a man named Úlfljótr to study the laws in Norway. He spent three years in Norway and returned with the foundation of Úlfljótr&#x27;s Law, which would form the basis for Iceland&#x27;s national assembly. Sections of his law code are preserved in the Landnámabók, (&quot;Book of Settlements&quot;). The first Alþingi assembly convened around the year 930 at Þingvellir, (&quot;Assembly Plains&quot;). The Alþingi served as a public gathering at which people from all over the country met for two weeks every June. The Alþingi revolved around the &quot;Lögrétta&quot;, the legislative council of the assembly, which was responsible for reviewing and amending the nation&#x27;s laws. The Lögrétta comprised the 39 &quot;goðar&quot; and their advisors. They also appointed a Lawspeaker (&quot;lögsögumaður&quot;) once every three years. The Lawspeaker recited and clarified laws at Lögberg (&quot;Law Rock&quot;), located at the center of Þingvellir. The descendants of Ingólfr Arnarson, the first settler of Iceland, held the ceremonial position of &quot;allsherjargoði&quot; and had the role of sanctifying the Alþingi each year.

==Court system==
Iceland was divided into four administrative regions called &quot;fjörðungar&quot; (farthings). Each of these was ruled by nine &quot;goðar&quot;. The Alþingi was made up of the four Quarter Courts (&quot;fjórðungsdómur&quot;). This judicial body of Iceland consisted of 36 judges, each appointed by one of the &quot;goðar&quot;. These courts tried individual cases and served as a higher judicial authority to the regional courts. The rulings of the quarter judges had to be agreed upon by a strong majority: if only six of the judges disagreed, then the case was deadlocked and dismissed. In 1005, this problem was solved by the creation of a Fifth Court, an appeals court based on a simple majority. Once a court decided a party was guilty, however, it had no executive authority to carry out a sentence. Instead, enforcement of a verdict became the responsibility of the injured party or his family.

Penalties often included financial compensation or outlawry. However, these were considered by some to be insufficient penalties and the Alþingi was only moderately successful at stopping feuds. According to Magnus Magnusson, the courts were &quot;an uneasy substitute for vengeance.&quot; The most severe punishments were outlawry and three years&#x27; exile. Outlaws lost all property rights and could be killed without any punishment for the killers. Exiles who failed to leave Iceland became outlaws.

Historian Birgir Solvason states that Icelandic society was &quot;more peaceful and cooperative than its contemporaries&quot;. In England and Norway, by contrast, &quot;the period from about 800 to 1200 is a period of continuous struggle; high in both violence and killings&quot;. Historian Jón Viðar Sigurðsson argues that the introduction of Christianity to Iceland illustrates how effective and significant arbitration was in Iceland. At the Christianisation of Iceland in 1000, the Alþingi outlawed public celebration of pagan rituals and decreed that in order to prevent an invasion, all Icelanders must be baptized. 

In 1117, the law code of the Icelandic Commonwealth was put into writing, becoming known as the Gray Goose Laws.

===Life within the system===
Knowledge of the system of government in medieval Iceland stems mainly from two main primary sources: the written law code, and Íslendingabók, or the Book of the Icelanders by Ari the Learned. The impact of the legislative and judicial systems on Icelandic settlers is a common theme in many of the other Icelandic sagas. Works such as &quot;Njáls saga&quot; and the &quot;Laxdæla saga&quot; give many details, but their accuracy has been disputed. &quot;Eyrbyggja saga&quot; details the transition from paganism to Christianity within Icelandic settlement under the direction of Snorri Goði, or &quot;Snorri the Priest.&quot; The emphasis on justice and the conviction in their system of governance is reflected within the saga: &quot;They say we shall suffer setbacks in court; we must plead for support from powerful chieftains: but Arnkel will argue an eloquent case, he will sway judge and jury – I have faith in justice.&quot;

Chieftains were highly reliant on the support of farmers in their domain in the 11th and 12th centuries, and did thus not have princely powers or subjects in the districts that they represented. Around 1190, the number of chieftaincies declined and power started to centralize in individual chieftains controlling larger regions of the country. By ca 1220, the country was a loose federation of 10–12 regional powers.

According to historian Jón Viðar Sigurðsson, &quot;a chieftain based his power on his personal qualities, his wealth, friends, assembly men, kinsmen and in-laws. The cleverest, the most helpful, the wealthiest and the most generous became the most powerful ones.&quot; Historian Árni Daniel Júliusson further notes that the food production of the peasantry was the &quot;basis of political and military power&quot;.

Peasant rebellions, traditionally defined, never occurred in Iceland, even though peasant unrest was fairly common.

Slavery was practiced in Iceland from settlement to the early 12th century. Icelandic law allowed individuals guilty of theft or failure to pay debts to be enslaved. Slaves were allowed to marry and have children, which meant that a class of slaves could self-perpetuate. Slavery likely declined in the second half of the 12th century and was extremely rare by the 15th century.

==Warfare==
The followers of the &quot;goðar&quot; owed them military service. They were organized into platoons or companies based on their social status and equipment, and these formed expeditionary armies or leiðangrs. Icelandic military tradition of the time closely followed developments in Norway. No organized cavalry formations or formations of troops equipped with projectile weapons are recorded: instead the bulk of the forces were formed in units of light, medium and heavy infantry, with bowmen or slingers distributed among the infantry units, operating as light support skirmishers. Before the end of the Commonwealth, at least 21 fortresses and castles had been built in Iceland. During the Age of the Sturlungs, the average battle involved fewer than 1000 men, with an average casualty rate of only 15%. This relatively low casualty rate might be attributed to the blood-feud mentality which permeated Icelandic society, which meant that the defeated army could not honourably be slaughtered to a man.

== Religion ==

The first Bishop of Skalholt was Ísleifur Gissurarson, who was elected by the Althing in 1056. After his son Gissur was installed as bishop, the power and wealth of the church quickly grew due to the introduction of tithing, the first tax introduced in Iceland. The church became the second unifying institution in the country after the Althing. Continuing similar patterns from the pre-Christian era, church estates could be owned by &quot;goðar&quot; who would then get a portion of the tithe.

==Decline and fall==
In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs, the Commonwealth began to suffer from chaos and division resulting from internal disputes. Originally, the (chieftains) functioned more as a contractual relationship than a fixed geographic chieftaincy. However, by 1220 this form of communal leadership was replaced by dominant regional individuals who battled with one another for more control. One historian argues the chaos and violence of this period stem from an imbalance of power and changes in the nature of Icelandic warfare. Whereas the number of had been at least 39 early in the Icelandic Commonwealth, a few powerful families had consolidated control over most of the in the late 12th century. 

There are several factors that may have resulted in the consolidation of . The separation of secular and ecclesiastical power led some families and regional networks to become stronger at the expense of others, leading to an imbalance of power. The introduction of tithe may have increased the wealth of chieftains that controlled the churches. The introduction of pitched battles and harassment of farmers on a regional basis raised the stakes and dangers, which may have incentivized consolidation. An increase in population along with a resource shortage may have made commoners more dependent on chieftains.

The King of Norway began to exert pressure on his Icelandic vassals to bring the country under his rule. He commissioned Icelandic chieftains to become part of his body of retainers and to pursue his interests in Iceland. The King&#x27;s role in Icelandic affairs started in 1220, and had become strong by 1240 (Icelanders were starting to accept the King&#x27;s choice of chieftains). Over the period 1240–1260, the King consolidated power in Iceland. A combination of discontent with domestic hostilities and pressure from the King of Norway led the Icelandic chieftains to accept Norway&#x27;s Haakon IV as king by the signing of the (&quot;Old Covenant&quot;) in 1262. According to historian Sverrir Jakobsson, three Icelanders played a central role in bringing Iceland under the King of Norway: Gissur Þorvaldsson (for getting farmers to agree to pay taxes to the King), Hrafn Oddsson (for pressuring Gissur into supporting the King, and getting farmers in the Westfjords to submit to the King) and bishop Brandur Jónsson (for getting his relatives in the East Fjords to submit to the King).

By 1264, all Icelandic chieftains had sworn allegiance to the King of Norway. The end of the Icelandic Commonwealth is typically dated to the Old Covenant (1262–1264) or to the adoption of Jónsbók in 1281.

== Contemporary libertarian perspectives ==
According to the libertarian theorist David D. Friedman, &quot;Medieval Icelandic institutions have several peculiar and interesting characteristics; they might almost have been invented by a mad economist to test the lengths to which market systems could supplant government in its most fundamental functions.&quot; While not directly labeling it anarcho-capitalist, he argues that the legal system came close to being a real-world anarcho-capitalist legal system. Although noting that there was a single legal system, Friedman argues that enforcement of the law was entirely private and highly capitalist, providing some evidence of how such a society would function. &quot;Even where the Icelandic legal system recognized an essentially &#x27;public&#x27; offense, it dealt with it by giving some individual (in some cases chosen by lot from those affected) the right to pursue the case and collect the resulting fine, thus fitting it into an essentially private system.&quot; Commenting on its political structure, libertarian scholar Roderick Long remarks:

Summarizing his research, Friedman concludes in part:

A 2021 study by economists Vincent Geloso and Peter T. Leeson concluded that:

Friedman and Bruce L. Benson argued that the Icelandic Commonwealth saw significant economic and social progress in the absence of systems of criminal law, an executive, or bureaucracy.

== See also ==

* History of Iceland
* History of Icelandic nationality
* Icelandic nobility
* Settlement of Iceland
* Sagas of Icelanders

== Citations ==
=== Notes ===

===References===
== External links ==
* Medieval Iceland: Society, Sagas, and Power by Jesse L. Byock</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62389" start="4" end="26" title="Icelandic Commonwealth" label="Icelandic Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62389" start="46" end="66" title="Icelandic Commonwealth" label="Icelandic Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="103" end="110" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="144" end="151" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813294" start="180" end="186" title="fealty" label="fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="194" end="208" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="Norwegian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717020" start="218" end="230" title="Old Covenant (Iceland)" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="271" end="277" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530553" start="301" end="306" title="Papar" label="Papar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708603" start="702" end="719" title="stateless society" label="stateless society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196956" start="784" end="801" title="Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="1065" end="1080" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501813" start="1321" end="1331" title="Goði" label="chieftains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480559" start="2451" end="2459" title="Úlfljótr" label="Úlfljótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q217835" start="2688" end="2699" title="Landnámabók" label="Landnámabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="2795" end="2805" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466992" start="3209" end="3219" title="Lawspeaker" label="Lawspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711348" start="3316" end="3323" title="Lögberg" label="Lögberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209138" start="3404" end="3420" title="Ingólfr Arnarson" label="Ingólfr Arnarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480165" start="3490" end="3504" title="allsherjargoði" label="allsherjargoði"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4540" end="4548" title="outlawry#In other countries" label="outlawry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965816" start="5440" end="5467" title="Christianisation of Iceland" label="Christianisation of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551261" start="5715" end="5730" title="Gray Goose Laws" label="Gray Goose Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q355194" start="5938" end="5953" title="Ari Thorgilsson" label="Ari the Learned"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="6067" end="6082" title="Icelandic sagas" label="Icelandic sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844119" start="6104" end="6114" title="Njáls saga" label="Njáls saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q122708" start="6135" end="6147" title="Laxdæla saga" label="Laxdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385875" start="6217" end="6231" title="Eyrbyggja saga" label="Eyrbyggja saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357734" start="6342" end="6353" title="Snorri Goði" label="Snorri Goði"/>
<link wikidata="Q15376278" start="8240" end="8248" title="leiðangr" label="leiðangr"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="8515" end="8523" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="8540" end="8548" title="Sling (weapon)" label="slingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="8675" end="8683" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="8736" end="8756" title="Age of the Sturlungs" label="Age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q876603" start="9075" end="9093" title="Diocese of Skálholt" label="Bishop of Skalholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q291836" start="9098" end="9118" title="Ísleifur Gissurarson" label="Ísleifur Gissurarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364802" start="9174" end="9180" title="Gissur Ísleifsson" label="Gissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="9281" end="9288" title="Tithe" label="tithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="9614" end="9634" title="Age of the Sturlungs" label="Age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="10054" end="10072" title="Balance of power (international relations)" label="imbalance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="10560" end="10565" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="10968" end="10974" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="11505" end="11514" title="Haakon IV" label="Haakon IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026239" start="12183" end="12202" title="Law of Iceland" label="adoption of Jónsbók"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="12274" end="12285" title="libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q353915" start="12295" end="12312" title="David D. Friedman" label="David D. Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="12605" end="12623" title="anarcho-capitalism" label="anarcho-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593193" start="13421" end="13436" title="Peter T. Leeson" label="Peter T. Leeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977814" start="13467" end="13482" title="Bruce L. Benson" label="Bruce L. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151128" start="13659" end="13677" title="History of Iceland" label="History of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864924" start="13680" end="13712" title="History of Icelandic nationality" label="History of Icelandic nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q353672" start="13715" end="13733" title="Nobility in Iceland" label="Icelandic nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725768" start="13736" end="13757" title="Settlement of Iceland" label="Settlement of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="13760" end="13779" title="Sagas of Icelanders" label="Sagas of Icelanders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382757" wikidata="Q5239590" url="?curid=382757" title="David Scott (painter)">
<text>David Scott (October 1806 – 5 March 1849) was a Scottish historical painter.

==Life==
Scott was the brother of William Bell Scott. He was born at Parliament Steps, off Parliament Square in Edinburgh, where he attended the Royal High School, and studied art under his father, Robert Scott, the engraver.

In 1828 he exhibited his first oil picture, the &quot;Hopes of Early Genius dispelled by Death,&quot; which was followed by &quot;Cain, Nimrod, Adam and Eve singing their Morning Hymn,&quot; &quot;Sarpedon carried by Sleep and Death,&quot; and other subjects of a poetic and imaginative character.

In 1829 he became a member of the Scottish Academy, and in 1832 visited Italy, where he spent more than a year in study. While in Rome he executed a large symbolical painting, entitled the &quot;Agony of Discord, or the Household Gods Destroyed.&quot; The works of his later years include &quot;Vasco da Gama encountering the Spirit of the Storm,&quot; a picture immense in size and most powerful in conception finished in 1842, and now preserved in the Trinity House, Leith; the &quot;Duke of Gloucester entering the Water Gate of Calais&quot; (1841); the &quot;Alchemist&quot; (1818), &quot;Queen Elizabeth at the Globe Theatre&quot; (1840) and &quot;Peter the Hermit&quot; (1845), remarkable for varied and elaborate character painting; and &quot;Ariel and Caliban&quot; (1837) and the &quot;Triumph of Love&quot; (1846), distinguished by beauty of colouring and depth of poetic feeling. The most important of his religious subjects are the &quot;Descent from the Cross&quot; (1835) and the &quot;Crucifixion the Dead Rising&quot; (1844).

Scott also executed several remarkable series of designs. Two of these—the &quot;Monograms of Man&quot; and the illustrations to Coleridge&#x27;s &quot;Ancient Mariner&quot;—were etched by his own hand, and published in 1831 and 1837 respectively, while his subjects from &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot; and Nichol&#x27;s &quot;Architecture of the Heavens&quot; were issued after his death.

Scott lived at 5 Mary Place, part of Raeburn Place in Stockbridge, Edinburgh. He died at his studio in Easter Dalry House (which he had leased from 1845) in western Edinburgh (now called Orwell Place). He died of a long illness contracted in Italy. Scott was buried in Dean Cemetery, and a monument designed by his brother was set in 1860. The grave lies in the south-east section not far from the main entrance. It bears the motto &quot;ars longa vita brevis&quot;: Art is long, life is short.

His main masterpiece is &quot;Vasco de Gama at the Cape of Good Hope&quot; which is held at Trinity House of Leith. In 1850 he created 40 illustrations for a new publication of &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress.&quot;

==Publications==

Scott occasionally wrote for &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s Magazine&quot; including &quot;The Peculiarities of Thought and Style&quot; (1839) and several articles on specific artists in 1840.
He created a pamphlet guide &quot;British, French and German Painting.&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Macmillan, Duncan (1984), &quot;Scottish Painting: The Later Enlightenment&quot;, in Parker, Geoff (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 19, Winter 1984, pp. 25 –27, 
*Obituary, from &quot;Tait&#x27;s Edinburgh magazine&quot;, April 1849, p. 269.
* This work in turn cites:
**Scott, William Bell. &quot;Memoir of David Scott, R.S.A.&quot; (Adam &amp; Charles Black, 1850)
**Gray, John M. &quot;David Scott, R.S.A. and his Works, with a catalogue of his paintings, engravings, and Designs&quot; (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1884).

==External links==
*Self-Portrait of David Scott (National Galleries of Scotland)
*Satan springing from the ear of Eve at the touch of Ithuriel&#x27;s Spear</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5239590" start="0" end="11" title="David Scott (painter)" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="48" end="56" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075556" start="112" end="130" title="William Bell Scott" label="William Bell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="190" end="199" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171033" start="223" end="240" title="Royal High School (Edinburgh)" label="Royal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349658" start="276" end="288" title="Robert Scott (engraver)" label="Robert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="899" end="912" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842854" start="1058" end="1078" title="Trinity House, Leith" label="Trinity House, Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="1776" end="1785" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="1799" end="1814" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253446" start="1963" end="1969" title="John Pringle Nichol" label="Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617942" start="2101" end="2123" title="Stockbridge, Edinburgh" label="Stockbridge, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246062" start="2316" end="2329" title="Dean Cemetery" label="Dean Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="2573" end="2586" title="Vasco de Gama" label="Vasco de Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="2594" end="2611" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842854" start="2635" end="2657" title="Trinity House of Leith" label="Trinity House of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="2726" end="2753" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529971" start="2815" end="2840" title="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845081" start="3080" end="3097" title="Duncan Macmillan (art historian)" label="Macmillan, Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="3141" end="3154" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="3192" end="3202" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676454" start="3265" end="3295" title="Tait&amp;#x27;s Edinburgh magazine" label="Tait&amp;#x27;s Edinburgh magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382764" wikidata="Q8015671" url="?curid=382764" title="William Minto">
<text>William Minto (10 October 18451 March 1893) was a Scottish academic, critic, editor, journalist and novelist.

==Life ==
Minto was born at Nether Auchintoul, near Alford, Aberdeenshire. He was son of James Minto, a farmer, and his wife Barbara Copland.

He was educated at the University of Aberdeen, graduating as an M.A. in 1865 and &quot;winning the leading prizes in mathematics, classics and philosophy&quot;. In 1866 he began studying at Merton College, Oxford, but left the following year without taking a degree.

He became assistant professor under Alexander Bain, who held the Regius Chair of Logic and the Regius Chair of English Literature at the University of Aberdeen. During this period he wrote the book, &quot;Manual of English Prose Literature, Biographical and Critical&quot;, which was published in 1872 and which was &quot;distinguished by sound judgment and sympathetic appreciation&quot;.

In 1873 Minto moved to London and from 1874 to 1878 he contributed literary and political articles to &quot;The Examiner&quot;, and later he was on the leader-writing staff of &quot;The Daily News&quot; and &quot;The Pall Mall Gazette&quot;. During this period Minto &quot;was considered to be an able and pungent critic of Lord Beaconsfield&#x27;s imperial policies&quot;.

In 1880 Bain retired and Minto succeeded him as Regius Professor of Logic and English Literature at Aberdeen, a post he held until his death. &quot;Though Logic and Rhetoric had long been combined in a single Chair at the Scottish universities, Minto&#x27;s occupancy of the Chair was marked by a much great[er] [&quot;sic&quot;] emphasis on the study and teaching of literature than logic.&quot;

==Works written by Minto==
===Nonfiction===
*&quot;Manual of English Prose Literature&quot; (1872)
*&quot;Characteristics of English Poets from Chaucer to Shirley&quot; (1874)
*&quot;Logic: Inductive and Deductive&quot; (1893) 
*&quot;Daniel Defoe&quot; in the &quot;English Men of Letters&quot; series (Macmillan, 1879)
*&quot;University Extension Manual on Logic&quot; (1893)
*&quot;Plain Principles of Prose Composition&quot; (1893)
*&quot;English Literature under the Georges&quot; (1894); republished, with a biographical introduction by William Knight, as &quot;The Literature of the Georgian Era&quot; (1895).

===Fiction===
*&quot;The Crack of Doom&quot; (1886) – a science fiction novel
*&quot;The Mediation of Ralph Hardelot&quot; (1888) – a historical novel set during the Peasants&#x27; Revolt
*&quot;Was She Good or Bad?&quot; (1889) – a humorous novel of modern manners

===Articles===
*Numerous articles on literary subjects (including Lord Byron, Geoffrey Chaucer, Charles Dickens, Edgar Allan Poe and William Wordsworth) in the 9th edition (1875–89) of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; and reprinted in the tenth edition (1902).
*Articles on Thomas Dekker, John Dryden, John Stuart Mill, Alexander Pope, Sir Walter Scott, Edmund Spenser, Sir Richard Steele, Laurence Sterne, and William Wordsworth that were partly authored by Minto were published in the eleventh edition (1911) of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; and acknowledged as such at the end of each article.

==Works edited by Minto==
*Sir Walter Scott, &quot;Lay of the Last Minstrel&quot;, Oxford, 1886
*Sir Walter Scott, &quot;Lady of the Lake&quot;, 1891
*Sir Walter Scott, &quot;Poetical works of Sir Walter Scott, Bart.&quot;, 1887
*&quot;Autobiographical Notes of the Life of William Bell Scott&quot;, 1892

==Family==
On 8 January 1880 Minto married Cornelia Beatrice, daughter of the Rev. Lewis Griffiths, rector of Swindon, Gloucestershire. His health began to decline in 1891. A trip to Greece gave him some respite but he died of his ailments on 1 March 1893.

He had two sons, William and Charles. On 2 July 1919 the elder son, Lt. Col. William Bain Griffiths Minto, &quot;died of injuries received while firing [a] peace salute at Aberdeen&quot;.

==References==

Attribution:

==External links==
* William Minto on SF Encyclopedia.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8015671" start="0" end="13" title="William Minto" label="William Minto"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="50" end="58" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638187" start="163" end="184" title="Alford, Aberdeenshire" label="Alford, Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="277" end="299" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="444" end="466" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q384882" start="558" end="572" title="Alexander Bain (philosopher)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138652" start="587" end="593" title="Regius professor" label="Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="603" end="608" title="Logic" label="Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="633" end="651" title="English Literature" label="English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605160" start="1095" end="1109" title="The Daily News (UK)" label="The Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="1126" end="1147" title="The Pall Mall Gazette" label="The Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="1237" end="1254" title="Lord Beaconsfield" label="Lord Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="1921" end="1933" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378327" start="1953" end="1975" title="English Men of Letters" label="English Men of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="2470" end="2491" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="2637" end="2647" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2649" end="2665" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="2667" end="2682" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="2684" end="2699" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="2704" end="2722" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="2766" end="2789" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q336189" start="2852" end="2865" title="Thomas Dekker (writer)" label="Thomas Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="2867" end="2878" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="2880" end="2896" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="2898" end="2912" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="2914" end="2930" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="2932" end="2946" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="2948" end="2966" title="Sir Richard Steele" label="Sir Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="2968" end="2983" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="2989" end="3007" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3213" end="3229" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3283" end="3299" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3337" end="3353" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658454" start="3602" end="3626" title="Swindon, Gloucestershire" label="Swindon, Gloucestershire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382766" wikidata="Q1294480" url="?curid=382766" title="Edwin Chadwick">
<text>Sir Edwin Chadwick KCB (24 January 18006 July 1890) was an English social reformer who is noted for his leadership in reforming the Poor Laws in England and instituting major reforms in urban sanitation and public health. A disciple of Utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham, he was most active between 1832 and 1854; after that he held minor positions, and his views were largely ignored. Chadwick pioneered the use of scientific surveys to identify all phases of a complex social problem, and pioneered the use of systematic long-term inspection programmes to make sure the reforms operated as planned.

==Early life==
Edwin Chadwick was born on 24 January 1800 at Longsight, Manchester, Lancashire His mother, Teresa, died when he was still a young child, yet to be named. His father, James Chadwick, tutored the scientist John Dalton in music and botany and was considered to be an advanced liberal politician, thus exposing young Edwin to political and social ideas. His grandfather, Andrew Chadwick, had been a close friend of the Methodist theologian John Wesley.

He began his education at a small local school and then at a boarding school in Stockport, where he studied until he was 10. When his family moved to London in 1810, Chadwick continued his education with the help of private tutors, his father and a great deal of self-teaching.

His father remarried in the early 1820s; Edwin&#x27;s younger half-brother was baseball icon Henry Chadwick, born in 1824.

At 18, Chadwick decided to pursue a career in law and undertook an apprenticeship with a solicitor. In 1823, he enrolled in law school at The Temple in London. On 26 November 1830 he was called to the bar, becoming a barrister.

Called to the bar without independent means, he sought to support himself by literary work such as his work on &#x27;Applied Science and its Place in Democracy&#x27;, and his essays in the &quot;Westminster Review&quot;, mainly on different methods of applying scientific knowledge to the practice of government. He became friends with two of the leading philosophers of the day, John Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham. Bentham engaged him as a literary assistant and left him a large legacy. He also became acquaintanced with Thomas Southwood Smith, Neil Arnott and James Kay-Shuttleworth, all doctors.

From his exposure to social reform and under the influence of his friends, he began to devote his efforts to sanitary reform. In 1832, Chadwick began on his path to make improvements with sanitary and health conditions.

==Reformer==

In 1832, he was employed by the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the operation of the Poor Law, and in 1833, he was made a full member of that commission. Chadwick and Nassau William Senior drafted the famous report of 1834, recommending the reform of the old law. Under the 1834 system, individual parishes were formed into Poor Law Unions, and each Poor Law Union was to have a union workhouse. Chadwick favoured a more centralised system of administration than the one adopted, and he felt the Poor Law reform of 1834 should have provided for the management of poor law relief by salaried officers controlled from a central board, with the boards of guardians acting merely as inspectors.

In 1834, he was appointed secretary to the Poor Law commissioners. Unwilling to administer an act of which he was largely the author in any way other than as he thought best, he found it hard to get along with his superiors. The disagreement, among others, contributed to the dissolution of the Poor Law Commission in 1847. His chief contribution to political controversy was his belief in entrusting certain departments of local affairs to trained and selected experts instead of to representatives, elected on the principle of local self-government.

===Sanitation===
Following a serious outbreak of typhus in 1838, Chadwick convinced the Poor Law Board that an enquiry was required, and this was initially carried out by his doctor friends Arnot and Southwood Smith, assisted by another doctor from Manchester, James Kay Shuttleworth. This was the first time in British history that doctors were employed to look at the conditions which might contribute to ill health in the population. Chadwick sent questionnaires to every Poor Law Union, and talked to surveyors, builders, prison governors, police officers and factory inspectors to obtain additional data about the lives of the poor. He edited the information himself, and prepared it for publication. His &quot;Report on The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain&quot;, begun in 1839 and published in 1842, was researched and published at his own expense, and became the best-selling publication produced by the Stationery Office to date. A supplementary report was also published in 1843.

He employed John Roe, the surveyor for the district of Holborn and Finsbury who had invented the egg-shaped sewer, to conduct experiments on the most efficient ways to construct drains, the results of which were incorporated into the report, and the summary included eight points, including the absolute necessity of better water supplies and of a drainage system to remove waste, as ways to diminish premature mortality. Evidence given by Dr Dyce Guthrie convinced Chadwick that every house should have a permanent water supply, rather than the intermittent supplies from standpipes that were often provided. The report caught the public imagination, and the government had to set up a Royal Commission on the Health of Towns to consider the issues and recommend legislation. Its chairman was the Duke of Buccleuch, and there were thirteen members, including the engineers Robert Stephenson and William Cubitt. Chadwick acted as secretary in an unofficial capacity, and seems to have dominated the proceedings.

The Commission took evidence from Robert Thom, who had designed a water supply system for Greenock, Thomas Wicksteed, who was the engineer for the East London Waterworks Company, and Thomas Hawksley from the Trent Waterworks, Nottingham. These confirmed his ideas about constant water supplies, and he developed a model which he called the &quot;venous and arterial system.&quot; Each house would have a constant water supply, and water-closets would ensure that soil was discharged into egg-shaped sewers, to be carried away and spread on the land as manure, preventing rivers from becoming polluted. Followed the publication of the commission&#x27;s report, the Health of Towns Association was formed and various city-based branches were created. Chadwick later helped to ensure that the Waterworks Clauses Act 1847 became law, to limit the profits that water supply companies could make to 10 per cent, and requiring them to comply with reasonable demands for water. This included a constant supply of wholesome water for houses, and a supply for cleansing sewers and watering streets.

Chadwick wanted to see his ideas implemented over a wide area, and set about forming a company to supply water to towns, to ensure their drainage and cleansing, and to use the refuse for agricultural production. It was to have the grandiose title &quot;The British, Colonial and Foreign Drainage, Water Supply and Towns Improvement Company&quot;, with an initial capital of £1 million, but it was the time of the Railway Mania, and he struggled to raise the finance against such competition. The company when it was eventually registered became the more modest Towns Improvement Company. Railways continued to dominate the money market, and the company was wound up after just three years. Chadwick understood that both water supply and drainage were important, since replacing earth-closets with water closets resulted in cesspools overflowing and making sanitary conditions worse, unless there were sewers to carry the waste away. This led to a rift forming between him and Hawksley, who had initially worked closely with him but who later took on water supply projects which did not include any requirement for drainage.

===Public Health Act===
Chadwick&#x27;s report led to the Public Health Act 1848, which was the first instance of the British government taking responsibility for the health of its citizens. It had been introduced by Lord Morpeth in 1847, with the aim or requiring every town to supply water to every house, which they could do by building their own waterworks or by liaising with water companies, and to undertake drainage, sewerage and street paving projects. Most of its grand aims were considerably watered down by the time it became law, but it established a General Board of Health, whose members were Lord Morpeth, Lord Shaftesbury, and Chadwick. They were later joined by Southwood Smith, who acted as a medical advisor. Local Boards could pay for a survey from an inspector employed by the Board, and could then proceed without the need to obtain a costly local act to authorise the work. Chadwick chose all of the inspectors himself, ensuring that they shared his views on glazed sewer pipes, constant water supply and arterial drainage. They worked enthusiastically, ensuring that districts considered comprehensive schemes for water supply, drainage and sewerage.

Ratepayers in a district could request an inspector to attend if ten per cent of them signed a petition. The Board could also hold an enquiry if the death rate of a district exceeded 23 per 1000, but gauged the level of local feeling, and formed a local Board if there was support, and withdrew tactfully if there was opposition. By 1853, they had received requests for inspections from 284 towns, and 13 combined water supply, sewerage and drainage schemes had been completed under the legislation. Relationships with engineers were not always easy, with J. M. Rendel calling Chadwick&#x27;s ideas &quot;sanitary humbug&quot; and Robert Stephenson stating that he hated the ideas of pipes, rather than brick-built sewers. Even Joseph Bazalgette, who went on to design London&#x27;s trunk sewer network, spoke out against glazed sewer pipes. As time went by, there was growing opposition to what was seen as central control by the Board. The rift between Chadwick and Hawksley had become open hostility, and Hawksley made serious complaints against Chadwick and one of the Board&#x27;s inspectors to a Select Committee of the House of Commons in 1853. Opposition from engineers increased, and a &quot;Private Enterprise Society&quot; was formed by Hawksley and James Simpson, with the intent of bringing down the Board. Shaftsbury, Chadwick and Southwood Smith all had to resign in 1854, and the Board did not last for long afterwards. Chadwick lived to see his position vindicated when the Local Government Board was established in 1871, which led to the formation of the Ministry of Health. Since then, it has been widely acknowledged that public health is a matter of government responsibility, working through local authorities.

In 1851, Chadwick made a recommendation that a single authority should take over the nine separate water supply companies that operated in London. Although this idea was rejected by the Government, the Metropolitan Water Supply Act 1852 forced the companies to move the intakes for their water to locations above Teddington weir, to filter water before it was used for domestic supply, to cover filtered water reservoirs, and to ensure that there was a constant water supply to all users by 1857. This was not achieved until 1899, and Chadwick&#x27;s recommendation for a single authority was eventually implemented in 1902, with the formation of the Metropolitan Water Board.

In 1852, Chadwick conversed with Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn in relation to the construction of a sewerage system in Swansea.

Chadwick&#x27;s efforts were acknowledged by at least one health reformer of the day: Erasmus Wilson dedicated his 1854 book &quot;Healthy Skin&quot; to Chadwick &quot;In admiration of his strenuous and indefatigable labours in the cause of Sanitary Reform&quot;.

He corresponded with Florence Nightingale on methodology. He encouraged her to write up her research into the book &quot;Notes on Nursing.&quot; He promoted it among well placed intellectuals, making her more visible.

==Later life==
Chadwick was a commissioner of the Metropolitan Commission of Sewers in London from 1848 to 1849. He was also a commissioner of the General Board of Health from its establishment in 1848 to its abolition in 1854, when he retired on a pension. He occupied the remainder of his life in voluntary contributions to sanitary, health and economic questions.

In January 1884, he was appointed as the first president of the Association of Public Sanitary Inspectors, now the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health. Its head office, in Waterloo, London, is named Chadwick Court, in his honour.

While he is well known for his work with the Poor Law and with sanitation, he also contributed to other areas of public policy. These included tropical hygiene, criminal justice institutions, policy regarding funerals and burials in urban areas, school architecture, utilisation of sewage, military sanitation and the education of paupers. He was involved in investigations into child labour in factories, the organisation of the police force, drunkenness, the treatment of labourers on the railways, the building and maintenance of roads, organisation of the civil service, and various aspects of education. Most of these benefitted from his use of statistical methods to collect and organise data, and of the use of anecdotal evidence to support his conclusions. He was involved in a number of organisations, including the British Association for the Advancement of Science, the Institute of Civil Engineers, the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, the Royal Society of Arts, the Royal Statistical Society, the London Debating Society and the Political Economy Club.
In recognition of his public service, he was knighted in 1889. He served in his post until his death, at 90, in 1890, at East Sheen, Richmond on Thames. He was buried at Mortlake Cemetery.

==Criticism and acclaim==
Chadwick is remembered at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine where his name appears among the names of 23 pioneers of public health and tropical medicine chosen to be honoured when the School was built in 1929.
He is also commemorated at Heriot Watt University in Edinburgh, Scotland for the engineering building.

Chadwick was not without contemporary critics among fellow advocates of the causes he espoused and largely on the basis of his disregard for local government. One such was his successor as head of the Board of Health, Sir Benjamin Hall, later Lord Llanover, an advocate of decentralisation through the strengthening of municipalities. Hall believed that the centralisation of powers in the Board of Health, a body that was in effect independent of government and not obliged to align with municipalities, and the manner in which Chadwick set a course that frequently put it at odds local and national government, made the Board ineffective. Another critic was the representative of national government, Lord Seymour, later the Duke of Somerset, under whom as First Commissioner of Works from 1851-1852 the Board nominally fell. He was one of the three Commissioners who formed the Board, but was more often than not overruled by Chadwick and the third Commissioner, Dr Thomas Southwood Smith. In July 1858, in a piece covering the a programme of government to clean up the River Thames through provision of funds for that purpose to the Metropolitan Board of Works, a body set up by Sir Benjamin Hall during his own tenure as First Commissioner of Works (1855-1858), The Holborn Journal describes Chadwick as the influence behind &quot;that sharp, persevering set of centralising meddlers&quot;.

In their 1936 history of the governance of London, Sir Gwilym Gibbon and Reginald Bell say of Chadwick and the Board of Health that &quot;by the end of its first term of office such a storm of unpopularity and opposition broke over it that the Government was defeated on the Bill to renew its appointment. [It] had foundered on the rock of its own uncompromising zeal.&quot;

According to Priti Joshi in 2004 the evaluation of his career has drastically changed since the 1950s:
:The Chadwick that emerges in recent accounts could not be more different from the mid-century Chadwick. The post-war critics saw him as a visionary, an often-embattled crusader for public health whose enemies were formidable but whose vision, extending the liberal and radical tradition, ultimately prevailed. Cultural critics, on the other hand, present a Chadwick who misrepresented (if not outright oppressed) the poor and who was instrumental in developing a massive bureaucracy to police their lives. Thus, while earlier accounts highlighted Chadwick&#x27;s accomplishments, the progress of public health reforms, and the details of legislative politics, more recent ones draw attention to his representations of the poor, the erasures in his text, and the growing nineteenth-century institutionalization of the poor that the Sanitary Report promotes. Chadwick, in other words, is portrayed as either a pioneer of reform or an avatar of bureaucratic oppression.

Such views are not universally held. Thus Ekelund and Price in their assessment of Chadwick&#x27;s economic policies in 2012 wrote:
:It is no exaggeration to note that Chadwick is an almost singular progenitor of public health in the UK and elsewhere. The one hundredth anniversary of his death (1990) and the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the first Public Health Act (1848) was an occasion of serious and deserved plaudits for him in the United States and abroad. His prowess in sanitation engineering has also been duly noted. These excellent works appropriately feature Chadwick&#x27;s role as one of the two or three most important policy makers of nineteenth century England.

==Works==

== Collections ==
In 1898 the executor of Sir Benjamin Ward Richardson&#x27;s estate presented University College London with Chadwick&#x27;s archive. Richardson was Chadwick&#x27;s biographer and friend. The collection spans over 190 boxes of material, around half of which is correspondence. It also documents Chadwick&#x27;s involvement with Poor Law reforms and public health improvements.

==See also==
* History of public health in the United Kingdom

==References==
Attribution:


===Bibliography===
* Hamlin, Christopher. &quot;Public Health and Social Justice in the Age of Chadwick: Britain, 1800–1854&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1998).


==Further reading==
* Finer, S.E. &quot;The life and times of Sir Edwin Chadwick&quot; (1952) excerpt
* Hamlin, Christopher. &quot;Public Health &amp; Social Justice in the Age of Chadwick: Britain, 1800-1854&quot; (1998) excerpt
* Hanley, James. &quot;Edwin Chadwick and the poverty of statistics.&quot; &quot;Medical history&quot; 46.1 (2002): 21+. online
* Joshi, Priti. &quot;Edwin Chadwick&#x27;s Self-Fashioning: Professionalism, Masculinity, and the Victorian Poor.&quot; &quot;Victorian Literature and Culture&quot; 32.2 (2004): 353–370.
* Lewis, R. A. &quot;Edwin Chadwick and the public health movement, 1832–1854&quot; (1952) online
* Mandler, Peter. &quot;Chadwick, Sir Edwin (1800–1890)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,&quot; Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 accessed 25 Oct 2017 doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/5013

==External links==
* Chadwick Papers at University College London
* 
* Marjie Bloy, &quot;Edwin Chadwick (1800–1890)&quot;, &quot;The Victorian Web&quot;
* 
* 1842 Sanitary Report on the UK Parliament website
* Sir Edwin Chadwick at UCL</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="0" end="18" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Sir Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="19" end="22" title="Order of the Bath" label="KCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q686264" start="132" end="140" title="Poor Law" label="Poor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="192" end="202" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="207" end="220" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="236" end="247" title="Utilitarianism" label="Utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="260" end="274" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423211" start="667" end="676" title="Longsight" label="Longsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="678" end="688" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="690" end="700" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="826" end="837" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="1058" end="1069" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="1133" end="1148" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655" start="1152" end="1161" title="Stockport" label="Stockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1222" end="1228" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q864938" start="1444" end="1458" title="Henry Chadwick (writer)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="1564" end="1573" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="1613" end="1623" title="Inns of Court" label="The Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="1662" end="1679" title="call to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1692" end="1701" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989198" start="1899" end="1917" title="Westminster Review" label="Westminster Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="2084" end="2100" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="2105" end="2119" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794109" start="2228" end="2250" title="Thomas Southwood Smith" label="Thomas Southwood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398302" start="2252" end="2263" title="Neil Arnott" label="Neil Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527445" start="2268" end="2290" title="James Kay-Shuttleworth" label="James Kay-Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374008" start="2573" end="2589" title="Royal Commission into the Operation of the Poor Laws 1832" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q686264" start="2637" end="2645" title="Poor Law" label="Poor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q687552" start="2719" end="2740" title="Nassau William Senior" label="Nassau William Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397866" start="2876" end="2891" title="Poor Law Unions" label="Poor Law Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="2937" end="2946" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="3048" end="3063" title="Reform movement" label="Poor Law reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228780" start="3539" end="3558" title="Poor Law Commission" label="Poor Law Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="3846" end="3852" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4513" end="4590" title="Report on The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain" label="Report on The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607738" start="4736" end="4757" title="Office of Public Sector Information" label="the Stationery Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="5693" end="5710" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007343" start="5715" end="5729" title="William Cubitt" label="William Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350333" start="5866" end="5877" title="Robert Thom (engineer)" label="Robert Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217831" start="5922" end="5930" title="Greenock" label="Greenock"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667745" start="5932" end="5948" title="Thomas Wicksteed" label="Thomas Wicksteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328867" start="5979" end="6009" title="East London Waterworks Company" label="East London Waterworks Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424595" start="6015" end="6030" title="Thomas Hawksley" label="Thomas Hawksley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="6058" end="6068" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q268534" start="6263" end="6275" title="water-closet" label="water-closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969318" start="6496" end="6523" title="Health of Towns Association" label="Health of Towns Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072191" start="7335" end="7348" title="Railway Mania" label="Railway Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153938" start="7700" end="7712" title="earth-closet" label="earth-closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664281" start="8105" end="8127" title="Public Health Act 1848" label="Public Health Act 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079517" start="8264" end="8276" title="George Howard, 7th Earl of Carlisle" label="Lord Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8611" end="8634" title="Local board of health#General Board of Health" label="General Board of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q333294" start="8669" end="8685" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Lord Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794109" start="8727" end="8742" title="Thomas Southwood Smith" label="Southwood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664281" start="8776" end="8788" title="Local board of health" label="Local Boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664265" start="8912" end="8921" title="Local and personal acts of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="local act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139585" start="9780" end="9792" title="James Meadows Rendel (engineer)" label="J. M. Rendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="9855" end="9872" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q981915" start="9952" end="9969" title="Joseph Bazalgette" label="Joseph Bazalgette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143209" start="10485" end="10498" title="James Simpson (engineer)" label="James Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610051" start="11271" end="11286" title="Teddington Lock" label="Teddington weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536798" start="11669" end="11691" title="Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn" label="Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013450" start="11844" end="11858" title="Erasmus Wilson" label="Erasmus Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="12044" end="12064" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825048" start="12292" end="12325" title="Metropolitan Commission of Sewers" label="Metropolitan Commission of Sewers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12389" end="12412" title="Local board of health#General Board of Health" label="General Board of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086807" start="12725" end="12768" title="Chartered Institute of Environmental Health" label="Chartered Institute of Environmental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q146436" start="12790" end="12806" title="Waterloo, London" label="Waterloo, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="13674" end="13724" title="British Science Association" label="British Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="13730" end="13758" title="Institute of Civil Engineers" label="Institute of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932075" start="13764" end="13820" title="National Association for the Promotion of Social Science" label="National Association for the Promotion of Social Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="13826" end="13847" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692699" start="13853" end="13878" title="Royal Statistical Society" label="Royal Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670309" start="13884" end="13907" title="London Debating Societies" label="London Debating Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210197" start="13916" end="13938" title="Political Economy Club" label="Political Economy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="13985" end="13991" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530557" start="14061" end="14071" title="East Sheen" label="East Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32515" start="14073" end="14091" title="Richmond on Thames" label="Richmond on Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876237" start="14110" end="14127" title="Mortlake Cemetery" label="Mortlake Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126189" start="14186" end="14234" title="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine" label="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568971" start="14707" end="14724" title="Benjamin Hall, 1st Baron Llanover" label="Sir Benjamin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719921" start="15192" end="15204" title="Edward St Maur, 12th Duke of Somerset" label="Lord Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557670" start="15248" end="15275" title="First Commissioner of Works" label="First Commissioner of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794109" start="15455" end="15480" title="Thomas Southwood Smith" label="Dr Thomas Southwood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="15562" end="15574" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546743" start="15626" end="15653" title="Metropolitan Board of Works" label="Metropolitan Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896276" start="18083" end="18107" title="Benjamin Ward Richardson" label="Benjamin Ward Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="18132" end="18157" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q132235751" start="18447" end="18493" title="History of public health in the United Kingdom" label="History of public health in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="19593" end="19618" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="19786" end="19789" title="University College London" label="UCL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382768" wikidata="Q55591" url="?curid=382768" title="Santo Domingo, Nueva Ecija">
<text>Santo Domingo, officially the Municipality of Santo Domingo (; ), is a municipality in the province of Nueva Ecija, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 61,092 people.

==Etymology==
The town got its name from Saint Dominic, which became the town&#x27;s patron saint.

==History==
During the last quarter of the 17th century, Ilocos and Bulacan natives and Tagalogs from Cabanatuan migrated to Santo Domingo. They found in the settlement buri palms. Therefore, these people called the site, Pulong Buli. Santo Domingo de Guzman became their Patron saint. The settlement became a Municipio but was later demoted to a mere barangay of Talavera, Nueva Ecija in 1903. It was later reverted to the political status of Municipality. The Alejos, Juans, Samatras, Salamancas, Andreses, Pascuals and Tomases were the descendants of the founders of the town.

During the Japanese Occupation from 1942 to 1945, various local guerrillas and Hukbalahap communist groups fought side by side at Santo Domingo, aided by the Filipino soldiers of the Philippine Commonwealth Army units. Following the Allied liberation in 1945, over 4,500 Filipino soldiers and guerrillas had been killed or wounded, and 29,000 Japanese troops killed or captured in action.

==Geography==
Santo Domingo is bordered by the municipalities of Talavera to the east, Quezon to the west, Science City of Muñoz to the north, Guimba to the northwest, and Aliaga to the south.

===Barangays===
Santo Domingo is politically subdivided into 24 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios.
* Baloc
* Buasao
* Burgos
* Cabugao
* Casulucan
* Comitang
* Concepcion
* Dolores
* General Luna
* Hulo
* Mabini
* Malasin
* Malayantoc
* Mambarao
* Poblacion
* Malaya (Pook Malaya)
* Pulong Buli
* Sagaba
* San Agustin
* San Fabian
* San Francisco
* San Pascual
* Santa Rita
* Santo Rosario
===Climate===

==Demographics==

===Religion===
====St. Dominic Parish Church====
The 1896 St. Dominic Parish Church (Real St., Poblacion, Santo Domingo, 3133 Nueva Ecija) belongs to the Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose. Most. Rev. Roberto Calara Mallari, D.D. (since 15 May 2012) is the head of the Diocese. The Church&#x27;s Parish Priest is Very Rev. Mnsgr. Rolando Mabutol, Hp and its Parish Administrator is Rev. Fr. Ian Christopher D. Andal (Acting Parish Priest) (Vicariate of St. Dominic - Diocesis Sancti Josephi in Insulis Philippinis, Suffragan of Lingayen-Dagupan; created: February 16, 1984, erected July 14, 1984, comprising the City of San Jose and the Science City of Muñoz and 12 other municipalities in Northern Nueva Ecija; Titular: St. Joseph the Worker, May 1). Its Vicar Forane is Fr. Bonifacio P. Flores Saint Dominic Parish Titular: Saint Dominic de Guzman; Year of Establishment: 1929.

Founded in 1896 as part of the Manila Archdiocese, in 1929, the Church was established and in 1950, the Parish became part of the Diocese of Cabanatuan. In 1977 the Baloc Parish was severed from Santo Domingo. On July 14, 1984, the Diocese of Cabanatuan was split into 2, and the San Jose Diocese had 16 Parishes including Santo Domingo Parish.
The first Parish Priest of Santo Domingo was Fr. Emilio Gutierez and the 19th, the incumbent is Fr. Edwin I. Bravo. The Parish has a population of 21,677 Catholics: 75%.

====St. Jerome Parish Church====
The St. Jerome Parish Church (Barangay Baloc, Santo Domingo, 3133 Nueva Ecija) belongs to the Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose. Most. Rev. Roberto Calara Mallari, D.D. (since 15 May 2012) is the head of the Diocese (Vicariate of St. Dominic - Diocesis Sancti Josephi in Insulis Philippinis, Suffragan of Lingayen-Dagupan; created: February 16, 1984, erected July 14, 1984, comprising the City of San Jose and the Science City of Muñoz and 12 other municipalities in Northern Nueva Ecija; Titular: St. Joseph the Worker, May 1). Its Vicar Forane is Fr. Bonifacio P. Flores and its Parish Priest: Fr. Rosalito F. Cabanting. The Population is 45,049 Catholics -8%.

====Iglesia Filipina Independiente, San Geronimo Church====
The Iglesia Filipina Independiente, San Geronimo Church is also one of the landmark religious heritage of Santo Domingo.

====Dambana ni San Geronimo====
Fr. Resty Valenzuela Ahyong Baloc established his own Dambana ni San Geronimo when he transferred from the Roman Catholic Church.
The people of Baloc, Santo Domingo Nueva Ecija became religious because of Him. He wrote a book about the life of St. Jerome.

== Economy ==

As an agricultural town, Santo Domingo is famous for its scenic agricultural landscape amid its Philippine duck raising industry.

==Government==
===Local government===

Santo Domingo, belonging to the 1st congressional district of the province of Nueva Ecija, is governed by a mayor designated as its local chief executive and by a municipal council as its legislative body in accordance with the Local Government Code. The mayor, vice mayor, and the councilors are elected directly by the people through an election which is being held every three years.

===Elected officials===
==Gallery==


==References==
==External links==

*Website of Santo Domingo
*[ Philippine Standard Geographic Code]
*Philippine Census Information
*Local Governance Performance Management System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55591" start="0" end="13" title="Santo Domingo, Nueva Ecija" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55591" start="30" end="59" title="Santo Domingo, Nueva Ecija" label="Municipality of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="71" end="83" title="municipality of the Philippines" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="91" end="99" title="Philippine Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="103" end="114" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="116" end="127" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="239" end="252" title="Saint Dominic" label="Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55595" start="400" end="410" title="Cabanatuan" label="Cabanatuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q141134" start="467" end="477" title="Polyandrococos" label="buri palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="533" end="556" title="Saint Dominic" label="Santo Domingo de Guzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55592" start="662" end="683" title="Talavera, Nueva Ecija" label="Talavera, Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q371789" start="958" end="968" title="Hukbalahap" label="Hukbalahap"/>
<link wikidata="Q55592" start="1334" end="1342" title="Talavera, Nueva Ecija" label="Talavera"/>
<link wikidata="Q55569" start="1356" end="1362" title="Quezon, Nueva Ecija" label="Quezon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55597" start="1376" end="1397" title="Muñoz, Nueva Ecija" label="Science City of Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55552" start="1412" end="1418" title="Guimba, Nueva Ecija" label="Guimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q55543" start="1441" end="1447" title="Aliaga, Nueva Ecija" label="Aliaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="1527" end="1535" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261368" start="1564" end="1569" title="purok" label="purok"/>
<link wikidata="Q572784" start="1585" end="1591" title="sitios" label="sitios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167111" start="2071" end="2105" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose in Nueva Ecija" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167111" start="3441" end="3475" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose in Nueva Ecija" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q771902" start="4076" end="4106" title="Iglesia Filipina Independiente" label="Iglesia Filipina Independiente"/>
<link wikidata="Q66771522" start="4700" end="4726" title="Nueva Ecija&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="4746" end="4757" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382769" wikidata="Q687552" url="?curid=382769" title="Nassau William Senior">
<text>Nassau William Senior (26 September 1790 – 4 June 1864), was an English lawyer known as an economist. He was also a government adviser over several decades on economic and social policy on which he wrote extensively. In his writings, he made early contributions to theories of value and monopoly.

==Early life==
He was born at Compton, Berkshire, the eldest son of Rev. J. R. Senior, vicar of Durnford, Wiltshire. He was educated at Eton College and Magdalen College, Oxford; at university he was a private pupil of Richard Whately, afterwards Archbishop of Dublin with whom he remained connected by ties of lifelong friendship. He took the degree of B.A. in 1811 and became a Vinerian Scholar in 1813.

==Career==
Senior went into the field of conveyancing, with a pupilage under Edward Burtenshaw Sugden. When Sugden rather abruptly informed his pupils in 1816 that he was concentrating on chancery work, Senior took steps to qualify as a Certified Conveyancer, which he did in 1817. With one other pupil, Aaron Hurrill, he then took over Sugden&#x27;s practice. Senior was called to the bar in 1819, but problems with public speaking limited his potential career as an advocate. In 1836, during the chancellorship of Lord Cottenham, he was appointed a master in chancery.

On the foundation of the Drummond professorship of political economy at Oxford in 1825, he was elected to fill the chair, which he occupied until 1830 and again from 1847 to 1852. In 1830, he was requested by Lord Melbourne to inquire into the state of combinations and strikes, report on the state of the law and suggest improvements.

Senior was a member of the Poor Law Inquiry Commission of 1832, and of the Royal Commission of 1837 on handloom weavers. The report of the latter, published in 1841, was drawn up by him and had the substance of the report he had prepared some years earlier, on combinations and strikes.

==Later life==
Senior became a good friend of Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859) whom he met in 1833 for the first time before the publishing of &quot;Democracy in America&quot;.

Senior was in the spring of 1849 legal advisor and counsellor to Jenny Lind, who then was performing in London. She intended to marry a soldier named Harris, and Senior was supposed to draw up marriage settlements. Harriet Grote in correspondence calls him Claudius Harris, a lieutenant of the Madras Cavalry; the Grote connection was that he was the brother of the wife of Joseph Grote, the brother of her husband, George. Senior accompanied Lind and Harriet Grote to Paris (amid civil strife and a cholera epidemic). The marriage failed to take place.

Senior was &quot;indirectly responsible for the contract which Jenny Lind condescended to sign in 1850 with the American promoter P. T. Barnum&quot;.

Senior was one of the commissioners appointed in 1864 to inquire into popular education in England. He died at Kensington that year.

==Writings==
Senior was a contributor to the &quot;Quarterly Review&quot;, &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot;, &quot;London Review&quot; and &quot;North British Review&quot;. In their pages, he dealt with literary as well as with economic and political subjects. The &quot;London Review&quot; was a project of Senior from 1828, for a quarterly periodical. It was backed by Richard Whately and others of the Oriel Noetics, and with the help of Thomas Mayo, he found an editor in Joseph Blanco White. Early contributions from John Henry Newman, Edwin Chadwick and Senior himself (on the Waverley novels and William Jacob&#x27;s views) were not enough to establish it, and it ceased publication in mid-1829.

===Economics===
His writings on economic theory consisted of an article in the &quot;Encyclopædia Metropolitana&quot;, afterwards separately published as &quot;An Outline of the Science of Political Economy&quot; (1836), and his lectures delivered at Oxford. Of the latter, the following were printed:
* &quot;An Introductory Lecture on Political Economy&quot; (London: John Murray, 1827).
* &quot;Two Lectures on Population&quot;, with a correspondence between the author and Malthus (1829).
* &quot;Three Lectures on the Transmission of the Precious Metals from Country to Country, and the Mercantile Theory of Wealth&quot; (1828).
* &quot;Three Lectures on the Cost of obtaining Money, and on some Effects of Private and Government Paper Money&quot; (London: John Murray, 1830).
* &quot;Three Lectures on the Rate of Wages&quot; (1830, 2nd ed. 1831).
* &quot;A Lecture on the Production of Wealth&quot; (1847).
* &quot;Four Introductory Lectures on Political Economy&quot; (1852).
Several of his lectures were translated into French by M. Arrivabne under the title of &quot;Principes Fondamentaux d&#x27;Economie Politique&quot; (1835).

===Social questions===
Senior also wrote on administrative and social questions:
* &quot;Report on the Depressed State of the Agriculture of the United Kingdom&quot;. In: The Quarterly Review (1821), pp. 466–504
* &quot;A Letter to Lord Howick on a Legal Provision for the Irish Poor, Commutation of Tithes and a Provision for the Irish Roman Catholic Clergy&quot; (1831, 3rd ed., 1832, with a preface containing suggestions as to the measures to be adopted in the present emergency)
* &quot;Statement of the Provision for the Poor and of the Condition of the Laboring Classes in a considerable portion of America and Europe, being the Preface to the Foreign Communications in the Appendix to the Poor Law Report&quot; (1835)
* &quot;On National Property, and on the Prospects of the Present Administration and of their Successors&quot; (anon.; 1835)
* &quot;Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the Cotton Manufacture&quot; (1837)
* &quot;Suggestions on Popular Education&quot; (1861)
* &quot;American Slavery&quot; (in part a reprint from the &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot;, 1862)
* &quot;An Address on Education delivered to the Social Science Association&quot; (1863)
His contributions to the reviews were collected in volumes entitled &quot;Essays on Fiction&quot; (1864); &quot;Biographical Sketches&quot; (1865, chiefly of noted lawyers); and &quot;Historical and Philosophical Essays&quot; (1865).

In 1859 appeared his &quot;Journal kept in Turkey and Greece in the Autumn of 1857 and the Beginning of 1858&quot;; and the following were edited after his death by his daughter:
* &quot;Journals, Conversations and Essays relating to Ireland&quot; (1868)
* &quot;Journals kept in France and Italy from 1848 to 1852, with a Sketch of the Revolution of 1848&quot; (1871)
* &quot;Conversations with Thiers, Guizot and other Distinguished Persons during the Second Empire&quot; (1878)
* &quot;Conversations with Distinguished Persons during the Second Empire, from 1860 to 1863&quot; (1880)
* &quot;Conversations and Journals in Egypt and Malta&quot; (1882)
* also in 1872 &quot;Correspondence and Conversations with Alexis de Tocqueville from 1834 to 1859&quot;.

== Political economy ==
Senior regarded political economy as a deductive science, of inferences from four elementary propositions, which are not assumptions but facts. It concerns itself, however, with wealth only and can therefore give no political advice. He pointed out inconsistencies of terminology in David Ricardo&#x27;s works: for example, his use of value in the sense of cost of production, high and low wages in the sense of a certain proportion of the product as dilute amount and his employment of the epithets fixed and circulating as applied to capital. He argued, too, that in some cases the premises assumed by Ricardo are false. He cited the assertions that rent depends on the difference of fertility of the different portions of land in cultivation; that the laborer always receives precisely the necessaries or what custom leads him to consider the necessaries, of life; that as wealth and population advance, agricultural labor becomes less and less proportionately productive and therefore the share of the produce taken by the landlord and the laborer must constantly increase, but that taken by the capitalist must constantly diminish. He denied the truth of all the propositions.

Besides adopting some terms, such as that of natural agents, from Jean-Baptiste Say, Senior introduced the term &quot;abstinence&quot; to express the conduct of the capitalist that is remunerated by interest. He added some considerations to what had been said by Adam Smith on the division of labor and distinguished between the rate of wages and the price of labor but assumed a determinate wage-fund.

Senior&#x27;s 1837 &quot;Letters on the Factory Act&quot; have been called out for the analytical mistake made in them by economist Brad DeLong. Nassau opposed the Child Labour Law and the proposed Ten Hours Act, on the grounds that they would make it impossible for factory owners to make profits. In Senior&#x27;s analysis of factory production, capital advanced means of subsistence (wage) to the workers, who would then return the advance during the first 10 hours of their labor, producing a profit only in the last hour. What Senior failed to realize is that the turnover of capital stock depends on the length of the working day; he assumed it constant.

In Karl Marx&#x27;s first volume of &quot;Capital&quot;, Senior&#x27;s analyses are subjected to a series of exacting criticisms. &quot;If, giving credence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or replacement of the value of the buildings, machinery, cotton, coal, &amp;c.,&quot; Marx writes, &quot;then his analysis was superfluous.&quot;

Senior modified his opinions on population in the course of his career and asserted that in the absence of disturbing causes, subsistence may be expected to increase in a greater ratio than population. Charles Périn argued that he set up &quot;egoism&quot; as the guide of practical life. Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie attacked the abstraction implied in the phrase &quot;desire of wealth&quot;.

==Controversy on Irish Famine==
Senior reportedly said of the Great Irish Famine of 1845
&quot;would not kill more than one million people, and that would scarcely be enough to do any good&quot;.
That is a point quoted by theorists who propose that the actions of the British government before and during the famine were tantamount to deliberate genocide, but his opinion was not government policy. Costigan argues, however, that the quote is taken out of context and reflects Senior&#x27;s opinion purely from the viewpoint of the theory of political economy; in other words, even such a large reduction in the population would not solve the underlying economic, social and political problems, which would be proved correct. He argues that Senior made attempts over many years to improve the lot of the Irish people, even at considerable personal cost (in 1832, he was removed, after one year in office, from his position as Professor of Political Economy at King&#x27;s College, London, for supporting the Catholic Church in Ireland). In his letter of 8 January 1836 to Lord Howick, Senior wrote,
&quot;With respect to the ejected tenantry, the stories that are told make one&#x27;s blood boil. I must own that I differ from most persons as to the meaning of the words &#x27;legitimate influence of property&#x27;. I think that the only legitimate influence is example and advice, and that a landlord who requires a tenant to vote in opposition to the tenant&#x27;s feeling of duty is the suborner of a criminal act.&#x27;
Senior&#x27;s notes of his visits to Birr, County Offaly in the 1850s mention his surprise and concern that the everyday lifestyle of the Irish poor had changed so little, despite the famine disaster.

:&quot;Though the aspect of Ireland is somewhat changed since 1852, and much since 1844, I doubt whether any great real alteration in the habits to feelings of the people has taken place. They still depend mainly on the potato. They still depend rather on the occupation of land, than on the wages of labour. They still erect for themselves the hovels in which they dwell. They are still eager to subdivide and to sublet. They are still the tools of their priests, and the priests are still ignorant of the economical laws on which the welfare of the labouring classes depends.&quot;

==Family==
Senior married Mary Charlotte Mair of Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, in 1821. Their daughter, the memoirist Mary Charlotte Mair Simpson (1825–1907) acted as his literary executor. Their son Nassau John Senior (1822–1891), was a lawyer and married Jane Elizabeth Senior (1828–1877), an inspector of workhouses and schools.

== See also ==
* Abstinence theory of interest

==Notes==
==References==
* Levy, S. Leon (1943). &quot;Nassau W. Senior, The Prophet of Modern Capitalism&quot;, Boston, Massachusetts: Bruce Humphries. 
* Levy, S. Leon (1970). &quot;Nassau W. Senior 1790–1864&quot;, Newton Abbot : David &amp; Charles. 

==External links==
* 
* Nassau William Senior, Online Library of Liberty</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q687552" start="0" end="21" title="Nassau William Senior" label="Nassau William Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="91" end="100" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187415" start="265" end="282" title="Value theory" label="theories of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="287" end="295" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338882" start="328" end="346" title="Compton, Berkshire" label="Compton, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850780" start="394" end="413" title="Durnford, Wiltshire" label="Durnford, Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="434" end="446" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="451" end="475" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997652" start="517" end="532" title="Richard Whately" label="Richard Whately"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785670" start="545" end="565" title="Archbishop of Dublin (Church of Ireland)" label="Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932458" start="678" end="694" title="Vinerian Scholarship" label="Vinerian Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q759815" start="746" end="758" title="conveyancing" label="conveyancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345498" start="782" end="806" title="Edward Burtenshaw Sugden" label="Edward Burtenshaw Sugden"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="893" end="901" title="Court of Chancery" label="chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="1077" end="1094" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670298" start="1221" end="1235" title="Charles Pepys, 1st Earl of Cottenham" label="Lord Cottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309234" start="1302" end="1345" title="Drummond professorship of political economy" label="Drummond professorship of political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q686264" start="1641" end="1649" title="Poor Law" label="Poor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932516" start="1689" end="1713" title="Royal Commission on Hand-Loom Weavers" label="Royal Commission of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="1717" end="1732" title="handloom weaver" label="handloom weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="1948" end="1969" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q784882" start="2052" end="2072" title="Democracy in America" label="Democracy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q231345" start="2146" end="2156" title="Jenny Lind" label="Jenny Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664138" start="2296" end="2309" title="Harriet Grote" label="Harriet Grote"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="2581" end="2588" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="2766" end="2778" title="P. T. Barnum" label="P. T. Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="2898" end="2908" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="2972" end="2988" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616695" start="3002" end="3018" title="Edinburgh Review" label="Edinburgh Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054291" start="3062" end="3082" title="North British Review" label="North British Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102257" start="3322" end="3335" title="Oriel Noetics" label="Oriel Noetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792255" start="3358" end="3369" title="Thomas Mayo (physician)" label="Thomas Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047406" start="3393" end="3412" title="Joseph Blanco White" label="Joseph Blanco White"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="3439" end="3456" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="3458" end="3472" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975429" start="3500" end="3515" title="Waverley novels" label="Waverley novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013408" start="3520" end="3533" title="William Jacob (MP, died 1851)" label="William Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915400" start="3706" end="3732" title="Encyclopædia Metropolitana" label="Encyclopædia Metropolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="4098" end="4105" title="Malthus" label="Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="6568" end="6574" title="Louis Adolphe Thiers" label="Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157324" start="6576" end="6582" title="François Pierre Guillaume Guizot" label="Guizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="6626" end="6639" title="Second French Empire" label="Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="7135" end="7141" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="7240" end="7253" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="7493" end="7500" title="capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q13513" start="8206" end="8223" title="Jean-Baptiste Say" label="Jean-Baptiste Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="8403" end="8413" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="8421" end="8438" title="division of labor" label="division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953995" start="8532" end="8541" title="wage-fund" label="wage-fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q920476" start="8676" end="8687" title="Brad DeLong" label="Brad DeLong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8708" end="8724" title="Child Labour Law" label="Child Labour Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428740" start="8742" end="8755" title="Ten Hours Act" label="Ten Hours Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960066" start="9852" end="9865" title="Charles Périn" label="Charles Périn"/>
<link wikidata="Q355086" start="9939" end="9966" title="Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie" label="Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="10107" end="10125" title="Great Irish Famine" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="10391" end="10399" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="10425" end="10442" title="Public policy" label="government policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865849" start="11607" end="11626" title="Birr, County Offaly" label="Birr, County Offaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440896" start="12613" end="12634" title="Jane Senior" label="Jane Elizabeth Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669923" start="12706" end="12735" title="Abstinence theory of interest" label="Abstinence theory of interest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382771" wikidata="Q372037" url="?curid=382771" title="Seifert–Van Kampen theorem">
<text>In mathematics, the Seifert–Van Kampen theorem of algebraic topology (named after Herbert Seifert and Egbert van Kampen), sometimes just called Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem, expresses the structure of the fundamental group of a topological space formula_1 in terms of the fundamental groups of two open, path-connected subspaces that cover formula_1. It can therefore be used for computations of the fundamental group of spaces that are constructed out of simpler ones.

== Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem for fundamental groups ==

Let &quot;X&quot; be a topological space which is the union of two open and path connected subspaces &quot;U&quot;1, &quot;U&quot;2. Suppose &quot;U&quot;1 ∩ &quot;U&quot;2 is path connected and nonempty, and let &quot;x&quot;0 be a point in &quot;U&quot;1 ∩ &quot;U&quot;2 that will be used as the base of all fundamental groups. The inclusion maps of &quot;U&quot;1 and &quot;U&quot;2 into &quot;X&quot; induce group homomorphisms formula_3 and formula_4. Then &quot;X&quot; is path connected and formula_5 and formula_6 form a commutative pushout diagram:

The natural morphism &quot;k&quot; is an isomorphism. That is, the fundamental group of &quot;X&quot; is the free product of the fundamental groups of &quot;U&quot;1 and &quot;U&quot;2 with amalgamation of formula_7.

Usually the morphisms induced by inclusion in this theorem are not themselves injective, and the more precise version of the statement is in terms of pushouts of groups.

=== Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem for fundamental groupoids ===
Unfortunately, the theorem as given above does not compute the fundamental group of the circle – which is the most important basic example in algebraic topology – because the circle cannot be realised as the union of two open sets with connected intersection. This problem can be resolved by working with the fundamental groupoid formula_8 on a &quot;set A&quot; of base points, chosen according to the geometry of the situation. Thus for the circle, one uses two base points.

This groupoid consists of homotopy classes relative to the end points of paths in &quot;X&quot; joining points of &quot;A&quot; ∩ &quot;X&quot;. In particular, if &quot;X&quot; is a contractible space, and &quot;A&quot; consists of two distinct points of &quot;X&quot;, then formula_8 is easily seen to be isomorphic to the groupoid often written formula_10 with two vertices and exactly one morphism between any two vertices. This groupoid plays a role in the theory of groupoids analogous to that of the group of integers in the theory of groups. The groupoid formula_10 also allows for groupoids a notion of homotopy: it is a &quot;unit interval object&quot; in the category of groupoids.

The category of groupoids admits all colimits, and in particular all pushouts.

:Theorem. Let the topological space &quot;X&quot; be covered by the interiors of two subspaces &quot;X&quot;1, &quot;X&quot;2 and let &quot;A&quot; be a set which meets each path component of &quot;X&quot;1, &quot;X&quot;2 and &quot;X&quot;0 = &quot;X&quot;1 ∩ &quot;X&quot;2. Then &quot;A&quot; meets each path component of &quot;X&quot; and the diagram P of morphisms induced by inclusion
:is a pushout diagram in the category of groupoids.

This theorem gives the transition from topology to algebra, in determining completely the fundamental groupoid formula_8; one then has to use algebra and combinatorics to determine a fundamental group at some basepoint.

One interpretation of the theorem is that it computes homotopy 1-types. To see its utility, one can easily find cases where &quot;X&quot; is connected but is the union of the interiors of two subspaces, each with say 402 path components and whose intersection has say 1004 path components. The interpretation of this theorem as a calculational tool for &quot;fundamental groups&quot; needs some development of &#x27;combinatorial groupoid theory&#x27;. This theorem implies the calculation of the fundamental group of the circle as the group of integers, since the group of integers is obtained from the groupoid formula_10 by identifying, in the category of groupoids, its two vertices.

There is a version of the last theorem when &quot;X&quot; is covered by the union of the interiors of a family formula_14 of subsets.

The conclusion is that if &quot;A&quot; meets each path component of all 1,2,3-fold intersections of the sets formula_15, then &quot;A&quot; meets all path components of &quot;X&quot; and the diagram

:formula_16

of morphisms induced by inclusions is a coequaliser in the category of groupoids.

== Equivalent formulations ==
In the language of combinatorial group theory, if formula_17 is a topological space; formula_18 and formula_19 are open, path connected subspaces of formula_17; formula_21 is nonempty and path-connected; and formula_22; then formula_23 is the free product with amalgamation of formula_24 and formula_25, with respect to the (not necessarily injective) homomorphisms formula_26 and formula_27. Given group presentations:

:formula_28

the amalgamation can be presented as

:formula_29

In category theory, formula_23 is the pushout, in the category of groups, of the diagram:

:formula_31

==Examples==
=== 2-sphere ===
One can use Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem to calculate fundamental groups for topological spaces that can be decomposed into simpler spaces. For example, consider the sphere formula_32. Pick open sets formula_33 and formula_34 where &quot;n&quot; and &quot;s&quot; denote the north and south poles respectively. Then we have the property that &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot; and &quot;A&quot; ∩ &quot;B&quot; are open path connected sets. Thus we can see that there is a commutative diagram including &quot;A&quot; ∩ &quot;B&quot; into &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; and then another inclusion from &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; into formula_32 and that there is a corresponding diagram of homomorphisms between the fundamental groups of each subspace. Applying Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem gives the result

:formula_36

However, &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are both homeomorphic to R2 which is simply connected, so both &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; have trivial fundamental groups. It is clear from this that the fundamental group of formula_32 is trivial.

=== Wedge sum of spaces ===
Given two pointed spaces formula_38 and formula_39 we can form their wedge sum, formula_40, by taking the quotient of formula_41 by identifying their two basepoints.

If formula_42 admits a contractible open neighborhood formula_43 and formula_44 admits a contractible open neighborhood formula_45 (which is the case if, for instance, formula_1 and formula_47 are CW complexes), then we can apply the Van Kampen theorem to formula_48 by taking formula_49 and formula_50 as the two open sets and we conclude that the fundamental group of the wedge is the free product 
of the fundamental groups of the two spaces we started with:
:formula_51.

=== Orientable genus-&quot;g&quot; surfaces ===

A more complicated example is the calculation of the fundamental group of a genus-&quot;n&quot; orientable surface &quot;S&quot;, otherwise known as the &quot;genus-n surface group&quot;. One can construct &quot;S&quot; using its standard fundamental polygon. For the first open set &quot;A&quot;, pick a disk within the center of the polygon. Pick &quot;B&quot; to be the complement in &quot;S&quot; of the center point of &quot;A&quot;. Then the intersection of &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; is an annulus, which is known to be homotopy equivalent to (and so has the same fundamental group as) a circle. Then formula_52, which is the integers, and formula_53. Thus the inclusion of formula_54 into formula_55 sends any generator to the trivial element. However, the inclusion of formula_54 into formula_57 is not trivial. In order to understand this, first one must calculate formula_57. This is easily done as one can deformation retract &quot;B&quot; (which is &quot;S&quot; with one point deleted) onto the edges labeled by

:formula_59

This space is known to be the wedge sum of 2&quot;n&quot; circles (also called a bouquet of circles), which further is known to have fundamental group isomorphic to the free group with 2&quot;n&quot; generators, which in this case can be represented by the edges themselves: formula_60. We now have enough information to apply Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem. The generators are the loops formula_60 (&quot;A&quot; is simply connected, so it contributes no generators) and there is exactly one relation:

:formula_62

Using generators and relations, this group is denoted

:formula_63

=== Simple-connectedness ===
If &quot;X&quot; is space that can be written as the union of two open simply connected sets &quot;U&quot; and &quot;V&quot; with &quot;U&quot; ∩ &quot;V&quot; non-empty and path-connected, then &quot;X&quot; is simply connected.

==Generalizations==
As explained above, this theorem was extended by Ronald Brown to the non-connected case by using the fundamental groupoid formula_8 on a set &quot;A&quot; of base points. The theorem for arbitrary covers, with the restriction that &quot;A&quot; meets all threefold intersections of the sets of the cover, is given in the paper by Brown and Abdul Razak Salleh. The theorem and proof for the fundamental group, but using some groupoid methods, are also given in J. Peter May&#x27;s book. The version that allows more than two overlapping sets but with &quot;A&quot; a singleton is also given in Allen Hatcher&#x27;s book below, theorem 1.20.

Applications of the fundamental groupoid on a set of base points to the Jordan curve theorem, covering spaces, and orbit spaces are given in Ronald Brown&#x27;s book. In the case of orbit spaces, it is convenient to take &quot;A&quot; to include all the fixed points of the action. An example here is the conjugation action on the circle.

References to higher-dimensional versions of the theorem which yield some information on homotopy types are given in an article on higher-dimensional group theories and groupoids. Thus a 2-dimensional Van Kampen theorem which computes nonabelian second relative homotopy groups was given by Ronald Brown and Philip J. Higgins. A full account and extensions to all dimensions are given by Brown, Higgins, and Rafael Sivera, while an extension to &quot;n&quot;-cubes of spaces is given by Ronald Brown and Jean-Louis Loday.

Fundamental groups also appear in algebraic geometry and are the main topic of Alexander Grothendieck&#x27;s first Séminaire de géométrie algébrique (SGA1). A version of Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem appears there, and is proved along quite different lines than in algebraic topology, namely by descent theory. A similar proof works in algebraic topology.

==See also==
* Higher-dimensional algebra
* Higher category theory
* Mayer–Vietoris sequence
* Pseudocircle
* Ronald Brown (mathematician)

== Notes ==
==References==
* Allen Hatcher, &quot;Algebraic topology.&quot; (2002) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, xii+544 pp. and 
* Peter May, &quot;A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology.&quot; (1999) University of Chicago Press, &quot;(Section 2.7 provides a category-theoretic presentation of the theorem as a colimit in the category of groupoids)&quot;.
* Ronald Brown, Groupoids and Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem, &quot;Proc. London Math. Soc&quot;. (3) 17 (1967) 385–401.
* Mathoverflow discussion on many base points
* Ronald Brown, &quot;Topology and groupoids&quot; (2006) Booksurge LLC 
* R. Brown and A. Razak, A Van Kampen theorem for unions of non-connected spaces, Archiv. Math. 42 (1984) 85–88. (This paper gives probably the optimal version of the theorem, namely the groupoid version of the theorem for an arbitrary open cover and a set of base points which meets every path component of every 1-.2-3-fold intersections of the sets of the cover.) 
* P.J. Higgins, &quot;Categories and groupoids&quot; (1971) Van Nostrand Reinhold
* Ronald Brown, &quot;Higher-dimensional group theory&quot; (2007) &quot;(Gives a broad view of higher-dimensional Van Kampen theorems involving multiple groupoids)&quot;.
* Seifert, H., &quot;Konstruction drei dimensionaler geschlossener Raume&quot;. Berichte Sachs. Akad. Leipzig, Math.-Phys. Kl. (83) (1931) 26–66.
*E. R. van Kampen. &quot;On the connection between the fundamental groups of some related spaces.&quot; American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 55 (1933), pp. 261–267.
* Brown, R., Higgins, P. J, &quot;On the connection between the second relative homotopy groups of some related spaces&quot;, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 36 (1978) 193–212.
*Brown, R., Higgins, P. J. and Sivera, R.. 2011, EMS Tracts in Mathematics Vol.15 (2011) &quot;Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: filtered spaces, crossed complexes, cubical homotopy groupoids&quot;; (The first of three Parts discusses the applications of the 1- and 2-dimensional versions of the Seifert–van Kampen Theorem. The latter allows calculations of nonabelian second relative homotopy groups, and in fact of homotopy 2-types. The second part applies a Higher Homotopy van Kampen Theorem for crossed complexes, proved in Part III.)
* R. Brown, H. Kamps, T. Porter : A homotopy double groupoid of a Hausdorff space II: a Van Kampen theorem&#x27;, Theory and Applications of Categories, 14 (2005) 200–220.
* Dylan G.L. Allegretti, &quot;Simplicial Sets and Van Kampen&#x27;s Theorem&quot; &quot;(Discusses generalized versions of Van Kampen&#x27;s theorem applied to topological spaces and simplicial sets).&quot;
* R. Brown and J.-L. Loday, &quot;Van Kampen theorems for diagrams of spaces&quot;, Topology 26 (1987) 311–334.
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q372037" start="20" end="46" title="Seifert–Van Kampen theorem" label="Seifert–Van Kampen theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="50" end="68" title="algebraic topology" label="algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75807" start="82" end="97" title="Herbert Seifert" label="Herbert Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296937" start="102" end="119" title="Egbert van Kampen" label="Egbert van Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q372037" start="144" end="169" title="Seifert–Van Kampen theorem" label="Van Kampen&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q662830" start="202" end="219" title="fundamental group" label="fundamental group"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="225" end="242" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="301" end="315" title="path-connected" label="path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="316" end="325" title="subspace topology" label="subspaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="331" end="336" title="cover (topology)" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="578" end="583" title="union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="719" end="727" title="empty set" label="nonempty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098095" start="930" end="936" title="Induced homomorphism (fundamental group)" label="induce"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="937" end="955" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633079" start="1066" end="1073" title="Fibered coproduct" label="pushout"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="1125" end="1136" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454165" start="1193" end="1205" title="free product" label="free product"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="1380" end="1389" title="injective map" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633079" start="1452" end="1460" title="fibered coproduct" label="pushouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1464" end="1470" title="group (mathematics)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="1621" end="1627" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="1779" end="1791" title="intersection (set theory)" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q85174068" start="1842" end="1862" title="fundamental groupoid" label="fundamental groupoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196038" start="2016" end="2024" title="groupoid" label="groupoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="2037" end="2045" title="homotopy" label="homotopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="2084" end="2089" title="path (topology)" label="paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q230689" start="2193" end="2211" title="contractible space" label="contractible space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2526" end="2534" title="Integer#Algebraic properties" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="2680" end="2688" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322614" start="2741" end="2748" title="colimit" label="colimit"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="2852" end="2861" title="interior (topology)" label="interiors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="2958" end="2972" title="path component" label="path component"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="3267" end="3275" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="3279" end="3286" title="abstract algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="3382" end="3395" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140810" start="4527" end="4538" title="coequaliser" label="coequaliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526736" start="4619" end="4645" title="combinatorial group theory" label="combinatorial group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454165" start="4843" end="4873" title="free product with amalgamation" label="free product with amalgamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q915906" start="4999" end="5017" title="group presentation" label="group presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="5088" end="5103" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633079" start="5123" end="5130" title="pushout (mathematics)" label="pushout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912012" start="5139" end="5157" title="category of groups" label="category of groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="5382" end="5388" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q621542" start="5683" end="5702" title="commutative diagram" label="commutative diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="6084" end="6096" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="6112" end="6128" title="simply connected" label="simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q568687" start="6175" end="6182" title="trivial group" label="trivial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419329" start="6317" end="6330" title="pointed space" label="pointed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781358" start="6376" end="6385" title="wedge sum" label="wedge sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="6413" end="6421" title="quotient space (topology)" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="6515" end="6527" title="neighborhood (mathematics)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189061" start="6671" end="6681" title="CW complex" label="CW complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454165" start="6861" end="6873" title="free product" label="free product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7075" end="7113" title="genus (mathematics)#Orientable surface" label="genus-&amp;quot;n&amp;quot; orientable surface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7229" end="7257" title="Fundamental polygon#Standard fundamental polygons" label="standard fundamental polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45926" start="7501" end="7508" title="annulus (mathematics)" label="annulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="7531" end="7550" title="homotopy equivalent" label="homotopy equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141963" start="7922" end="7941" title="deformation retract" label="deformation retract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781358" start="8074" end="8083" title="wedge sum" label="wedge sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961806" start="8125" end="8143" title="bouquet of circles" label="bouquet of circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q431078" start="8213" end="8223" title="free group" label="free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558786" start="8421" end="8426" title="loop (topology)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="8724" end="8740" title="simply connected" label="simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="8827" end="8841" title="path-connected" label="path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364701" start="8953" end="8965" title="Ronald Brown (mathematician)" label="Ronald Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="9280" end="9285" title="mathematical proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676378" start="9364" end="9376" title="J. Peter May" label="J. Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="9470" end="9479" title="singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837899" start="9497" end="9510" title="Allen Hatcher" label="Allen Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q260928" start="9617" end="9637" title="Jordan curve theorem" label="Jordan curve theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="9639" end="9653" title="covering space" label="covering space"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="9660" end="9671" title="orbit space" label="orbit space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626416" start="10147" end="10161" title="homotopy group" label="homotopy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166866" start="10389" end="10405" title="Jean-Louis Loday" label="Jean-Louis Loday"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="10442" end="10460" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77141" start="10487" end="10509" title="Alexander Grothendieck" label="Alexander Grothendieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510766" start="10523" end="10556" title="Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois Marie" label="Séminaire de géométrie algébrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029637" start="10776" end="10802" title="Higher-dimensional algebra" label="Higher-dimensional algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758318" start="10805" end="10827" title="Higher category theory" label="Higher category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421905" start="10830" end="10853" title="Mayer–Vietoris sequence" label="Mayer–Vietoris sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254653" start="10856" end="10868" title="Pseudocircle" label="Pseudocircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364701" start="10871" end="10899" title="Ronald Brown (mathematician)" label="Ronald Brown (mathematician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75807" start="12127" end="12138" title="Herbert Seifert" label="Seifert, H."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382772" wikidata="Q10917278" url="?curid=382772" title="Streaker">
<text>Streaker may refer to:

* Someone who engages in streaking, purposely appearing and running nude in public
* Streaker (dinghy), a sailing dinghy
*&quot;Streaker&quot; (video game), a 1987 computer game published by Bulldog
* Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (tracked), a high-mobility carrier vehicle named Streaker, from the United Kingdom
* Streaker (SpaceDev), a small launch vehicle
* MQM-107 Streaker, a target-towing drone used by the U.S. Army and Air Force
* The &quot;Streaker&quot;, a starship crewed by dolphins, from David Brin&#x27;s &quot;Uplift Universe&quot; novels

==See also==
* Streak (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10917278" start="0" end="8" title="Streaker" label="Streaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064754" start="49" end="58" title="streaking" label="streaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q269580" start="109" end="126" title="Streaker (dinghy)" label="Streaker (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622639" start="146" end="179" title="Streaker (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Streaker&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984722" start="225" end="264" title="Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (tracked)" label="Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (tracked)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142543" start="340" end="359" title="Streaker (SpaceDev)" label="Streaker (SpaceDev)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717401" start="386" end="402" title="MQM-107 Streaker" label="MQM-107 Streaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166951" start="474" end="482" title="Streaker (David Brin)" label="Streaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622628" start="595" end="618" title="Streak (disambiguation)" label="Streak (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382777" wikidata="Q1218361" url="?curid=382777" title="Loriot (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Loriot]] was the stage name of Vicco von Bülow (1923–2011), a German humorist, graphic artist, director, actor, and writer.

It may also refer to:

== Surname ==
* Anne-Marie Loriot (born 1956), Olympic Athlete
* Fernand Loriot (1870-1932), French pacifist and politician
* Guillaume Loriot (born 1986), French footballer
* Julien Loriot (1633–1715), French priest

== Other ==
* &quot;Loriot&quot;, a British term for the game Diabolo
* &quot;Loriot&quot; (ship), a mid-19th-century American ship
* &quot;Loriot&quot;, Great Western Railway telegraphic code for a machine truck

== See also ==
* Oriole, a family of birds known in French as loriots</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1218361" start="0" end="10" title="Loriot (disambiguation)" label="[[Loriot]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218361" start="33" end="48" title="Loriot (disambiguation)" label="Vicco von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768090" start="166" end="183" title="Anne-Marie Loriot" label="Anne-Marie Loriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069247" start="215" end="229" title="Fernand Loriot" label="Fernand Loriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406043" start="276" end="292" title="Guillaume Loriot" label="Guillaume Loriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189576" start="326" end="339" title="Julien Loriot" label="Julien Loriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q653904" start="430" end="437" title="Diabolo" label="Diabolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681280" start="440" end="465" title="Loriot (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Loriot&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029018" start="522" end="560" title="Great Western Railway telegraphic codes" label="Great Western Railway telegraphic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q202955" start="599" end="605" title="Old World oriole" label="Oriole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382778" wikidata="Q503384" url="?curid=382778" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory">
<text>Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory, (11 July 1892 – 14 November 1944) was a senior commander in the Royal Air Force. Leigh-Mallory served as a Royal Flying Corps pilot and squadron commander during the First World War. Remaining in the newly formed RAF after the war, Leigh-Mallory served in a variety of staff and training appointments throughout the 1920s and 1930s.

At the start of the Second World War, he was Air Officer Commanding (AOC) No. 12 (Fighter) Group and during the Battle of Britain. However he has been rightfully criticized for his political machinations within the Air Ministry, particularly with Sholto Douglas, that led to the replacement of Hugh Dowding and Keith Park on 25 November 1940, less than a month after the end of the Battle of Britain. Leigh-Mallory replaced Park at No. 11 (Fighter) Group and Sholto Douglas replaced Dowding as head of RAF Fighter Command. In 1942, Leigh-Mallory became Commander-in-Chief (C-in-C) of Fighter Command before being selected in 1943 to be the C-in-C of the Allied Expeditionary Air Force, which made him the air commander during the Allied Invasion of Normandy.

He died on November 1944 while en route to Ceylon to take up the post of Air Commander-in-Chief South East Asia Command when his aircraft crashed in the French Alps killing all eight people on-board including his wife.

==Early life==
Trafford Leigh-Mallory was born in Mobberley, Cheshire, the son of Herbert Leigh Mallory, (1856–1943), Rector of Mobberley, who legally changed his surname to Leigh-Mallory in 1914. He was the younger brother of George Mallory, the noted mountaineer. Leigh-Mallory grew up in a large house with many servants including a butler, a valet and a footman as well as numerous maids and gardeners. He was educated at Haileybury and at Magdalene College, Cambridge where he was a member of a literary club and where he made the acquaintance of Arthur Tedder, the future Marshal of the Royal Air Force. He passed his Bachelor of Laws degree and had applied to the Inner Temple in London to become a barrister when, in 1914, war broke out.

==First World War==
Leigh-Mallory immediately volunteered to join a Territorial Force battalion of the King&#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment) as a private. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 3 October 1914 and transferred to the Lancashire Fusiliers though officer training kept him in England when his battalion embarked. In the spring of 1915, he went to the front with the South Lancashire Regiment and was wounded during an attack at the Second Battle of Ypres. He was promoted to lieutenant on 21 June 1915.

After recovering from his wounds, Leigh-Mallory joined the Royal Flying Corps in January 1916 and was accepted for pilot training. On 7 July 1916, he was posted, as a lieutenant in the RFC, to No. 7 Squadron, where he flew on bombing, reconnaissance and photographic operations during the Battle of the Somme.

He was then transferred to No. 5 Squadron in July 1916 before returning to England. He was promoted to temporary captain on 2 November 1916.

Leigh-Mallory&#x27;s first combat command was No. 8 Squadron in November 1917. In the period after the Battle of Cambrai, No. 8 Squadron was involved in army cooperation, directing tanks and artillery. At the Armistice, Leigh-Mallory was mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Distinguished Service Order.

==Interwar years==
After the war, Leigh-Mallory thought of re-entering the legal profession, but with little prospect of a law career, he stayed in the recently created Royal Air Force (RAF), with promotion to major on 1 August 1919 (the rank was renamed &quot;squadron leader&quot; on the same date), and command of the Armistice Squadron.

Promoted to wing commander on 1 January 1925, Leigh-Mallory passed through the RAF Staff College in 1925 and received command of the School of Army Cooperation in 1927 before eventually being posted to the Army Staff College, Camberley in 1930. He was now a leading authority on army cooperation and in 1931, lectured at the Royal United Services Institute on air cooperation with mechanized forces. He spent a little over a year in the Protectorate of Uganda, arriving in the country in the late autumn of 1929 and returning to England in December of 1931.

Promoted to group captain on 1 January 1932, Leigh-Mallory received a posting to the Air Ministry in 1932 and was then assigned to the British delegation at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva under the auspices of the League of Nations, where he made many contacts. After the collapse of the conference, he returned to the Air Ministry and attended the Imperial Defense College, the most senior of the staff colleges. However, lack of senior command experience meant a spell as commander of No. 2 Flying School and station commander at RAF Digby before serving as a staff officer overseas. He was posted to the RAF in Iraq in Christmas 1935, and, having been promoted to air commodore on 1 January 1936, he returned to England to be appointed commander of No. 12 Group, Fighter Command in December 1937. He was visiting Harlaxton Manor when he received the news that he was now commander of No. 12 Group.

==Second World War==
===Battle of Britain===
Leigh-Mallory took command of 12 Group and proved an energetic organizer and leader. On 1 November 1938, he was promoted to air vice-marshal, one of the younger air vice-marshals then serving in the RAF. He was greatly liked by his staff, but his relations with his airfield station commanders were strained.

===No. 12 Group and the &quot;Big Wing&quot;===
During the Battle of Britain, Leigh-Mallory quarreled with Air Vice-Marshal Keith Park, the commander of 11 Group. Park, who was responsible for the defence of south east England and London, had stated that 12 Group was not doing enough to protect the airfields in the south-east. Leigh-Mallory had devised with Squadron Leader Douglas Bader a massed fighter formation known as the Big Wing, which they used with little success to hunt German bomber formations. Leigh-Mallory was critical of the tactics of Park and Sir Hugh Dowding, head of Fighter Command, believing that not enough was being done to allow wing-sized formations to operate successfully. 

He then worked energetically in political circles to bring about the removal of Park from command of 11 Group; the false claims for the Duxford Big Wing successes played a part in this. Throughout the Battle of Britain, his lack of support for Park&#x27;s 11 Group contributed materially to the damage that the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was able to inflict on 11 Group&#x27;s airfields.
After the Battle of Britain, Air Chief Marshal Charles Portal, the new Chief of the Air Staff, who had agreed with Leigh-Mallory, removed both Park and Dowding from their posts. Leigh-Mallory took over from Park as commander of 11 Group in December 1940.

===Fighter Command and D-Day===
One of the reasons for Leigh-Mallory&#x27;s appointment to command 11 Group was that he was seen as an offensively-minded leader in the Trenchard mould. Once appointed he soon introduced wing-sized fighter sweeps into France, known as &quot;rodeos&quot; (when accompanied by bombers to provoke enemy fighters, these were known as &quot;Circus&quot; operations). 

However, Leigh-Mallory came in for criticism as these raids over enemy territory caused heavy RAF casualties with over 500 pilots lost in 1941 alone, losing four aircraft for each German aircraft destroyed and having little effect on ground targets. Indeed, during this period the German armed forces were mobilizing for Operation Barbarossa and few &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; fighters remained in western Europe. It was indeed a steep learning curve for Leigh Mallory despite the fact that the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had made similar mistakes during the Battle of Britain and there were few other senior RAF commanders who had understanding of this. One of his staff officers pointed out: &quot;In my opinion we learned a hell of a lot – how to get these raids in, by deceiving radar and by counter-offensive techniques. [In the Middle East] they were still in the First World War business – they&#x27;d learned none of the deception techniques such as sending in high-level fighters and sneaking the bombers in underneath.&quot; Keeping 75 squadrons of fighters, mainly to conduct ineffective offensive operations from Britain during 1941, was also questionable while Malta and Singapore were only defended by older, obsolete types of aircraft. The RAF&#x27;s best commanders and air-warfare tacticians were in the Mediterranean area around this time achieving greater success over Malta and North Africa than their counterparts back home. Leigh-Mallory was promoted to acting air marshal on 13 July 1942.

In November 1942, Leigh-Mallory replaced Sholto Douglas as head of Fighter Command and was promoted to the temporary rank of air marshal on 1 December 1942. 

He was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in January 1943 and following a tour of air and army headquarters in Africa began lobbying for a unified command of the Allied air forces for the forthcoming invasion of Europe. There was considerable resistance to such a post with none of the vested air force interests – including Arthur Tedder, Arthur Harris at Bomber Command, and Carl Spaatz of the US Army Air Force – appearing interested in ceding any authority or autonomy. This was, of course, exactly why a unified commander was needed and Leigh-Mallory, with his experience with army cooperation, was a candidate for the job. In August 1943, Leigh-Mallory was appointed commander-in-chief of the Allied Expeditionary Air Force for the Normandy invasion. He was promoted to the substantive rank of air vice-marshal on 15 December 1943 and to the substantive rank of air marshal on 1 January 1944.

As many of these &quot;interdiction&quot; bombing missions took place against transport nodes, such as towns and villages, Leigh-Mallory came under political pressure to limit the effects of attacks on French civilians. He resisted, insisting that sacrifices were unfortunate but necessary if the air plan was to have any effect. His air plan succeeded in greatly slowing the mobilization of the German Army and his experience at army cooperation paid dividends. General Bernard Montgomery was pleased with the air support and told the War Office: &quot;We must definitely keep Leigh-Mallory as Air Commander-in-Chief. He is the only airman who is out to win the land battle and has no jealous reactions.&quot;

==Personal life==
Leigh-Mallory married Doris Sawyer in 1915; the couple had two children. He was a keen sailor and cricket fan.

After one of his children survived a serious illness, Leigh-Mallory became interested in faith healing and spiritualism. He was a practicing Christian and consistently donated portions of his salary to charity, which he kept private during his life, and it was only revealed after his death. In one anecdote, he suggested he had seen the ghost of Emily Langton Massingberd, the women&#x27;s rights campaigner, at Gunby Hall in Lincolnshire. When the building was threatened with demolition during the Second World War to make way for an airfield, Leigh-Mallory intervened to save it. The property is now managed by the National Trust.

==Death ==
On 16 August 1944, with the Battle of Normandy almost over, Leigh-Mallory was appointed Air Commander-in-Chief of South East Asia Command (SEAC) with the temporary rank of air chief marshal. But before he could take up his post, on 14 November, he and his wife were killed en route to Burma when their Avro York &quot;MW126&quot;, flown by Squadron Leader Charles Gordon Drake Lancaster (DFC and Bar), crashed in the French Alps, killing all on board. A court of inquiry found that the accident was a consequence of bad weather and might have been avoided if Leigh-Mallory had not insisted that the flight proceed in such poor conditions against the advice of his aircrew. His replacement at SEAC was his Battle of Britain rival Air Marshal Sir Keith Park.

He and his wife are buried, alongside eight aircrew, in Le Rivier d&#x27;Allemont, 15 miles (24 km) east-southeast of Grenoble, a short distance below the site of the air crash. To mark the 60th anniversary of the accident and Leigh-Mallory&#x27;s death, the local commune opened a small museum near the crash site, dedicated to him, in 2004.

==Legacy==
Battle of Britain-class steam railway locomotive number 34109, built for the Southern Region of British Railways in 1950, was named &quot;Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory&quot;.

==References==
==Sources==

* Deighton, Len. &quot;Battle of Britain&quot;. London: Michael Joseph, 1980. .
* Gilbert, Martin. &quot;Finest Hour.&quot; London: Heinemann, 1983. .
* Korda, Michael. &quot;With Wings Like Eagles: A History of the Battle of Britain.&quot; New York: HarperCollins, 2009. .
* Regan, Geoffrey. &quot;The Guinness Book of Flying Blunders&quot;. London: Guinness Books, 1996. .

==External links==

|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="0" end="17" title="Air Chief Marshal" label="Air Chief Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q503384" start="18" end="44" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory" label="Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="110" end="125" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="153" end="171" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="212" end="227" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="400" end="416" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698125" start="425" end="447" title="Air Officer Commanding" label="Air Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q635803" start="454" end="476" title="No. 12 Group RAF" label="No. 12 (Fighter) Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="492" end="509" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="595" end="607" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072665" start="627" end="641" title="Sholto_Douglas,_1st_Baron_Douglas_of_Kirtleside" label="Sholto Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="674" end="686" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q963245" start="691" end="701" title="Keith Park" label="Keith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551751" start="812" end="834" title="No. 11 Group RAF" label="No. 11 (Fighter) Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="882" end="901" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732565" start="1034" end="1064" title="Allied Expeditionary Air Force" label="Allied Expeditionary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1117" end="1137" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1183" end="1189" title="Sri Lanka" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="1236" end="1259" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="1293" end="1304" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886651" start="1410" end="1419" title="Mobberley" label="Mobberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="1421" end="1429" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="1478" end="1484" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q311604" start="1587" end="1601" title="George Mallory" label="George Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="1786" end="1796" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="1804" end="1832" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="1912" end="1925" title="Arthur Tedder" label="Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452755" start="1938" end="1968" title="Marshal of the Royal Air Force" label="Marshal of the Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="1984" end="2000" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="Bachelor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="2031" end="2043" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="2066" end="2075" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="2175" end="2192" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411074" start="2210" end="2242" title="King&amp;#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment)" label="King&amp;#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="2282" end="2299" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="2341" end="2361" title="Lancashire Fusiliers" label="Lancashire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567789" start="2488" end="2513" title="South Lancashire Regiment" label="South Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="2554" end="2576" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996284" start="2597" end="2607" title="Lieutenant (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="2685" end="2703" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308721" start="2819" end="2833" title="No. 7 Squadron RAF" label="No. 7 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="2915" end="2934" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043658" start="2964" end="2978" title="No. 5 Squadron RAF" label="No. 5 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="3050" end="3057" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043865" start="3125" end="3139" title="No. 8 Squadron RAF" label="No. 8 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q654374" start="3182" end="3199" title="Battle of Cambrai (1917)" label="Battle of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="3232" end="3248" title="army cooperation" label="army cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253436" start="3288" end="3297" title="Armistice with Germany" label="Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="3317" end="3340" title="mentioned in despatches" label="mentioned in dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="3357" end="3384" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3556" end="3571" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="3597" end="3602" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="3741" end="3755" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275587" start="3808" end="3825" title="RAF Staff College, Andover" label="RAF Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596549" start="3935" end="3964" title="Staff College, Camberley" label="Army Staff College, Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464767" start="4054" end="4085" title="Royal United Services Institute" label="Royal United Services Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097943" start="4166" end="4188" title="Protectorate of Uganda" label="Protectorate of Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="4300" end="4313" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="4449" end="4481" title="World Disarmament Conference" label="Disarmament Conference in Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4508" end="4525" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170999" start="4643" end="4667" title="Royal College of Defence Studies" label="Imperial Defense College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275277" start="4826" end="4835" title="RAF Digby" label="RAF Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="4961" end="4974" title="air commodore" label="air commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671333" start="5110" end="5125" title="Harlaxton Manor" label="Harlaxton Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="5365" end="5381" title="Air Vice Marshal" label="air vice-marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="5610" end="5627" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q963245" start="5675" end="5685" title="Keith Park" label="Keith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="5911" end="5926" title="Squadron Leader" label="Squadron Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="5927" end="5940" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q858346" start="5981" end="5989" title="Big Wing" label="Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="6119" end="6131" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317425" start="6393" end="6409" title="Duxford Wing" label="Duxford Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="6687" end="6701" title="Charles Portal" label="Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="7064" end="7073" title="Hugh Trenchard, 1st Viscount Trenchard" label="Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121850" start="7258" end="7287" title="Circus offensive" label="&amp;quot;Circus&amp;quot; operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="7613" end="7633" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="8456" end="8461" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="8466" end="8475" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="8765" end="8776" title="air marshal" label="air marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072665" start="8836" end="8850" title="William Douglas, 1st Baron Douglas of Kirtleside" label="Sholto Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="9293" end="9306" title="Arthur Tedder" label="Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="9308" end="9321" title="Arthur Travers Harris" label="Arthur Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q579115" start="9345" end="9356" title="Carl Spaatz" label="Carl Spaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732565" start="9667" end="9697" title="Allied Expeditionary Air Force" label="Allied Expeditionary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="10339" end="10357" title="Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372254" start="11057" end="11082" title="Emily Langton Massingberd" label="Emily Langton Massingberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618531" start="11123" end="11133" title="Gunby Hall" label="Gunby Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="11137" end="11149" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="11329" end="11343" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="11529" end="11546" title="air chief marshal" label="air chief marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11642" end="11647" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q538968" start="11659" end="11668" title="Avro York" label="Avro York"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="12062" end="12079" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q963245" start="12102" end="12112" title="Keith Park" label="Keith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="12233" end="12241" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="12380" end="12387" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596188" start="12470" end="12493" title="List of SR West Country and Battle of Britain class locomotives" label="Battle of Britain-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570387" start="12547" end="12582" title="Southern Region of British Railways" label="Southern Region of British Railways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382779" wikidata="Q3034836" url="?curid=382779" title="Ángel Berroa">
<text>Ángel Maria Berroa Selmo (born January 27, 1977) is a Dominican professional baseball coach and former professional baseball infielder. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Kansas City Royals, Los Angeles Dodgers, New York Yankees and New York Mets. Berroa was selected as the 2003 American League Rookie of the Year.

==Playing career==

===Oakland Athletics===
Berroa was signed out of the Dominican Republic by the Oakland Athletics on August 14, 1997. After spending the 1998 season with the A&#x27;s Dominican Summer League affiliate, he debuted stateside in the Arizona League for the 1999 season. There, he hit .290 in 46 games and was named to the league&#x27;s All-Star team. In 2000, he played for the Visalia Oaks in the California League and received an honorable mention on that year&#x27;s All-Star team for recording 11 doubles and 11 stolen bases in 129 games. He also committed 54 errors that year, third most in the league.

===Kansas City Royals===
On January 8, 2001, Berroa was acquired by the Kansas City Royals in a three-way trade that also included the Tampa Bay Devil Rays. Kansas City acquired Berroa, relief pitcher Roberto Hernández, and backup catcher A. J. Hinch in exchange for Johnny Damon and infielder Mark Ellis. In 2001, he hit a combined .304 with 14 home runs, 67 RBI, and 25 stolen bases between the Wilmington Blue Rocks in High-A and the Wichita Wranglers in Double-A. He played for the World Team in the 2001 All-Star Futures Game. He made his major league debut on September 18 as a defensive replacement against the Cleveland Indians. Berroa made his first start on September 25 and got his first major league hit off Detroit Tigers pitcher José Lima. He hit .302 in 15 games that season.

Berroa&#x27;s 2002 season was a disaster. It was discovered that he had lied about his age and was actually two years older than he originally claimed to be. Berroa was born in 1978, not 1980, making him 23 during his breakout 2001 season, not 21 like originally believed. He also missed much to a knee injury that required surgery, as well as hamstring and back issues, playing just 77 games for the Omaha Royals in Triple-A and hitting .216 with eight home runs and 35 RBI. Still, he was selected to play for the World Team in the All-Star Futures Game and also played for the Pacific Coast League in the Triple-A All-Star Game. He was called up in September and appeared in twenty games for the Royals.

Following the departure of Neifi Pérez, Berroa was made the team&#x27;s starting shortstop. He started the season hitting ninth in the batting order but was moved up later in the season. After committing 19 errors in his first 63 games, he had only five errors the rest of the year. Berroa finished the season with a .287 batting average, 17 home runs, 73 RBI, and 21 stolen bases. His performance sparked a media debate over who should be the American League Rookie of the Year: Berroa, Tampa Bay&#x27;s outfielder Rocco Baldelli, Cleveland&#x27;s outfielder Jody Gerut, or New York Yankees outfielder Hideki Matsui, a former star in the Central League of Nippon Professional Baseball. In the end, Berroa narrowly beat out Matsui by just four points to become the fourth member of the Royals to win the Rookie of the Year award, following Lou Piniella (1969), Bob Hamelin (1994), and Carlos Beltrán (1999).

Berroa took a step back in 2004. After just 14 games, he hit the disabled list with migraine headaches. In May, the Royals signed him to a four-year, $11 million deal with an option for the 2009 season. He slashed .249/.295/.368 through August 9 and made numerous mental mistakes in the field and on the base paths before he was demoted to Double-A Wichita for two weeks. Following his return, Berroa hit .291 with three home runs and 13 RBI in 38 games to close out the season. His 28 errors in the field led the majors that year.

Berroa&#x27;s numbers continued to slip in 2005. His quality of play was seen by the media as a cause for manager Tony Pena&#x27;s resignation on May 10. Berroa was doubled off second base in the ninth inning of a 3–1 game against the Toronto Blue Jays. After losing a franchise-record 104 games in 2004 and getting off to an 8–25 start to the 2005 season, Pena resigned hours after the game ended. He hit .270 with 11 home runs and 55 RBI in a career-high 159 games that year. His 0.17 K/BB rate ranked second worst in the majors.

In 2006, he hit just .234 with nine home runs and 54 RBI in 132 games that year. It was the third year in a row where Berroa&#x27;s on-base percentage, slugging, and steals declined. His .592 OPS ranked the worst among all qualified hitters, and his average, on-base percentage and slugging were all last among qualified batters in the American League. His 0.16 K/BB was tied for last in the majors that year. Berroa&#x27;s fielding statistics included 71 errors from 2004 to 2006, which were the most in the majors during that time.

Berroa spent the offseason before the 2007 season in Kansas City to work on his hitting and agility. He went into spring training expected to compete against Alex Gonzalez and Andres Blanco for the shortstop position. He ultimately hit .263 with 14 strikeouts and no walks in 38 at-bats. It was also believed that Berroa&#x27;s defensive range had deteriorated. On March 23, the Royals acquired shortstop Tony Peña Jr. from the Atlanta Braves. Berroa was optioned to Triple-A Omaha the next day and Peña was named the starting shortstop. He was recalled on May 14, but was 1–11 in nine games with the Royals before being designated for assignment on June 6. Berroa was outrighted to Triple-A and spent the rest of the season in the minors, hitting .300 in 81 games for the Omaha Royals.

He spent spring training in 2008 with the Royals, but was assigned to Triple-A on March 29. He hit .291 in 51 games with Omaha.

===Los Angeles Dodgers===

On June 6, 2008, Berroa was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers for minor league infielder Juan Rivera. At the time of the trade, the Dodgers needed a temporary replacement for Rafael Furcal, who was in the disabled list with a back injury. Berroa received a surprisingly large amount of playing time, hitting .230 starting 64 games out of 84 total. Notably, he showed increased patience at the plate, drawing more walks than in any season since 2004 despite not playing a full season. 

Berroa was included on the Dodgers&#x27; playoff roster as a bench player behind the recently-returned Furcal. He was used as a defensive replacement, pinch runner, and pinch hitter in five games during LA&#x27;s playoff run. He got his first postseason hit in Game 2 of the National League Division Series against the Chicago Cubs. After the end of the season, the Dodgers declined Berroa&#x27;s $5.5 million option for the 2009 season. 

===New York Yankees ===
On January 6, 2009, Berroa agreed to a minor league deal worth $900,000 with the New York Yankees. He was brought in to compete for a utility infielder role with Cody Ransom expected to played third base in place of the injured Alex Rodriguez. Despite hitting .371 in 29 games, Berroa did not make the opening day roster and was assigned to minor league camp on the last day of spring training. He was added to the major league roster on April 25 following following an injury to Ransom, leaving Berroa and Ramiro Pena to fill in at third base. Berroa got his first hit with the Yankees that day. After hitting .136 in 21 games, he was designated for assignment on June 24 once Ransom returned from the 60-day disabled list. He was granted his release on July 7.

===New York Mets===

On July 11, 2009, the New York Mets signed Berroa to a minor league contract assigned him to Triple-A Buffalo. On July 16, his contract was purchased by the major league club in order to help fill in for the injured Jose Reyes. He was designated for assignment on August 7. He finished the season having played a combined 35 games with 49 at-bats and a .391 OPS for the Yankees and the Mets.

===Los Angeles Dodgers (second stint)===
On December 17, 2009, Berroa was signed to a minor league contract with an invitation to spring training by the Dodgers. However, he failed to make the team and was released by the Dodgers on March 22, 2010.

===San Francisco Giants===
On April 28, 2010, Berroa signed a minor league contract with the San Francisco Giants. He hit .206 with four walks and 12 strikeouts in 26 games for the Fresno Grizzlies before he was placed on the disabled list on June 13. Berroa was released on June 26.

===Bridgeport Bluefish===
In April 2011, he signed with the Bridgeport Bluefish of the independent Atlantic League. He hit .263 with six home runs and 33 RBI in 64 games with the Bluefish.

===Arizona Diamondbacks===
Berroa signed a minor league contract with the Arizona Diamondbacks on July 24, 2011. He was assigned to the Triple-A Reno Aces to replace Cody Ransom, who had been called up to the majors in order to replace the injured Stephen Drew.

===New Jersey Jackals===
Berroa spent the 2012 season with the New Jersey Jackals of the Can-Am League, hitting .310 with a team-leading .398 OBP. On July 26, 2012, it was announced Berroa had formally retired from baseball and was seeking a job in professional soccer.

===Leones de Yucatan===
Berroa played for Leones de Yucatan in the Mexican League for the 2013 season. He hit .293 with 12 home runs and 62 RBI.

===Pericos de Pueblo===
He joined Pericos de Pueblo for the 2014 season and hit .334 with 23 home runs and 98 RBI. That year, he was an LMB All-Star.

===Vaqueros Laguna===
On February 6, 2015, Berroa signed with the Vaqueros Laguna in the Mexican League. He was released on June 12. In 44 games he hit .281/.337/.431 with 5 home runs, 28 RBIs and 1 stolen base.

==Post-playing career==
Berroa has been a coach with the GCL Red Sox since the 2017 season. After four years in the Red Sox organization, he joined the Danville Otterbots of the Appalachian League as hitting coach. In 2022, he was hired as the Latin America infield coordinator for the Detroit Tigers.

==Personal==
Berroa is the son-in-law of former major league player and coach Luis Silverio.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Angel Berroa at Baseball Almanac</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3034836" start="0" end="24" title="Ángel Berroa" label="Ángel Maria Berroa Selmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="54" end="63" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="86" end="91" title="coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147776" start="125" end="134" title="infielder" label="infielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="149" end="170" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="185" end="203" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="205" end="224" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="226" end="242" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="247" end="260" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="294" end="328" title="MLB Rookie of the Year award" label="American League Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="430" end="447" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052962" start="517" end="540" title="Dominican Summer League" label="Dominican Summer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050345" start="580" end="594" title="Arizona Complex League" label="Arizona League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935602" start="724" end="736" title="Visalia Oaks" label="Visalia Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186782" start="744" end="761" title="California League" label="California League"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="1027" end="1045" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="1090" end="1110" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436912" start="1156" end="1173" title="Roberto Hernández (relief pitcher)" label="Roberto Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818926" start="1194" end="1205" title="A. J. Hinch" label="A. J. Hinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25720" start="1222" end="1234" title="Johnny Damon" label="Johnny Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294069" start="1249" end="1259" title="Mark Ellis (baseball)" label="Mark Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022743" start="1352" end="1373" title="Wilmington Blue Rocks" label="Wilmington Blue Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998179" start="1392" end="1409" title="Wichita Wranglers" label="Wichita Wranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="1573" end="1590" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="1675" end="1689" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q495884" start="1698" end="1707" title="José Lima" label="José Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118310" start="2148" end="2160" title="Omaha Royals" label="Omaha Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054498" start="2280" end="2301" title="All-Star Futures Game" label="All-Star Futures Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="2326" end="2346" title="Pacific Coast League" label="Pacific Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139069" start="2481" end="2492" title="Neifi Pérez" label="Neifi Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202128" start="2661" end="2667" title="Error (baseball)" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="2776" end="2791" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="2796" end="2804" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="2810" end="2813" title="run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="2822" end="2833" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="2898" end="2913" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017352" start="2970" end="2984" title="Rocco Baldelli" label="Rocco Baldelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q742052" start="3014" end="3024" title="Jody Gerut" label="Jody Gerut"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="3029" end="3045" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q954080" start="3057" end="3070" title="Hideki Matsui" label="Hideki Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053900" start="3093" end="3107" title="Central League" label="Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="3111" end="3139" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="Nippon Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q676861" start="3294" end="3306" title="Lou Piniella" label="Lou Piniella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907692" start="3315" end="3326" title="Bob Hamelin" label="Bob Hamelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042743" start="3339" end="3353" title="Carlos Beltrán" label="Carlos Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026246" start="4010" end="4019" title="Tony Peña" label="Tony Pena"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="4131" end="4148" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q281706" start="5122" end="5135" title="Alex Gonzalez (shortstop, born 1973)" label="Alex Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q861758" start="5140" end="5153" title="Andrés Blanco" label="Andres Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747948" start="5369" end="5381" title="Tony Peña Jr." label="Tony Peña Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="5392" end="5406" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="5950" end="5969" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339046" start="6083" end="6096" title="Rafael Furcal" label="Rafael Furcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093339" start="6669" end="6700" title="2008 National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="6713" end="6725" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="6939" end="6955" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981727" start="7020" end="7031" title="Cody Ransom" label="Cody Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="7086" end="7100" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139775" start="7365" end="7376" title="Ramiro Peña" label="Ramiro Pena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264402" start="7494" end="7519" title="designated for assignment" label="designated for assignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="7568" end="7581" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="7665" end="7678" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q733939" start="7745" end="7752" title="Buffalo Bisons" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220096" start="7859" end="7869" title="José Reyes (infielder)" label="Jose Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="8379" end="8399" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106580" start="8467" end="8483" title="Fresno Grizzlies" label="Fresno Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869400" start="8670" end="8685" title="Atlantic League of Professional Baseball" label="Atlantic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="8835" end="8855" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822963" start="8906" end="8915" title="Reno Aces" label="Reno Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063924" start="9009" end="9021" title="Stephen Drew" label="Stephen Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009239" start="9087" end="9105" title="New Jersey Jackals" label="New Jersey Jackals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240266" start="9113" end="9126" title="Canadian American Association of Professional Baseball" label="Can-Am League"/>
<link wikidata="Q868087" start="9658" end="9673" title="Vaqueros Laguna" label="Vaqueros Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349768" start="9681" end="9695" title="Mexican League" label="Mexican League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617449" start="9862" end="9873" title="GCL Red Sox" label="GCL Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393699" start="9957" end="9975" title="Danville Otterbots" label="Danville Otterbots"/>
<link wikidata="Q867411" start="9983" end="10001" title="Appalachian League" label="Appalachian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="10091" end="10105" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701121" start="10186" end="10199" title="Luis Silverio" label="Luis Silverio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382786" wikidata="Q355086" url="?curid=382786" title="Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie">
<text>Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie (21 June 182527 January 1882) was an Irish jurist and economist. He was professor of jurisprudence and political economy in Queen&#x27;s College, Belfast, noted for challenging the Wages-Fund doctrine and for addressing contemporary agrarian policy questions. A critic of Ricardian orthodoxy, he said that it had sidelined consumer behaviour and demand. He developed the idea of consumer sovereignty, but insisted that the analysis of demand should be based on historical and comparative institutional work.

== Early life ==

T. E. Cliffe Leslie was born in the county of Wexford, the second son of the Rev. Edward Leslie, prebendary of Dromore, and rector of Annahilt, in the county of Down. His family was of Scottish descent, but had been connected with Ireland since the reign of Charles I. Amongst his ancestors were John Leslie (1571–1671), bishop first of Raphoe and afterwards of Clogher, and the bishop&#x27;s son Charles Leslie.

Cliffe Leslie received his elementary education from his father, who resided in England, though holding church preferment and some landed property in Ireland. His father taught him Latin, Greek and Hebrew at an unusually early age. Afterwards, for a short time he was under the care of a clergyman at Clapham, and was then sent to King William&#x27;s College, in the Isle of Man.

He entered the University of Dublin, Trinity College in 1842. He was a distinguished student there, obtaining, besides other honours, a classical scholarship in 1845, and a senior moderatorship (gold medal) in mental and moral philosophy at his degree examination in 1846. He became a law student at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn, was for two years a pupil in a conveyancers chambers in London, and was called to the English bar. But his attention soon turned from the pursuit of legal practice, for which he seems never to have had much inclination.

== Academic career ==

In 1853, Cliffe Leslie was appointed to the professorship of jurisprudence and political economy in Queen&#x27;s College, Belfast. The duties of this chair requiring only short visits to Ireland in certain terms of each year, he continued to reside and pursue his studies in London, and became a frequent writer on economic and social questions in the principal reviews and other periodicals.

In 1860 he collected a number of his essays, adding several new ones, into a volume entitled &quot;Land Systems and Industrial Economy of Ireland, England and Continental Countries&quot;. JS Mill gave a full account of the contents of this work in a paper in the &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot;, in which he pronounced Leslie to be one of the best living writers on applied political economy. Mill had sought his acquaintance on reading his first article in &quot;Macmillan&#x27;s Magazine&quot;; he admired his talents, took pleasure in his society, and treated him with a respect and kindness which Leslie always gratefully acknowledged.

In the frequent visits which Leslie made to the continent, especially to Belgium and some of the less-known districts of France and Germany, he occupied himself much in economic and social observation. He studied the effects of the institutions and system of life which prevailed in each region, on the material and moral condition of its inhabitants. In this way he gained an extensive and accurate acquaintance with continental rural economy, of which he made excellent use in studying parallel phenomena at home. The accounts he gave of the results of his observations were among his happiest efforts; no one, said Mill, was able to write narratives of foreign visits at once so instructive and so interesting. In these excursions he made the acquaintance of several distinguished persons, amongst others of M. Lonce de Lavergne and M. Émile de Laveleye. To the memory of the former of these he afterwards paid a graceful tribute in a biographical sketch (&quot;Fortnightly Review&quot;, February 1881); and to the close of his life there existed between him and M. de Laveleye relations of mutual esteem and cordial intimacy.

==Writings==
Leslie&#x27;s work falls into two categories: applied political economy and the discussion of the philosophical method of the science. &quot;The Land Systems and Industrial Economy of Ireland, England and Continental Countries&quot; belonged principally to the former division. Two essays of Leslie&#x27;s appeared in volumes published under the auspices of the Cobden Club. The &quot;Land System of France&quot; (2nd ed., 1870), contained an earnest defence of &quot;la petite culture&quot; and still more of &quot;la petite propriété.&quot; &quot;Financial Reform&quot; (1871), set forth the impediments to production and commerce arising from indirect taxation. Many other articles were contributed by him to reviews between 1875 and 1879, including several discussions of the history of prices and the movements of wages in Europe, and a sketch of life in Auvergne in his best manner. The most important of them, however, related to the philosophical method of political economy, notably a memorable one which appeared in the Dublin University periodical, &quot;Hermathena&quot;.

In 1879 the provost and senior fellows of Trinity College published for him a volume in which a number of these articles were collected under the title of &quot;Essays in Political and Moral Philosophy&quot;. These and some later essays, together with the earlier volume on &quot;Land Systems&quot;, form the essential contribution of Leslie to economic literature. He had long contemplated, and had in part written, a work on English economic and legal history, which would have been his &quot;magnum opus&quot;, a more substantial fruit of his genius and his labours than anything he has left. But the manuscript of this treatise, after much pains had already been spent on it, was unaccountably lost at Nancy in 1872; and, though he hoped to be able speedily to reproduce the missing portion and finish the work, no material was left in a state fit for publication. What the nature of it would have been may be gathered from an essay on the &quot;History and Future of Profit&quot; in the &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; for November 1881, which is believed to have been in substance an extract from it.

That he was able to do so much may well be a subject of wonder when it is known that his labours had long been impeded by a painful and depressing malady, from which he suffered severely at intervals, whilst he never felt secure from its recurring attacks. To this disease he in the end succumbed at Belfast, on 27 January 1882.

Cliffe Leslie emphasised the land question as a central issue for the social welfare of both Ireland and England. This volume has both a breadth of view and a rich variety of illustrative detail. His general purpose was to show that the territorial systems of both countries were so encumbered with historical elements of a feudal origin as to be altogether unfit to serve the purposes of a modern industrial society. The policy he recommended is summed up in the following:Had there been in England a simple jurisprudence relating to land, a law of equal intestate succession, a prohibition of entail, a legal security for tenants&#x27; improvements, an open registration of title and transfer, a considerable number of peasant properties, the rural economy of England would long since have created unanswerable objections to the Irish land system in the public mind.—The Land Systems, ed. 1870, p. 2

Much of Cliffe Leslie&#x27;s work concerned the problems of Ireland. He rejected Home Rule as a solution, preferring land reform in favour of small proprietorship.

== Method ==

Cliffe Leslie defended the inductive method in political economy, against the attempt to deduce the economic phenomena of a society from the so-called universal principle of the desire of wealth. English empiricism has a long tradition, dating from David Hume and Francis Bacon. Leslie was of this empirical tendency of British economic thought. He said that[Economics&#x27;] fundamental laws ought to be obtained by careful induction, that assumptions from which an unreal order of things and unreal uniformities are deduced cannot be regarded as final or adequate; and that facts, instead of being irrelevant to the economist&#x27;s reasoning, are the phenomena from which he must infer his general principles, and by which he ought constantly to verify his deductions.

Further, he spoke of the...necessity of studying every economic problem in conformity with the universal canons of the logic of science – of accepting no assumptions as finally established without proof, none as adequate from which conclusions untrue as matters of fact are found to result, and no chains of deduction from hypothetical premises as possessing more than hypothetical truth, until verified by observation.

The first influence which impelled Cliffe Leslie in the direction of the historical and comparative institutional methods was that of Sir Henry Maine, himself a student of historical jurisprudence as represented by Savigny. Maine&#x27;s &quot;Ancient Law&quot; (1861) is famous for the thesis that law and society developed &quot;from status to contract&quot;. Maine&#x27;s personal teaching of jurisprudence, as well as the example of his writings, led Cliffe Leslie to look at the present economic structure and state of society as the result of a long evolution. Of the German economists who represent similar tendencies, only perhaps Roscher was an influence. And the writings of Comte, whom he admired though critically, must have powerfully co-operated to form in him the habit of regarding economic science as only a single branch of sociology.

The earliest writing in which Leslie&#x27;s revolt against the so-called orthodox school distinctly appears is his &quot;Essay on Wages&quot;, first published in 1868 and reproduced as an appendix to the volume on &quot;Land Systems&quot;. In this, after criticism of the Wages-Fund doctrine and the lack of agreement between its results and the observed phenomena, he concludes by declaring that political economy must be an inductive, instead of a purely deductive science. By this change, it will gain in utility, interest and real truth far more than a full compensation for the forfeiture of a fictitious title to mathematical exactness and certainty. But it is in the essays collected in the volume of 1879 that his attitude in relation to the question of method is most decisively marked. In one of these, on the political economy of Adam Smith, he exhibits in a very interesting way the co-existence in The Wealth of Nations of historical-inductive investigation in the manner of Montesquieu with &quot;a priori&quot; speculation founded on theologico-metaphysical bases, and points out the error of ignoring the former element, which is the really characteristic feature of Smith&#x27;s social philosophy, and places him in strong contrast with the school of Ricardo.

The essay, however, which contains the most brilliant polemic against the orthodox school, as well as the most luminous account and the most powerful vindication of the new direction, was that of which we have above spoken as having first appeared in &quot;Hermathena&quot;. It may be recommended as supplying the best extant presentation of one of the two contending views of economic method. On this essay mainly rests the claim of Leslie to be regarded as the founder and first head of the English historical school of political economy. Those who share his views on the philosophical constitution of the science regard the work he did, notwithstanding its unsystematic character, as in reality the most important done by any English economists in the latter half of the 19th century. But even the warmest partisans of the older school acknowledge that he did excellent service by insisting on a kind of inquiry, previously too much neglected, which was of the highest interest and value, in whatever relation it might be supposed to stand to the establishment of economic truth. The members of both groups alike recognised his great learning, his patient and conscientious habits of investigation and the large social spirit in which he treated the problems of his science.

Cliffe Leslie insisted on an inductive, historical and institutional approach, which was in vogue in the late-Nineteenth Century. Even so, a recent assessment views his work in applied economics as complementary to contemporary theoretical work.

== Works ==
* &quot;The Military Systems of Europe Economically Considered&quot; (1856)
* &quot;Political Economy and the Rate of Wages&quot;, &quot;Fraser&#x27;s Magazine&quot; (15 July 1868); Reprinted in &quot;Land Systems...&quot; (1870) pp. 357–379. On line.
* &quot;Land Systems and Industrial Economy of Ireland, England and Continental Countries,&quot; London, Longmans, Green (1860); new edition, (1870) 
* &quot;The Love of Money&quot; (1862) Reprinted in &quot;Essays in Political Economy,&quot; cited below, p. 189.
* &quot;The Political Economy of Adam Smith&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (1 November 1870)
* &quot;Financial Reform,&quot; Cobden Club Essays, 2nd Series (1871)
* &quot;The History of German Political Economy&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (1 July 1875)
* &quot;On the Philosophical Method of Political Economy&quot;, &quot;Hermathena,&quot; Dublin University (1876)
* &quot;The Land System of France,&quot; Cobden Club Essays (1876)
* &quot;Political Economy and Sociology&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (1 January 1879)
* &quot;Essays in Political and Moral Philosophy,&quot; Dublin and London, Hodges, Foster &amp; Figgis and Longmans, Green (1879)
* &quot;Essays in Political Economy,&quot; Dublin, Hodges, Figgis &amp; Co. (1879, 1888)
* &quot;Political Economy in the United States&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (1 October 1880)
* &quot;The Irish Land Question&quot;, &quot;Appleton&#x27;s Journal&quot; (1881)
* &quot;History and Future of Profit&quot;, &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (November 1881)

==References==
==Sources==
* F. W. Fetter, &quot;Leslie, T. E. Cliffe&quot;, &quot;International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences&quot; D. L. Sills (ed.) (Macmillan and Free Press, 1968), vol. 2.
* G. M. Koot, &quot;English Historical Economics, 1870–1926: The Rise of Economic History and Neomercantilism,&quot; Cambridge, Cambridge University Press (1987)
* G. M. Koot, &quot;T. E. Cliffe Leslie, Irish Social Reform, and the Origins of the English Historical School of Economics,&quot; in &quot;James Wilson (1805–1860), Isaac Butt (1813–1879), T. E. Cliffe Leslie (1827–1882),&quot; ed. Mark Blaug, Elgar Reference Collection Series, Pioneers in Economics, vol. 22. Aldershot, Elgar pp. 92–116 (1991)
* Gregory C. G. Moore, &quot;T. E. Cliffe Leslie and the English Methodenstreit,&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Economic Thought&quot; 17 pp. 57–77 (Spring 1995)
* Geoffrey Martin Hodgson, &quot;The Historical School in the British Isles&quot;, &quot;How Economics Forgot History: The Problem of Historical Specificity in the Social Sciences,&quot; Routledge (2001) 
* R. D. Collison Black, &quot;The political economy of Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie (1826–82): a re-assessment&quot;, &quot;European Journal of the History of Economic Thought,&quot; Volume 9, Number 1, pp. 17–41 (1 March 2002)

==External links==
*Works of Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie available at the &quot;Archive for the History of Economic Thought&quot; website at McMaster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355086" start="0" end="27" title="Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie" label="Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="113" end="126" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="131" end="148" title="political economy" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="152" end="181" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953995" start="209" end="219" title="Wages-Fund" label="Wages-Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="261" end="276" title="land tenure" label="agrarian policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q301468" start="351" end="369" title="consumer behaviour" label="consumer behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q458007" start="407" end="427" title="consumer sovereignty" label="consumer sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378581" start="489" end="499" title="English historical school of economics" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118654" start="516" end="529" title="Institutional economics" label="institutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="591" end="608" title="County Wexford" label="county of Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="706" end="720" title="County Down" label="county of Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="813" end="822" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206871" start="851" end="862" title="John Leslie (bishop of Clogher)" label="John Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025561" start="892" end="898" title="Raphoe" label="Raphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283248" start="917" end="924" title="Clogher" label="Clogher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080208" start="952" end="966" title="Charles Leslie (nonjuror)" label="Charles Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1150" end="1155" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1157" end="1162" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1167" end="1173" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="1270" end="1277" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133147" start="1300" end="1327" title="King William&amp;#x27;s College" label="King William&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="1336" end="1347" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="1365" end="1402" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="University of Dublin, Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="2014" end="2043" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="2496" end="2503" title="John Stuart Mill" label="JS Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3021" end="3028" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q286125" start="3784" end="3804" title="Émile Louis Victor de Laveleye" label="M. Émile de Laveleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138848" start="4454" end="4465" title="Cobden Club" label="Cobden Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="4952" end="4960" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="5883" end="5888" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="7598" end="7607" title="Home Rule" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="7634" end="7645" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="7945" end="7955" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="7960" end="7973" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195523" start="9024" end="9039" title="Henry James Sumner Maine" label="Sir Henry Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76892" start="9105" end="9112" title="Friedrich Carl von Savigny" label="Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q62842" start="9528" end="9535" title="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher" label="Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718" start="9574" end="9579" title="Auguste Comte" label="Comte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953995" start="10015" end="10025" title="Wages-Fund" label="Wages-Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="10654" end="10675" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="10731" end="10742" title="Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="10754" end="10762" title="A priori and a posteriori" label="a priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366712" start="11522" end="11560" title="historical school of political economy" label="historical school of political economy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382788" wikidata="Q1943463" url="?curid=382788" title="Moleskin">
<text>Moleskin is a heavy cotton fabric, woven and then shorn to create a short, soft pile on one side. The feel and appearance of its nap is suede-like, less plush than velour and more like felt or chamois. The word is also used for clothing made from this fabric. Clothing made from moleskin is noted for its softness and durability. Some variants of the cloth are so densely woven as to be windproof.

Its name is due to the soft brushed hand of the fabric, similar to mole fur. Though mole pelts have been used to make fur clothing, they are not referred to as &quot;moleskin&quot;.

Moleskin is also a term for soft, dense adhesive pads stuck to the skin to prevent blisters.

== Structure ==
Moleskin is woven of carded cotton yarn in a dense weft-faced satin weave. The surface is napped or shorn to &quot;produce a suede-like finish&quot;.

==Uses==
Moleskin fabric is commonly used to make trousers, also referred to as &quot;moleskins&quot;, that are similar to jeans in terms of cut and construction. They similarly started as working menswear, but are now also much more widely worn.

===Medical===
Moleskin-like fabric with an adhesive backing is used to prevent or treat blisters, cut with a hole in the centre to provide relief to the affected skin. The thickness of the surrounding moleskin further protects the blister from additional friction.

===Audiovisual productions ===
Medical moleskin-like fabric with adhesive backing is also commonly used in video and/or audio productions when using a lavalier microphone. When further concealment of a lavalier microphone is needed in these types of productions, it can be worn underneath a layer or layers of the singer&#x27;s clothing. This would normally cause the microphone to pick up the unwanted noises of the singer&#x27;s clothing rubbing up against the body and top of the lavalier. Attaching a small strip of moleskin around the microphone body will dramatically reduce the amount of noise created by the singer&#x27;s clothing and, consequently, reduces the amount of unwanted noise picked up by the lavalier microphone.

===Military ===
West German army uniforms from the 1960s until the early 1990s were made of &quot;moleskin&quot; fabric in a greyish olive-drab colour, but the German moleskin was not shorn and thus had a flat, smooth outer side. Nonetheless, it was a tough, densely woven material, strongly resistant to wind and abrasion.

Military snipers occasionally wrap the stocks of their rifles in moleskin to absorb sweat and prevent slippage.

=== Workwear ===
Trousers made from moleskin were popular with British workers during the end of the nineteenth century due to the insulating and windproof qualities of the fabric.

==Variations==
Cotton sateen is a variant of moleskin. It utilises cheaper short-staple cotton to create a softer feeling fabric that is relatively fragile and wears quickly.

==See also==
* Cottonade

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1943463" start="0" end="8" title="Moleskin" label="Moleskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="20" end="26" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="27" end="33" title="textile" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152500" start="50" end="55" title="Shearing (textiles)" label="shorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397733" start="80" end="84" title="Pile (textile)" label="pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071417" start="136" end="141" title="suede" label="suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057522" start="153" end="158" title="plush" label="plush"/>
<link wikidata="Q621044" start="164" end="170" title="velour" label="velour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450533" start="193" end="200" title="Chamois leather" label="chamois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189180" start="466" end="470" title="Mole (animal)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="665" end="672" title="blister" label="blister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411858" start="713" end="719" title="carding" label="carded"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="720" end="726" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="743" end="747" title="weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q14298" start="754" end="759" title="satin" label="satin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901586" start="782" end="788" title="nap (textile)" label="napped"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="893" end="901" title="trousers" label="trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83363" start="966" end="971" title="jeans" label="jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="1179" end="1186" title="blister" label="blister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312047" start="1508" end="1527" title="lavalier microphone" label="lavalier microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="1568" end="1578" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="2107" end="2123" title="Bundeswehr" label="West German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q864152" start="2224" end="2234" title="Olive (color)" label="olive-drab"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="2425" end="2431" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649890" start="2733" end="2739" title="sateen" label="sateen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131072" start="2792" end="2798" title="Staple (textiles)" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q108660683" start="2902" end="2911" title="Cottonade" label="Cottonade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382789" wikidata="Q1273684" url="?curid=382789" title="John Stagliano">
<text>John Stagliano (born November 29, 1951), also known as Buttman, is an American entrepreneur, former pornographic film actor, producer and director who founded and owns the Evil Angel pornographic film studio.

==Early life and career==
Stagliano grew up in the Chicago suburbs, and attended high school from 1965 to 1969. He enrolled in college, but dropped out in 1969 for several semesters. He then went back to college and studied subjects including English, journalism, and engineering, before transferring to UCLA to major in economics. He originally planned to get an economics PhD and become a professor. He then switched to studying theater, playwriting, modern dance and jazz dance, partly because there were more women in those classes. He is of Italian ancestry with some of his grandparents from Florence.

In the 1970s, he wrote erotic fiction for a small newspaper, and did some softcore modeling. He made his debut in a hardcore pornographic film in an 8 mm loop in 1974. In 1979, he was looking for dancing jobs in Hollywood. He replied to an advertisement in the &quot;Daily Variety&quot; looking for male strippers for the new Chippendales show. He performed with the group four or five nights a week for the next four years. In 1982, when he was 30, he began publishing a small pornographic magazine on newsprint, which he called &quot;Evil Angel&quot;.

==Adult film producer==
Initially he had little knowledge of film making, but he made his first movie for $8,000 in 1983, titled &quot;Bouncing Buns&quot;, starring Stacy Donovan. For the next six years he made films for other companies to manufacture and distribute. In 1989, he started Evil Angel to sell his own films. The origin of the company&#x27;s name dates back to when Stagliano was working as a stripper. &quot;There was another guy in one of my shows named John. So this MC started calling me Evil John to differentiate us. This was when I was doing Dracula and chains. At the same time I had a girlfriend who called herself Angel when she did strip shows. She was a very nasty girl and I suggested that she call herself Evil Angel. She didn&#x27;t, but I loved the name and wound up using it for my company.&quot;

The first Evil Angel film was &quot;Dance Fire&quot;, filmed in 1988 by Stagliano, starring himself, Trinity Loren, and Brandy Alexandre.

=== &quot;The Adventures of Buttman&quot; ===
In 1989, he produced &quot;The Adventures of Buttman&quot;, the first in a popular series which is credited with sparking the &quot;gonzo&quot; adult film genre. These films involved highlighting the female buttocks, with actors often licking, kissing and playfully biting the female behind. Stagliano has stated that a scene showing Tracey Adams&#x27; buttocks inspired him to make the &quot;Buttman&quot; series of films. The clip shows Adams on her hands and knees with her rear end stuck high in the air. &quot;The shot only lasted a couple of seconds,&quot; says Stagliano, &quot;but I knew then what I wanted to do.&quot; Early Stagliano productions had little to no anal sex in them and were critically acclaimed for the showcasing of his buttocks fetish. Later &quot;Buttman&quot; films included numerous anal sex scenes, often featuring Stagliano himself. In the 1990s, Stagliano became one of the most successful figures in American pornographic films.

Stagliano was described by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; magazine in 1998 as &quot;the nation&#x27;s leading director of hard-core videos&quot;.

He has directed series including &quot;Buttman at Nudes a Poppin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Buttman Goes to Rio&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Anal Divas&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Anal Show&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Bend Over Babes&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Bend Over Brazilian Babes&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Big Butt Backdoor Babes&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Big Tit Adventure&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Butt Freak&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s European Vacation&quot;, &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Favorite Big Butt Babes&quot;, &quot;Face Dance&quot; and &quot;Fashionistas&quot;, as well as numerous one-off films. Stagliano also served as mentor, producer, and co-director to Tristan Taormino in her video version of &quot;The Ultimate Guide to Anal Sex for Women&quot;.

===Fashionistas===
From October 2004 through February 2008, Stagliano produced and directed a Las Vegas show called Fashionistas based on his porn film of the same name. In 2008, he won the &#x27;Best Director – Video&#x27; award for &quot;Fashionistas Safado: Berlin&quot;. (&quot;Safado&quot; is a Portuguese word meaning lewd or salacious.)

=== Obscenity trial ===
On April 8, 2008, Evil Angel and Stagliano were indicted on federal obscenity charges by a federal grand jury in Washington, D.C. The scenes selected by the government to support the prosecution involved urination, use of enemas, and bondage.
On July 16, 2010, a federal trial began in Washington, D.C., with Stagliano as defendant and after three days all charges were dismissed. Judge Richard J. Leon stated, &quot;I hope the government will learn a lesson from its experience,&quot; and called the evidence linking Stagliano to the production and distribution of the DVD videos &quot;woefully insufficient&quot;. Although he dismissed the charges on the grounds of insufficient evidence, the judge cited the &quot;difficult, challenging and novel questions&quot; raised in the case against Stagliano, questions concerning extant federal obscenity-statutes, the Internet, free speech, and the rights of criminal defendants. He stated that he hoped &quot;[higher] courts and Congress will give greater guidance to judges in whose courtrooms these cases will be tried.&quot;

===HIV lawsuit===
Stagliano was diagnosed with HIV in January 1997.

In a June 2013 lawsuit filed in Los Angeles Superior Court against Stagliano and his company Evil Angel, adult performer Katie Summers alleged &quot;negligence, intentional infliction of emotional distress, sexual battery and violations of professions code section 17200&quot; because Stagliano didn&#x27;t inform her of his HIV positive status prior to her performing in the 2010 movie &quot;Buttman&#x27;s Stretch Class 4&quot;. According to the lawsuit, Summers consented to Stagliano engaging in sexual contact within the context of her acting in an adult film. In the scene, Stagliano can be seen handing Summers sex toys and touching her buttocks, but he does not perform hardcore sex with her. Summers claims that had she known of Stagliano&#x27;s status prior to the scene, she would not have done it.

In a press interview, Stagliano&#x27;s wife Karen disputes the allegations: &quot;John and the company feel that he did not do anything with Katie Summers that would warrant having to inform her of his HIV status,&quot; Karen said &quot;He had no genital contact with her, no sexual touching of her genitals at all that would have put her at any sort of a medical risk whatsoever.&quot;

The suit against Stagliano went into forced arbitration and the plaintiff had her deposition taken, but on September 29, 2014 Summers dropped her lawsuit. According to Stagliano&#x27;s attorney, Paul Cambria, &quot;[Summers] had no case. I took her testimony and when I was done I could not see any possible way for her to succeed.&quot;

===Scene with Ginger Banks and Jenny Blighe===
In 2018, Stagliano directed an Evil Angel scene between Ginger Banks and Jenny Blighe. It was both performers&#x27; first scene, after working as webcam models, and they were told the scene was girl-girl. According to Banks and Blighe, Stagliano touched their buttocks without their consent during the filming, in character as Buttman. Stagliano said the pair had been asked to watch a previous scene in which he did a similar thing; Banks and Blighe said that they had concerns after watching the scene, but the production told Banks that Stagliano would not perform as Buttman.

After Blighe made her experience public, Banks began experiencing online harassment due to her initial response. She voluntarily stood down as chair of the Adult Performer Advocacy Committee in the aftermath. Banks later filed a report of sexual battery against Stagliano and apologized to Blighe both privately and publicly, saying in 2020, &quot;I should be held accountable for my part in the gaslighting and denying her reality&quot;. She said that Stagliano mocked her over the incident afterwards, and that she was told by others of similar incidents to her and Blighe&#x27;s account.

==Critical appraisal==
In her essay &quot;Crackers and Whackers: The White Trash of Porn&quot;, Constance Penley asserts that John Stagliano did for anal fetishism what Woody Allen did for neurosis, pointing out that, &quot;as in so many stag films,&quot; Buttman is the &quot;butt of the joke&quot; since, &quot;seeking the perfect shot of a woman&#x27;s perfect ass,&quot; the character &quot;gets mugged, evicted, bankrupted, rejected, and ridiculed –  all in his single-minded quest for perfection.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
* 1998 Hot d&#x27;Or d&#x27;Honneur winner
* 2003 Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival&#x27;s Lifetime Career Award
* 2009 Hot d&#x27;Or Award winner of Best American Director award for &quot;Fashionistas Safado Berlin&quot; (for Evil Angel/Marc Dorcel productions)
* 2010 XBIZ winner of Industry Pioneer award
* 2011 XBIZ winner of Man of the Year award
* 2013 XBIZ nominated for the Director of the Year award for &quot;Voracious&quot;

==Personal life==
Stagliano was in a relationship with pornographic actress Krysti Lynn (A.K.A Shawna Yager) during 1993. She was driving Stagliano&#x27;s Acura Legend when she died on December 7, 1995, in an accident in Calabasas.

In 1997, Stagliano tested positive for HIV. As of 2002, medication has kept the virus in check.

He married former porn star Tricia Devereaux (Karen Stagliano) in 2008.

Stagliano espouses a libertarian political philosophy, and has been a significant financial contributor to the Cato Institute and the Reason Foundation, both libertarian think tanks.

==Other uses of &quot;Buttman&quot;==
*German deathgrind band Cock and Ball Torture made a tribute song titled &quot;Buttman Goes To Rio&quot;
*The nickname Buttman has been used in parodies of Batman, notably the segment of the same name by the Annoying Orange. 
*Argentinian Sex shop used Buttman as its business name.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* evilangel.com
* Buttman interview from Las Vegas </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1273684" start="0" end="14" title="John Stagliano" label="John Stagliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273684" start="55" end="62" title="John Stagliano" label="Buttman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="79" end="91" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="100" end="123" title="pornographic film actor" label="pornographic film actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281891" start="172" end="182" title="Evil Angel (studio)" label="Evil Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="196" end="207" title="film studio" label="film studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="514" end="518" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="584" end="587" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="663" end="675" title="modern dance" label="modern dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q936055" start="680" end="690" title="jazz dance" label="jazz dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="808" end="816" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q110293051" start="842" end="856" title="erotic fiction" label="erotic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000136" start="893" end="901" title="softcore pornography" label="softcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777448" start="935" end="943" title="Hardcore pornography" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="944" end="961" title="pornographic film" label="pornographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="968" end="972" title="8 mm film" label="8 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="1086" end="1099" title="Daily Variety" label="Daily Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141526" start="1123" end="1131" title="stripper" label="stripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q467804" start="1145" end="1157" title="Chippendales" label="Chippendales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244962" start="1297" end="1318" title="pornographic magazine" label="pornographic magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="1936" end="1943" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765226" start="2519" end="2524" title="gonzo pornography" label="gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q239492" start="2721" end="2733" title="Tracey Adams" label="Tracey Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="3142" end="3148" title="sexual fetishism" label="fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="3200" end="3208" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="3384" end="3412" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q152908" start="3558" end="3578" title="Nudes-A-Poppin" label="Nudes a Poppin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411281" start="4062" end="4074" title="Fashionistas (film)" label="Fashionistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q430900" start="4179" end="4195" title="Tristan Taormino" label="Tristan Taormino"/>
<link wikidata="Q430900" start="4226" end="4266" title="Tristan Taormino" label="The Ultimate Guide to Anal Sex for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411281" start="4391" end="4403" title="Fashionistas (film)" label="Fashionistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="4712" end="4721" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="4743" end="4753" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="4848" end="4857" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="4866" end="4871" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q273972" start="4878" end="4885" title="Bondage (BDSM)" label="bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326740" start="5031" end="5046" title="Richard J. Leon" label="Richard J. Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="5518" end="5529" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="5620" end="5628" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="5767" end="5770" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="7032" end="7043" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="7052" end="7061" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149690" start="7183" end="7195" title="Paul Cambria" label="Paul Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q56305861" start="7430" end="7442" title="Ginger Banks" label="Ginger Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q109254692" start="8111" end="8145" title="Adult Performer Advocacy Committee" label="Adult Performer Advocacy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="8716" end="8727" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="8736" end="8744" title="neurosis" label="neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305501" start="9091" end="9104" title="Hot d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Hot d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428088" start="9134" end="9178" title="Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival" label="Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409610" start="9365" end="9369" title="XBIZ Award" label="XBIZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986708" start="9686" end="9698" title="Acura Legend" label="Acura Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="9752" end="9761" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="9803" end="9806" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="9879" end="9888" title="Pornographic film actor" label="porn star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419845" start="9889" end="9905" title="Tricia Devereaux" label="Tricia Devereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="9955" end="9966" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="10045" end="10059" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301484" start="10068" end="10085" title="Reason Foundation" label="Reason Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="10104" end="10114" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="10164" end="10174" title="deathgrind" label="deathgrind"/>
<link wikidata="Q689234" start="10180" end="10201" title="Cock and Ball Torture (band)" label="Cock and Ball Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q473204" start="10364" end="10379" title="Annoying Orange" label="Annoying Orange"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382790" wikidata="Q62842" url="?curid=382790" title="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher">
<text>Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher (; 21 October 18174 June 1894) was a German economist from Hanover.

==Biography==
Roscher studied at Göttingen, where he became a member of Corps Hannovera, and Berlin, and obtained a professorship at Göttingen in 1844 and subsequently at Leipzig in 1848.

The main origins of the historical school of political economy may be traced to Roscher. Its fundamental principles are dated to his &quot;Grundriss zu Vorlesungen über die Staatswirtschaft nach geschichtlicher Methode&quot; (1843). Politically, Roscher remained faithful to the liberalism of Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann, which abjured revolution and anarchy but favored reform within the context of a constitutional monarchy. Historical economics began as a means of adjusting liberal thought and practice to the realities of the social question, namely: what should be done about the consequences of economic modernization and the classes displaced or exploited by the new industries.

Roscher tried to establish the laws of economic development by using the historical method from the investigation of histories legal, political, cultural and other aspects.

Roscher developed a cyclical theory where nations and their economies pass through youth, manhood and senile decay: &quot;The method of a science is of greater significance by far than any single discovery, however amazing the later may be.&quot; This was in direct contrast to the English traditional economist who believed that the principles of a science were only exposed long after they had performed their duties.

This short study was afterwards expanded into his great &quot;System der Volkswirthschaft&quot;, published in five volumes between 1854 and 1894, and arranged as follows:
* vol. i., &quot;Die Grundlagen der National Ökonomie&quot;, 1854 (trans. by JJ Lalor, &quot;Principles of Political Economy&quot;, Chicago, 1878) (Volume One, Volume Two)
* vol. ii., &quot;Die Nationalökonomik des Ackerbaues und der verwandten Urproduktionen&quot;, 1859
* vol. iii., &quot;Die Nationalökonomik des Handels und Gewerbfleisses&quot;, 1881
* vol. iv., &quot;System der Finanzwissenschaft&quot;, 1886
* vol. v., &quot;System der Armenpflege und Armenpolitik&quot;, 1894

His &quot;Geschichte der Nationalökonomie in Deutschland&quot; (1874) is a monumental work.

He also published in 1842 an excellent commentary on the life and works of Thucydides. In 1847 he was the first to use the term &quot;enlightened absolutism&quot; about the type of absolute monarchy influenced by contemporary philosophy that evolved in the 18th century.

In 1857 his &quot;Zur Geschichte der Englischen Volkswirthschaftslehre im sechzehnten und siebzehnten Jahrhundert&quot; (On the History of English Political Economy in the 16th and 17th Century) was published.

In 1870, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

Roscher died in 1894 in Leipzig. The classical scholar Wilhelm Heinrich Roscher (1845–1923) was his son.

==Notes==
==References==
* Theodor Roscher, &quot;Zur Geschichte der Familie Roscher in Niedersachsen&quot; (Hanover, 1892)
* Moritz Brasch, &quot;Wilhelm Roscher und die sozialwissenschaftlichen Strömungen der Gegenwart&quot; (Leipzig, 1895).

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62842" start="0" end="31" title="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher" label="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="76" end="85" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="91" end="98" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="134" end="143" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q317010" start="173" end="188" title="Corps Hannovera Göttingen" label="Corps Hannovera"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="194" end="200" title="Humboldt University" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="272" end="279" title="University of Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366712" start="314" end="352" title="historical school of political economy" label="historical school of political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="569" end="579" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76589" start="583" end="611" title="Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann" label="Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196545" start="1052" end="1069" title="historical method" label="historical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198240" start="1173" end="1188" title="cyclical theory" label="cyclical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="2398" end="2408" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="2457" end="2479" title="enlightened absolutism" label="enlightened absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="2854" end="2887" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="2914" end="2921" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q63567" start="2945" end="2969" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Roscher" label="Wilhelm Heinrich Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3023" end="3038" title="Theodor Roscher" label="Theodor Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q118372" start="3122" end="3135" title="Moritz Brasch" label="Moritz Brasch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382792" wikidata="Q7794109" url="?curid=382792" title="Thomas Southwood Smith">
<text>Thomas Southwood Smith (17881861) was an English physician and sanitary reformer.

==Early life==
Smith was born at Martock, Somerset, into a strict Baptist family, his parents being William Smith and Caroline Southwood. In 1802 he won a scholarship to the Bristol Baptist College to train as a minister, but in 1807 funds were abruptly withdrawn, on the grounds that he was &#x27;entertaining opinions widely different from us on most of the doctrines we consider to be essential to Evangelical Religion&#x27;. At 19 years old he was already showing the courage and independence of mind that were to characterise his life, however it led to a break with his parents who never spoke to him again. Over the following four years Smith turned to Unitarianism, influenced by William Blake, a minister at Crewkerne, Somerset: Blake put him in touch with John Prior Estlin at Lewin&#x27;s Mead, Bristol. Another friend, and Unitarian convert from Baptism who became a physician, was Benjamin Spencer. These associations and friendships drew him into the centre of 19th Century reform.

==Medical man==
Smith entered the University of Edinburgh in October 1812, and in November took over the Unitarian congregation meeting in Skinners&#x27; Hall, Canongate, which had stayed together without a minister since the death in 1795 of James Purves; he became known as a powerful preacher and raised the attendance sharply. In June 1813 he began a course of fortnightly evening lectures on universal restoration; these were published in 1816 and made him a literary reputation. Also in 1813 he founded the Scottish Unitarian Association, with James Yates, which brought Smith into contact with the Unitarian Lady Gillies and her nieces Mary and Margaret Gillies who would play a large part in his later life.

In 1816 he took his M.D. degree, and began to practice at Yeovil, Somerset, also becoming minister at a chapel in that town, but moved in 1820 to London, devoting himself mainly to medicine.

==Public health==
In 1824 Smith was appointed physician to the London Fever Hospital.8 The following year he began to write papers on public health. His post gave him the opportunity to study diseases of poverty. In the late 1830s, with Neil Arnott and James Phillips Kay, he was one of the first doctors brought in to report to the Poor Law Commission. In 1842 he was one of the founders of an early housing association, the Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes.

Smith was a close ally on public health matters with Edwin Chadwick, and like him supported the miasma theory. From 1848 to 1854 they worked closely together at the General Board of Health. As Medical Member of the General Board of Health, he was the Chief medical adviser of the nation (T. Baker in his Preface to The common nature of epidemics, 1866 - a collection of the writings of Southwood Smith) - in a role that was the precursor to the role of Chief Medical Officer which was first occupied by Sir John Simon from 1855. But the appointment of Lord Seymour made their work very difficult, despite the support of Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury.

Smith was frequently consulted in fever epidemics and on sanitary matters by public authorities. His reports on quarantine (1845), cholera (1850), yellow fever (1852), and on the results of sanitary improvement (1854) were of international importance.

==Bentham dissection==
Southwood Smith was a close friend of Jeremy Bentham and his secretary Edwin Chadwick. He had a particular interest in applying his philosophical beliefs to the field of medical research. In 1827 he published &quot;The Use of the Dead to the Living&quot;, a pamphlet which argued that the current system of burial was a wasteful use of bodies that could otherwise be used for dissection by the medical profession. Bentham attached a paper, written in 1830 to his will instructing Southwood Smith to create the auto-icon. It stated:

Bentham&#x27;s wish to preserve his dead body was consistent with his philosophy of utilitarianism. In his essay &quot;Auto-Icon, or the Uses of the Dead to the Living&quot;, Bentham wrote, &quot;If a country gentleman has rows of trees leading to his dwelling, the auto-icons of his family might alternate with the trees; copal varnish would protect the face from the effects of rain.&quot; On 8 June 1832, two days after his death, invitations were distributed to a select group of friends, and on the following day at 3 p.m., before the dissection, Southwood Smith delivered a lengthy oration over Bentham&#x27;s remains in the Webb Street School of Anatomy &amp; Medicine in Southwark, London. In the oration Smith argued that:&quot;If, by any appropriation of the dead, I can promote the happiness of the living, then it is my duty to conquer the reluctance I may feel to such a disposition of the dead, however well-founded or strong that reluctance may be&quot;.

Afterward, the skeleton and head were preserved and stored in a wooden cabinet called the &quot;Auto-icon&quot;, with the skeleton padded out with hay and dressed in Bentham&#x27;s clothes. From 1833 it stood in Southwood Smith&#x27;s Finsbury Square consulting rooms until he abandoned private practice in the winter of 1849-50 when it was moved to 36 Percy Street, Margaret Gillies&#x27; studio, who made studies of it. In March 1850 Southwood Smith offered the auto-icon to Henry Brougham who readily accepted it for UCL.

Smith&#x27;s lobbying helped lead to the 1832 Anatomy Act, the legislation which allowed the state to seize unclaimed corpses from workhouses and sell them to surgical schools. While this act is credited with ending the practice of grave robbery, it has also been condemned as discriminatory against the poor.

==Works==
In 1830 Smith published &quot;A Treatise on Fever&quot;, which became a standard authority on the subject. In this book he established a direct connection between the impoverishment of the poor and epidemic fever. The underlying theory opposed contagion as a mechanism of spread of disease, and postulated no pathogen that was airborne; it argued that the exclusion of &quot;pure air&quot; could suffice to create mortal disease.

==Family==

Smith married twice, firstly in 1808, to Anne Read, the daughter of a prominent Bristol tradesman. Anne died of fever four years later, at age 24, leaving Smith a widower with two young daughters, Caroline and Emily. His second marriage was to Mary, daughter of John Christie of Hackney, and they had three children, including his only son, Herman (died 23 July 1897, aged 77). The second marriage was not successful and soon Mary and her three children moved abroad. Miranda and Octavia Hill were his granddaughters, among the five daughters of his eldest, Caroline (c. 1809–1902), who married James Hill, merchant in 1835, and as Caroline Southwood Hill was known as a writer and educationalist. His other daughter, Emily (c. 1810-1872), moved to Florence, Italy.

Smith had separated from his second wife by the end of the 1830s, and for the rest of his life he lived quietly with the artist Margaret Gillies.
Along with his son Herman and daughter Emily they visited Wisbech in June 1836 and dined with Caroline and the actor William Macready, who was appearing as Hamlet in the Georgian Angles Theatre owned by James and Caroline. They also owned a school they built in front of the theatre.
Following his son-in-law James Hill&#x27;s second bankruptcy in 1840, his three-year-old granddaughter Gertrude Hill (1837–1923) came to live with him.
In the 1861 census the household lived at Heath House, Weybridge and consisted of Thomas Smith 72, Mary Gillies 62, Margaret Gillies 56, his son Herman Smith 40, wine merchant, his granddaughter Gertrude Hill, 23 lady, and a cook and a housemaid.

==Later life==
In his 70th year Smith travelled abroad for the first time to Milan, Italy to examine the irrigation works. Two years later, on a visit to his daughter Emily in Florence, he caught a chill and died there on 10 December 1861. He is interred there in the English Cemetery of Florence; his tombstone, an obelisk with a cameo portrait, was sculpted by Joel Tanner Hart. His daughter Emily, who died in 1872, is buried beside him.

==Further reading==
* Cook G. C. Thomas Southwood Smith FRCP (1788–1861): leading exponent of diseases of poverty, and pioneer of sanitary reform in the mid-nineteenth century. &quot;J. Med. Biog.&quot; (2002) 10(4): 194–205 

==Notes==
==References==
Attribution:
*

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7794109" start="0" end="22" title="Thomas Southwood Smith" label="Thomas Southwood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="49" end="58" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081154" start="116" end="133" title="Martock" label="Martock, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="149" end="156" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="257" end="264" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="743" end="755" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234905" start="800" end="819" title="Crewkerne" label="Crewkerne, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253450" start="849" end="866" title="John Prior Estlin" label="John Prior Estlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536174" start="870" end="896" title="Lewin&amp;#x27;s Mead" label="Lewin&amp;#x27;s Mead, Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="1114" end="1137" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="1185" end="1194" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251125" start="1240" end="1249" title="Canongate" label="Canongate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141503" start="1323" end="1335" title="James Purves (minister)" label="James Purves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360416" start="1477" end="1498" title="universal reconciliation" label="universal restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410772" start="1630" end="1641" title="James Yates (minister)" label="James Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062780" start="1732" end="1748" title="Margaret Gillies" label="Margaret Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q550110" start="1855" end="1871" title="Yeovil" label="Yeovil, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1943" end="1949" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670366" start="2052" end="2073" title="London Fever Hospital" label="London Fever Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="2123" end="2136" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936838" start="2181" end="2200" title="diseases of poverty" label="diseases of poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398302" start="2226" end="2237" title="Neil Arnott" label="Neil Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527445" start="2242" end="2260" title="James Phillips Kay" label="James Phillips Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228780" start="2322" end="2341" title="Poor Law Commission" label="Poor Law Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8207109" start="2390" end="2409" title="housing association" label="housing association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824987" start="2415" end="2494" title="Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes" label="Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="2550" end="2564" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="2593" end="2606" title="miasma theory" label="miasma theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2662" end="2685" title="Local board of health#General Board of Health" label="General Board of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719921" start="3049" end="3061" title="Edward Seymour, 12th Duke of Somerset" label="Lord Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q333294" start="3117" end="3163" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="3278" end="3288" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="3297" end="3304" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="3313" end="3325" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="3480" end="3494" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="3513" end="3527" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="4654" end="4663" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450927" start="5181" end="5196" title="Finsbury Square" label="Finsbury Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619689" start="5299" end="5311" title="Percy Street" label="Percy Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q333220" start="5423" end="5437" title="Henry Brougham, 1st Baron Brougham and Vaux" label="Henry Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752284" start="5513" end="5529" title="Anatomy Act 1832" label="1832 Anatomy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537376" start="5704" end="5717" title="grave robbery" label="grave robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="6037" end="6046" title="Infectious disease" label="contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="6102" end="6110" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872821" start="6704" end="6711" title="Miranda Hill" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q437462" start="6716" end="6728" title="Octavia Hill" label="Octavia Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917322" start="6868" end="6891" title="Caroline Southwood Hill" label="Caroline Southwood Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6985" end="7000" title="Florence" label="Florence, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012031" start="7207" end="7214" title="Wisbech" label="Wisbech"/>
<link wikidata="Q637374" start="7266" end="7282" title="William Macready" label="William Macready"/>
<link wikidata="Q26418897" start="7328" end="7342" title="Angles Theatre" label="Angles Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q106543376" start="7684" end="7696" title="Mary Gillies" label="Mary Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="7910" end="7922" title="Milan" label="Milan, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092134" start="8101" end="8129" title="English Cemetery of Florence" label="English Cemetery of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214025" start="8196" end="8212" title="Joel Tanner Hart" label="Joel Tanner Hart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382793" wikidata="Q5358300" url="?curid=382793" title="Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting">
<text>ERMA (Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting) was a computer technology that automated bank bookkeeping and check processing. Developed at the nonprofit research institution SRI International under contract from Bank of America, the project began in 1950 and was publicly revealed in September 1955.

Payments experts contend that ERMA &quot;established the foundation for computerized banking, magnetic ink character recognition (MICR), and credit-card processing&quot;. General Electric (GE) won the production contract, deciding to transistorize the design in the process. Calling the machine the GE-100, a total of 32 ERMA machines were built. GE would use this experience to develop several mainframe computer lines before selling the division to Honeywell in 1970.

==History==
=== Background ===
In 1950, Bank of America (BoA) was the largest bank in California, and led the world in the use of cheques. This presented a serious problem due to the workload processing time. An experienced bookkeeper could post 245 accounts in an hour, about 2,000 in an eight-hour workday and approximately 10,000 per week. Bank of America&#x27;s checking accounts were growing at a rate of 23,000 per month and banks were being forced to close their doors by 2 p.m. to finish daily postings.

S. Clark Beise was a senior vice president at BoA who was introduced to Thomas H. Morrin, SRI&#x27;s Director of Engineering. They formed an alliance under which SRI would essentially act as BoA&#x27;s research and development arm. In July 1950 they contracted SRI for an initial feasibility study for automating their bookkeeping and check handling. ERMA was under the technical leadership of computer scientist Jerre Noe.

===First study===
SRI immediately found a problem. Because accounts were kept alphabetically, adding a new account required a reshuffling of the account listings. SRI instead suggested using account numbers, simply adding new ones to the end of the list. In addition these numbers would be pre-printed on checks, thereby dramatically reducing the time to match the checks with account information (known as &quot;proofing&quot;). Numbered accounts are now a feature of almost all banks.

With that problem out of the way, SRI returned a report in September 1950 that stated a computer-based system was certainly feasible, which they called the Electronic Recording Machine (ERM).

===Second study===
Bank of America then offered a second six-month contract in November to fully study the changes needed to banking procedures, and design the logical layout of production ERM machines. While this was underway, Bank of America went to a number of industrial companies to set up production of the machines, but none were interested. So SRI was given another contract in January 1952 to build a prototype machine.

One of the biggest problems found in the second phase was how to input the check information, especially the account numbers, with any sort of speed. Beise demanded a system that would not require the information to be changed from one medium to another, from check to punched card for instance, while simultaneously lowering error rates.

SRI investigated several solutions to the problem, including the first OCR system from a company in Arlington, Virginia. However, they found that it was all too easy for banks, and customers, to write over the account numbers and spoil the system. They also experimented with barcode information, and while this worked well even when printed over, if there was enough &quot;damage&quot; to the code a human operator could not read them in order to input them manually.

Instead, they decided to combine the two technologies, and used MICR-printed account numbers which could be read by a magnetic reader similar to those in a cassette tape recorder. The resulting reader was a mechanical tour-de-force, combining five MICR readers with a large rotating drum that forced checks dumped in the top to come out the bottom single-file. The system was eventually able to read ten checks a second, with errors on the order of 1 per 100,000 checks.

===Final prototype===
The final ERM computer contained more than a million feet (304,800 metres) of wiring, 8,000 vacuum tubes, 34,000 diodes, 5 input consoles with MICR readers, 2 magnetic memory drums, the check sorter, a high-speed printer, a power control panel, a maintenance board, 24 racks holding 1,500 electrical packages and 500 relay packages, and 12 magnetic tape drives for 2,400-foot (731-metre) tape reels.

ERM weighed about 25 tons (22.7 tonnes), used more than 80 kW of power and required cooling by an air conditioning system. By 1955, the system was still in development, but BoA was anxious to announce the project. At the time, computers (still known as &quot;electronic brains&quot;) were all the rage; if BoA could announce that they were using them, it would convey a sense of futuristic infallibility. In September 1955, BoA froze the design.

By this point, no fewer than 24 companies had expressed interest in building the production machines, and General Electric won the competition. Among GE&#x27;s team members was AI pioneer Joseph Weizenbaum. The company took the basic design, but decided it was time to move the tube-based system to a transistor-based one using core memory. This won SRI yet another contract, this time by GE, to study the commercial computer market and suggest how ERM machines could be sold into other markets. After the construction run, they also contracted them to dispose of the original machine.

== Legacy ==
The first production ERMA system, known as the GE-100, was installed in 1959. Over the next two years 32 systems were installed and by 1966 twelve regional ERMA centers served all but 21 of Bank of America&#x27;s 900 branches. The centers handled more than 750 million checks a year, about the number they had predicted to occur by 1970. The automation was so effective that it allowed Bank of America to be the first bank to offer credit cards attached to a user&#x27;s bank account. They were so successful in operation that Bank of America was propelled ahead of other banks in profitability, and became the world&#x27;s largest bank by 1970.

ERMA machines were replaced with newer equipment in the early 1970s. There is a special room commemorating ERMA machines inside the Bank of America facilities in Concord, California.

Payments experts contend that ERMA &quot;established the foundation for computerized banking, magnetic ink character recognition (MICR), and credit-card processing&quot;.

==References==
==External links==

* SRI page on ERMA </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5358300" start="0" end="4" title="Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting" label="ERMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358300" start="6" end="46" title="Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting" label="Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="54" end="62" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="94" end="105" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205955" start="110" end="126" title="Cheque clearing" label="check processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="176" end="193" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="214" end="229" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q188506" start="375" end="395" title="Online banking" label="computerized banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192011" start="397" end="431" title="magnetic ink character recognition" label="magnetic ink character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="444" end="455" title="credit-card" label="credit-card"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074350" start="456" end="466" title="Payment processor" label="processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="474" end="490" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="537" end="547" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="698" end="707" title="mainframe" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="754" end="763" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="814" end="829" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="860" end="870" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q80042" start="904" end="911" title="Cheque" label="cheques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1287" end="1301" title="S. Clark Beise" label="S. Clark Beise"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995318" start="1359" end="1375" title="Thomas H. Morrin" label="Thomas H. Morrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="1589" end="1599" title="automation" label="automating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183057" start="1700" end="1709" title="Jerre Noe" label="Jerre Noe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="3092" end="3104" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="3234" end="3237" title="Optical character recognition" label="OCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="3263" end="3282" title="Arlington, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="3439" end="3446" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192011" start="3697" end="3701" title="Magnetic Ink Character Recognition" label="MICR"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="3789" end="3802" title="cassette tape" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="4219" end="4230" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="4240" end="4245" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="4295" end="4307" title="drum memory" label="memory drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="4467" end="4480" title="magnetic tape" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="5081" end="5097" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q75778" start="5163" end="5180" title="Joseph Weizenbaum" label="Joseph Weizenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="5253" end="5257" title="Vacuum tube" label="tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="5276" end="5286" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="5303" end="5314" title="core memory" label="core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="6007" end="6018" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q490441" start="6384" end="6403" title="Concord, California" label="Concord, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q188506" start="6478" end="6498" title="Online banking" label="computerized banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192011" start="6500" end="6534" title="magnetic ink character recognition" label="magnetic ink character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="6547" end="6558" title="credit-card" label="credit-card"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074350" start="6559" end="6569" title="Payment processor" label="processing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382795" wikidata="Q57992" url="?curid=382795" title="Johannes Peter Müller">
<text>Johannes Peter Müller (14 July 1801 – 28 April 1858) was a German physiologist, comparative anatomist, ichthyologist, and herpetologist, known not only for his discoveries but also for his ability to synthesize knowledge. The paramesonephric duct (Müllerian duct) was named in his honor.

==Life==

===Early years and education===
Müller was born in Coblenz. He was the son of a poor shoemaker, and was about to be apprenticed to a saddler when his talents attracted the attention of his teacher, and he prepared himself to become a Roman Catholic Priest. During his college course in Koblenz, he devoted himself to the classics and made his own translations of Aristotle. At first, his intention was to become a priest.

When he was eighteen, his love for natural science became dominant, and he turned to medicine, entering the University of Bonn in 1819. There he received his M.D. in 1822. He then studied at the University of Berlin. There, under the influence of G. W. F. Hegel and Karl Rudolphi, he was induced to reject all systems of physiology which were not founded upon a strict observation of nature. He habilited there in 1824.

===Career summary===
He became &quot;Privatdozent&quot; of physiology and comparative anatomy at the University of Bonn in 1824, extraordinary professor of physiology in 1826, and ordinary professor in 1830. In 1833 he went to the University of Berlin, where he filled the chair of anatomy and physiology until his death.

===Early research===
Müller made contributions in numerous domains of physiology, in particular increasing understanding of the voice, speech and hearing, as well as the chemical and physical properties of lymph, chyle and blood. His first important works, &quot;Zur vergleichenden Physiologie des Gesichtssinns&quot; (&quot;On the comparative physiology of sight&quot;, Leipzig, 1826) and &quot;Über die phantastischen Gesichtserscheinungen&quot; (&quot;On visual hallucination&quot;, Coblenz, 1826), are of a subjective philosophical tendency. The first work concerns the most important facts as to human and animal sight, the second sounds depths of difficult psychological problems. He soon became the leader in the science of the morphological treatment of zoology as well as of experimental physiology. To his research (1830) is due the settlement of the theory of reflex action.

===&quot;Elements of Physiology&quot;===
In the century preceding Müller&#x27;s work, many contributions to physiological science had been made. Müller gave order to these facts, developed general principles and showed physiologists how recent discoveries in physics and chemistry could be applied to their work.

The appearance of his &quot;magnum opus&quot;, &quot;Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen&quot;, between 1833 and 1840 (translated into English as &quot;Elements of Physiology&quot; by William Baly, and published in London 1837–1843) marked the beginning of a new period in the study of physiology. In it, for the first time, the results of human and comparative anatomy, as well as of chemistry and other departments of physical science, and tools like the microscope, were brought to bear on the investigation of physiological problems.

The most important portion of the work was that dealing with nervous action and the mechanism of the senses. Here he stated the principle, previously recognized but not stated as clearly, that the kind of sensation following stimulation of a sensory nerve does not depend on the mode of stimulation but upon the nature of the sense organ. Thus light, pressure, or mechanical stimulation acting on the retina and optic nerve invariably produces luminous impressions. This he termed the law of specific energies of the sense.

The book became the leading textbook in physiology for much of the nineteenth century. It manifests Müller&#x27;s interests in vitalism, philosophy and scientific rigor. He discusses the difference between inorganic and organic matter. He considers in detail various physiological systems of a wide variety of animals, but attributes the indivisible whole of an organism to the presence of a soul. He also proposes that living organisms possess a life-energy for which physical laws can never fully account.

Edward Forbes F.R.S. in his &quot; A History of British Starfishes, and Other Animals of the Class Echinodermata &quot; (1841) in his preface refers to Muller as &quot;one of the greatest living physiologists, Muller of Berlin&quot;.

===Later years===
In the later part of his life he chiefly devoted himself to comparative anatomy. Fishes and marine invertebrates were his favorite subjects. He took 19 trips to the Baltic and North Sea, the Adriatic and the Mediterranean to investigate salt-water life.

He authored a comprehensive work on the anatomy of amphibians, which in his era including reptiles. Also, he described several new species of snakes.

Müller coined the term &quot;desmoid&quot;, from the Greek &#x27;tendon-like&#x27;, in 1838. The same year, he also described phyllodes tumors, which he called cystosarcoma phyllodes.

Müller mentored such distinguished scientists and physiologists as Hermann von Helmholtz, Emil du Bois-Reymond, Fritz Müller, Theodor Schwann, Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle, Ernst Wilhelm Brücke, Carl Ludwig and Ernst Haeckel. In 1834, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In 1846, the American Philosophical Society elected him an international Member.

Müller died in Berlin in 1858. In 1899, a bronze statue by Joseph Uphues was erected in his memory in Koblenz.

==Works==
In addition to his &quot;Handbuch der Physiologie&quot; (translated by Baly in 1843: of Physiology&quot;), his publications include:
* (Leipzig, 1823), a prize dissertation
* (1826)
* (1826)
* (1830), in which he traced the development of the Müllerian duct
* (1830)
* (1832)
* (Berlin, 1832)
* (1834–1843)
* (Berlin, 1835)
* (&quot;On the structural details of malignant tumors&quot;, Coblenz, 1838), unfinished — a pioneering use of microscopical research in the investigation of pathological anatomy
* (1841) with F. G. J. Henle
* (1842) with F. H. Troschel
* (1845–1849) with Troschel
* (1848)
* (1852)
After the death of J. F. Meckel (1781–1833) he edited the .

==See also==
*Connective tissue
*Hering&#x27;s law of equal innervation
*List of German inventors and discoverers

==Taxon described by him==
*See :Category:Taxa named by Johannes Peter Müller

==Notes==
==References==
*Short biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science
*Berrios G E (2005) On the fantastic apparitions of vision by Johannes Müller. &quot;History of Psychiatry&quot;. 16:229-46. 
*

Attribution:

==Further reading==
* Virchow, Rudolf, &quot;Johannes Müller, Eine Gedächtnisrede&quot; (Berlin, 1858)
* du Bois-Reymond, Emil, “Gedächtnisrede auf Johannes Müller. Gehalten in der Leibniz-Sitzung der Akademie der Wissenschaften am 8. Juli 1858,” In &quot;Reden,&quot; 2 volumes, (Leipzig, 1912), 1: 135-317
* du Bois-Reymond, Emil (&quot;Abhandlungen der Berliner Akademie&quot;, Berlin, 1859), containing a list of his works
* Bischoff, Theodor, &quot;Ueber Johannes Müller und sein Verhältnis zum jetztigen Standpunkt der Physiologie&quot; (Munich, 1858)
* &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Society of London&quot;, volume ix., p. 556.
* Holmes, Frederick L., “The Role of Johannes Müller in the Formation of Helmholtz’s Physiological Career,” in &quot;Universalgenie Helmholtz. Rückblick nach 100 Jahren&quot;, ed. Lorenz Krüger (Berlin, 1994), 3-21
* Jardine, Nicholas, “The Mantle of Müller and the Ghost of Goethe: Interactions between the Sciences and Their Histories,” in &quot;History and the Disciplines: The Reclassification of Knowledge in Early Modern Europe&quot;, ed. Donald R. Kelley (Rochester, 1997), 297-317
* Otis, Laura, &quot;Müller&#x27;s Lab: The Story of Jakob Henle, Theodor Schwann, Emil du Bois-Reymond, Hermann von Helmholtz, Rudolf Virchow, Robert Remak, Ernst Haeckel, and Their Brilliant, Tormented Advisor&quot; (Oxford; New York, 2007)
* Finkelstein, Gabriel, &quot;Emil du Bois-Reymond: Neuroscience, Self, and Society in Nineteenth-Century Germany&quot; (Cambridge; London, 2013), 39–50

==External links==
* Müller&#x27;s Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen für Vorlesungen (1837–1840) as fullscan from the original
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57992" start="0" end="21" title="Johannes Peter Müller" label="Johannes Peter Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="66" end="78" title="physiologist" label="physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="80" end="101" title="comparative anatomy" label="comparative anatomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60242" start="103" end="116" title="ichthyology" label="ichthyologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174416" start="122" end="135" title="herpetology" label="herpetologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q491057" start="226" end="246" title="paramesonephric duct" label="paramesonephric duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="350" end="357" title="Koblenz" label="Coblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915560" start="384" end="393" title="shoemaker" label="shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="432" end="438" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="567" end="574" title="Secondary school" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="620" end="628" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="662" end="671" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="830" end="848" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="880" end="884" title="Doctor of Medicine" label="M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="917" end="937" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="969" end="983" title="G. W. F. Hegel" label="G. W. F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q63159" start="988" end="1001" title="Karl Rudolphi" label="Karl Rudolphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="1117" end="1126" title="Habilitation" label="habilited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="1180" end="1192" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="1594" end="1599" title="voice" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="1601" end="1607" title="Speech communication" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="1612" end="1619" title="hearing (sense)" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179422" start="1672" end="1677" title="lymph" label="lymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q509244" start="1679" end="1684" title="chyle" label="chyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="1977" end="1987" title="Subject (philosophy)" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="2695" end="2706" title="Masterpiece" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459100" start="2853" end="2865" title="William Baly" label="William Baly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3054" end="3063" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="3126" end="3136" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q488479" start="3693" end="3717" title="Law of specific nerve energies" label="law of specific energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="3860" end="3868" title="vitalism" label="vitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248394" start="4242" end="4255" title="Edward Forbes" label="Edward Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="4660" end="4666" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4671" end="4680" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4686" end="4694" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4703" end="4716" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="4801" end="4811" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4840" end="4848" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="4892" end="4898" title="snakes" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q475086" start="4930" end="4937" title="desmoid" label="desmoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149070" start="5027" end="5042" title="phyllodes tumor" label="phyllodes tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="5153" end="5174" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="5176" end="5196" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="Emil du Bois-Reymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q62086" start="5198" end="5210" title="Fritz Müller" label="Fritz Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="5212" end="5227" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Theodor Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="5229" end="5257" title="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle" label="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72374" start="5259" end="5279" title="Ernst Wilhelm Brücke" label="Ernst Wilhelm Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q61975" start="5281" end="5292" title="Carl Ludwig" label="Carl Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="5297" end="5310" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="5360" end="5393" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="5408" end="5438" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q324124" start="5536" end="5549" title="Joseph Uphues" label="Joseph Uphues"/>
<link wikidata="Q491057" start="5842" end="5856" title="Müllerian duct" label="Müllerian duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="6116" end="6130" title="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle" label="F. G. J. Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72659" start="6145" end="6159" title="Franz Hermann Troschel" label="F. H. Troschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61712" start="6225" end="6237" title="J. F. Meckel" label="J. F. Meckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="6281" end="6298" title="Connective tissue" label="Connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022581" start="6300" end="6338" title="Hering&amp;#x27;s law of equal innervation" label="Hering&amp;#x27;s law of equal innervation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406985" start="6340" end="6380" title="List of German inventors and discoverers" label="List of German inventors and discoverers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6414" end="6459" title=":Category:Taxa named by Johannes Peter Müller" label=":Category:Taxa named by Johannes Peter Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527919" start="6527" end="6545" title="Virtual Laboratory" label="Virtual Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q318118" start="6553" end="6600" title="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science" label="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="6766" end="6781" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Virchow, Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="6849" end="6870" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="du Bois-Reymond, Emil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="7054" end="7075" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="du Bois-Reymond, Emil"/>
<link wikidata="Q65283" start="7173" end="7190" title="Theodor Ludwig Wilhelm von Bischoff" label="Bischoff, Theodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193201" start="7310" end="7352" title="Proceedings of the Royal Society of London" label="Proceedings of the Royal Society of London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382797" wikidata="Q315490" url="?curid=382797" title="John Hawkins (naval commander)">
<text>Admiral Sir John Hawkins (also spelled Hawkyns) (1532 – 12 November 1595) was an English naval commander, naval administrator, privateer and slave trader.

Hawkins pioneered, and was an early promoter of, English involvement in the Atlantic slave trade. He is considered to be the first English merchant to profit from the Triangle Trade, selling enslaved people from Africa to the Spanish colonies in the West Indies in the late 16th century.

In 1588, Hawkins served as a Vice-Admiral and fought in the victory over the Spanish Armada, for which he was knighted for gallantry. As Treasurer of the Navy, Hawkins became the chief architect of the Elizabethan Navy. He redesigned the navy so the ships were faster, more manoeuvrable and had more firepower.

Hawkins&#x27; son, Richard Hawkins, was captured by the Spanish. In response, along with his cousin Sir Francis Drake, he raised a fleet of ships to attack the Spanish in the West Indies. However, he died at sea during the expedition.

==Early years==

John Hawkins was born to a prominent family of ship builders and captains in the naval port of Plymouth in Devon. His exact date of birth is unknown, but was likely between November 1532 and March 1533. He was the second son of William Hawkins, who was the first Englishman to sail to Brazil, and Joan Trelawny, daughter and sole heiress of Roger Trelawny of Brighton, Cornwall. Sir Francis Drake, his second cousin, was brought up and lived in the same Protestant household as Hawkins.

Hawkins killed a man, a barber from Plymouth called White, before the age of 20. The coroner decided White was the antagonist, and Hawkins&#x27;s father secured a royal pardon. He worked with his older brother William Hawkins in the shipping industry and in privateering. He is thought to have done some service for the ambassadors from Spain, who negotiated the marriage of Mary I of England and Philip II of Spain. Hawkins was known to have frequently referred to King Philip II as &quot;my old master&quot;. The Spanish Castilianised his name where he was known as Juan Aquines.

Circa 1559, he dissolved his partnership with this brother, taking £10,000 from the business and moving to London. He married Katherine Gonson, daughter of Benjamin Gonson, a prominent Royal Navy administrator. He had one son, Richard Hawkins (born 1562). It is not known whether Katherine was Richard&#x27;s mother or step-mother, because the marriage happened after his birth. Richard spoke fondly of Katherine in later life, consequently it is more likely she was his birth mother.

==First slave voyage (1562–1563)==
Hawkins made voyages to the Canary Islands in the years leading up to 1561, and there he had learnt about the Atlantic slave trade – taking people from Guinea off the African coast and selling them in the Spanish Caribbean colonies. For his first slave voyage he formed a syndicate with Sir William Winter, Sir Lionel Duckett, Sir Thomas Lodge, his father-in-law Benjamin Gonson, and others to share the risk and cost of the voyage.

In 1562, he set sail with three ships (&quot;Saloman&quot;, &quot;Jonas&quot;, and &quot;Swallow&quot;) travelling down the African coast as far as Sierra Leone, he captured people and enslaved them as he went, taking around 300 people in total. From there he sailed to the Caribbean, he did not have permission from either Spain or Portugal to trade with their colonies so he sold his enslaved people in Isabella, Puerto de Plata and Monte Christi – places where the local authorities did not enforce government trade embargoes. The enslaved people were traded for pearls, hides and sugar.

The trade was so prosperous that, on his return to England, the College of Arms granted Hawkins a coat of arms which displays an enslaved male. Hawkins is widely considered to be the first English merchant to profit from the Triangle Trade; trading English goods for enslaved people in Africa, then selling those people in the Americas and buying foreign goods to be sold in England after the return journey.

==Second slave voyage (1564–1565)==

Hawkins persuaded Queen Elizabeth I to back his second slave voyage and secured investors from her court, these included Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester and Edward Clinton, 1st Earl of Lincoln, with William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley involved as a supervisor. The queen allowed Hawkins to charter one of her ships for the trip, the 700 Ton &quot;Jesus of Lübeck&quot; and for it to fly her flag, the Royal Standard. He set sail from Plymouth on 18 October 1564 with four vessels, &quot;Jesus of Lübeck&quot;, and 3 ships of his own. He took over 400 enslaved people from Africa, some he bought from the Portuguese, others he kidnapped directly by raiding the coast, he left Africa on 29 January 1565.

On 3 April 1565, Hawkins arrived at Borburata in Venezuela, as trade was prohibited, he carried out a fake threat of force with the local governor&#x27;s collusion. He then travelled to Rio de la Hacha where he used force to ensure he secured the deals he thought fair. He sold 300 enslaved people, clothing, linen and wine. He was paid in gold, silver and other precious items and took further orders to sell enslaved people on a future voyage.

After completing his business, Hawkins prepared to return to England. Needing water, he sailed to the French colony of Fort Caroline in Florida. Finding them in need, he traded his smallest ship and a quantity of provisions to them for cannon, powder, and shot, that they no longer needed, as they were preparing to return to France. The provisions gained from Hawkins enabled the French to survive and prepare to move back home as soon as possible.

The voyage returned a profit reported at 60%. Hawkins brought back to England the sweet potato and tobacco, which was initially used as a narcotic; smoking did not gain in popularity until years later.

==Slave voyage of John Lovell (1566–1567)==
Hawkins first two slave voyages had angered the Spanish and in response the queen had prohibited Hawkins from going to sea. Instead he arranged his next slave voyage and gave the captaincy to a relative of his called John Lovell. Sir Francis Drake, who is also likely to be a relative of Lovell, was on the voyage.

Lovell sailed to the West African coast in 1566 and through piracy captured five ships, three of which were slave ships. He took the cargo of enslaved people and other goods to the Spanish West Indies to be sold. The sale of the cargo did not go well and Lovell deposited 92 enslaved people ashore without any payment. Drake later recalled the trip with embarrassment and Hawkins ascribed the failure to the &quot;simpleness&quot; of his deputies.

==Third slave voyage (1567–1569)==
The queen had forbidden Hawkins from going to sea but she relented, and he arranged a third slave voyage, departing Plymouth on 2 October 1567. Arriving at the African coast, he could not secure enslaved people with ease because the local Portuguese agents were unwilling to trade with him. He attempted to capture and kidnap the inhabitants of a village on the Cap-Vert peninsula, near modern-day Dakar. The unprovoked raid was repulsed, Hawkins was wounded and eight of his men died slowly and painfully from wounds from poisoned arrows. His next stop was Cacheu, in modern-day Guinea-Bissau, where he captured several trading vessels but was again driven back to his ships by the local Papel people and lancados. Hawkins recruited a local king in Sierra Leone to help him forcibly kidnap people, capturing over 500 people. On 7 February 1568, he set sail across the Atlantic Ocean to sell these people. He sold some of his captives in Margarita Province and others in Borburata. At Rio de la Hacha, the governor refused him permission to trade, so Sir Francis Drake shot at his house and Hawkins took over the town in a battle, before selling the enslaved people.

The Battle of San Juan de Ulúa was fought between English privateers and Spanish forces at San Juan de Ulúa. The English fleet consisting of six armed merchant ships under Hawkins had been trading alongside the Spanish with the cooperation of local Spanish officials. The central Spanish authorities considered this to be illegal smuggling. Hawkins&#x27; ships were attacked unexpectedly, Drake fled on &quot;Judith&quot; and Hawkins was defeated. His remaining ship &quot;Minions&quot; limped home with only around 15 crew. The expedition, however, was financially rewarding as he had managed to transfer most of his trading income onto &quot;Minion&quot;.

==1570–1587==

In 1578 Hawkins was appointed Treasurer of the Navy, briefly he worked alongside his father-in-law, Benjamin Gonson, before taking full control of the position. He embarked on a comprehensive reform of naval administration and managed to achieve an annual saving of nearly £4,000 per annum, while at the same time raising naval pay. He reformed the design of galleons so that they were longer, able to carry a larger number of guns, more manoeuvrable and faster moving. As a result of Hawkins&#x27; reforms, according to Garrett Mattingly, the Navy was a &quot;fighting-fleet faster and more weatherly than any that had ever been seen on the ocean before&quot;. He also increased the size of the Navy, so that by 1587 it consisted of 23 ships and 18 pinnaces.

Hawkins&#x27;s financial reforms of the Navy upset many who had vested interests. In 1582, his rival, Sir William Wynter, accused him of administrative malfeasance, instigating a Royal Commission on fraud against him. The commission, under William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, Francis Walsingham, and Drake, concluded that there was no corruption, and that the Queen&#x27;s Navy was in first-rate condition.

==Spanish Armada==
Hawkins served as a Vice-Admiral during victory against the Spanish Armada, he was part of the war council and third in command overall. Hawkins had an extensive influence on the outcome of the engagement not only through his command, but because his improved ship designs, while acting as Treasurer of the Navy, had given the fleet more firepower and speed.

After that victory, Hawkins urged the seizure of Philip II&#x27;s colonial treasure, in order to stop Spain re-arming. In 1589, Hawkins sailed with Francis Drake in the English Armada. One of its goals was to try to intercept the Spanish treasure ships departing from Mexico. One decisive action might have forced Philip II to the negotiating table and avoided fourteen years of continuing warfare. Instead, the voyage failed and the King was able to use the brief respite to rebuild his naval forces and, by the end of 1589, Spain once again had an Atlantic fleet strong enough to escort the American treasure ships home.

==Final years and death==
Katherine Hawkins, his wife, died in 1591; he then married Margaret Vaughan (d. 1619), daughter of Charles Vaughan, a Lady of the Bedchamber of Queen Elizabeth I.

In 1593, Richard Hawkins, his son, was defeated and captured by the Spanish at a naval battle called the action of San Mateo Bay. With his cousin, Sir Francis Drake, John Hawkins raised a fleet of 27 ships to attack the Spanish in the West Indies. They set sail from Plymouth on 29 August 1595. Bad weather and skirmishes with the Spanish fleet hampered their efforts to get his son back. On 12 November 1595, it was reported that Hawkins had died at sea close to Puerto Rico.

==Legacy==

Hawkins’ legacy divides opinion. The historian Geoffrey Elton appraised Hawkins as &quot;one of the founding-fathers of England&#x27;s naval tradition ... he was a man of commanding presence and intellect, of outstanding abilities as a seaman, administrator, fighter and diplomat.&quot; More recently he has been described as a pirate and slave trader.

The Royal Navy named a heavy cruiser, after him, the ship was in commission between 1919 and 1947. The Hospital of Sir John Hawkins, Knight, in Chatham, Kent, was originally built by him and takes his name.

In the 16th century slavery was often accepted without a judgment of moral values. The Victorian era saw Hawkins described as the unscrupulous father of the English slave trade. In June 2006, Andrew Hawkins, a descendant, publicly apologised for John Hawkins&#x27;s actions in the slave trade. In 2023, Plymouth City Council announced that due to Hawkins&#x27;s links with the slave trade, it planned to rename Sir John Hawkins Square to Justice Square.

==References==
==Sources==
* Kelsey, Harry. &quot;Sir John Hawkins, Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s Slave Trader&quot;, Yale University Press, 384 pages, (April 2003), 
* 

==Further reading==
* Hazlewood, Nick. &quot;The Queen&#x27;s Slave Trader: John Hawkyns, Elizabeth I, and the Trafficking in Human Souls&quot;. HarperCollins Books, New York, 2004. .
* &quot;The African Slave Trade and Its Suppression: A Classified and Annotated Bibliography of Books, Pamphlets and Periodical Articles&quot;, annotated by Peter C. Hogg (editor), Frank Cass and Co. Ltd., Abingdon, Oxon, England; and Frank Cass and Co. Ltd., New York (1973), . Transferred to Digital Printing 2006
* Southey, Robert. &quot;Sir John Hawkins and Sir Francis Drake&quot;, pp. 67–242 of Vol. 3, &quot;The Lives of the British Admirals&quot;, 5 vols. 1833–1840.
* Unwin, Rayner. &quot;The Defeat of John Hawkins: A Biography of His Third Slaving Voyage&quot;. London: George Allen &amp; Unwin Ltd., 1960; New York: Macmillan, 1960.
* Walling, R.A.J. &quot;A Sea-Dog of Devon: a Life of Sir John Hawkins&quot;. 1907.
* Williamson, James. &quot;Hawkins of Plymouth: a new History of Sir John Hawkins&quot;. 1949. Second edition, 1969.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="0" end="7" title="Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q315490" start="8" end="24" title="John Hawkins (naval commander)" label="Sir John Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q315490" start="39" end="46" title="John Hawkins (naval commander)" label="Hawkyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="127" end="136" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="232" end="252" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q647110" start="323" end="337" title="Triangle Trade" label="Triangle Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="522" end="536" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="555" end="563" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488533" start="582" end="603" title="Treasurer of the Navy" label="Treasurer of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q523616" start="776" end="791" title="Richard Hawkins" label="Richard Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="861" end="874" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="1105" end="1113" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531374" start="1238" end="1253" title="William Hawkins (died c. 1554)" label="William Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1295" end="1301" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967561" start="1369" end="1387" title="Brighton, Cornwall" label="Brighton, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="1393" end="1406" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1464" end="1474" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672790" start="1708" end="1723" title="William Hawkins (died 1589)" label="William Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="1873" end="1890" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1895" end="1913" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888716" start="2237" end="2252" title="Benjamin Gonson" label="Benjamin Gonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q523616" start="2308" end="2323" title="Richard Hawkins" label="Richard Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="2630" end="2644" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="2754" end="2760" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="2807" end="2824" title="Spanish Caribbean" label="Spanish Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020631" start="2889" end="2907" title="William Wynter" label="Sir William Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555620" start="2909" end="2927" title="Lionel Duckett" label="Sir Lionel Duckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791899" start="2929" end="2945" title="Thomas Lodge (Lord Mayor of London)" label="Sir Thomas Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="3184" end="3196" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q647110" start="3853" end="3867" title="Triangle Trade" label="Triangle Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="4196" end="4232" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291914" start="4237" end="4272" title="Edward Clinton, 1st Earl of Lincoln" label="Edward Clinton, 1st Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="4279" end="4312" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514047" start="4425" end="4440" title="Jesus of Lübeck" label="Jesus of Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q592499" start="4817" end="4826" title="Borburata" label="Borburata"/>
<link wikidata="Q826566" start="4967" end="4982" title="Rio de la Hacha" label="Rio de la Hacha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5347" end="5360" title="Fort Caroline#Fort Caroline (1564–1565)" label="Fort Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="5817" end="5825" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275259" start="6143" end="6154" title="John Lovell (slave trader)" label="John Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="6302" end="6308" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251355" start="6350" end="6361" title="slave ships" label="slave ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q216889" start="7088" end="7096" title="Cap-Vert" label="Cap-Vert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="7124" end="7129" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002807" start="7284" end="7290" title="Cacheu" label="Cacheu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="7306" end="7319" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q952720" start="7415" end="7427" title="Papel people" label="Papel people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217674" start="7432" end="7440" title="lancados" label="lancados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="7476" end="7488" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408384" start="7664" end="7682" title="Margarita Province" label="Margarita Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q826566" start="7711" end="7726" title="Rio de la Hacha" label="Rio de la Hacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889912" start="7898" end="7924" title="Battle of San Juan de Ulúa (1568)" label="Battle of San Juan de Ulúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696230" start="7985" end="8001" title="San Juan de Ulúa" label="San Juan de Ulúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488533" start="8598" end="8619" title="Treasurer of the Navy" label="Treasurer of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181469" start="8927" end="8934" title="galleon" label="galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523925" start="9089" end="9106" title="Garrett Mattingly" label="Garrett Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236143" start="9318" end="9326" title="Pinnace (ship&amp;#x27;s boat)" label="pinnaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020631" start="9435" end="9449" title="William Wynter" label="William Wynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="9508" end="9524" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="9569" end="9602" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="9604" end="9622" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="9815" end="9829" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="10164" end="10173" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145934" start="10284" end="10298" title="English Armada" label="English Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886306" start="10864" end="10879" title="Charles Vaughan (by 1529 – 1574 or later)" label="Charles Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216038" start="10883" end="10905" title="Lady of the Bedchamber" label="Lady of the Bedchamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q523616" start="10938" end="10953" title="Richard Hawkins" label="Richard Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677403" start="11034" end="11057" title="action of San Mateo Bay" label="action of San Mateo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="11080" end="11093" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="11393" end="11404" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q89433" start="11466" end="11480" title="Geoffrey Elton" label="Geoffrey Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11777" end="11787" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729006" start="11917" end="11930" title="Chatham, Kent" label="Chatham, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="12068" end="12081" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205775" start="12284" end="12305" title="Plymouth City Council" label="Plymouth City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405768" start="12392" end="12415" title="Sir John Hawkins Square" label="Sir John Hawkins Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="13102" end="13117" title="Robert Southey" label="Southey, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q95155" start="13261" end="13274" title="Rayner Unwin" label="Unwin, Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928117" start="13431" end="13446" title="Robert Alfred John Walling" label="Walling, R.A.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q6145656" start="13515" end="13532" title="James Williamson (historian)" label="Williamson, James"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382800" wikidata="Q77130" url="?curid=382800" title="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle">
<text>Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle (; 9 July 1809 – 13 May 1885) was a German physician, pathologist, and anatomist. He is credited with the discovery of the loop of Henle in the kidney. His essay, &quot;On Miasma and Contagia,&quot; was an early argument for the germ theory of disease. He was an important figure in the development of modern medicine.

==Biography==

Henle was born in Fürth, Bavaria, to Simon and Rachel Diesbach Henle (Hähnlein). He was Jewish. After studying medicine at Heidelberg and at Bonn, where he took his doctor&#x27;s degree in 1832, he became prosector in anatomy to Johannes Müller at Berlin. During the six years he spent in that position he published a large amount of work, including three anatomical monographs on new species of animals and papers on the structure of the lymphatic system, the distribution of epithelium in the human body, the structure and development of the hair, and the formation of mucus and pus. He also developed a friendship with another assistant of Müller, Theodor Schwann, which later became famous for his cell theory.

In 1840, he accepted the chair of anatomy at Zürich and in 1844 he was called to Heidelberg, where he taught anatomy, physiology, and pathology. About this period he was engaged on delineating his complete system of general anatomy, which formed the sixth volume of the new edition of Samuel Thomas von Sömmering&#x27;s treatise, published at Leipzig between 1841 and 1844. While at Heidelberg he published a zoological monograph on the sharks and rays, in conjunction with his master Müller, and in 1846 his famous &quot;Manual of Rational Pathology&quot; began to appear; this marked the beginning of a new era in pathological study, since in it physiology and pathology were treated, in Henle&#x27;s own words, as branches of one science, and the facts of disease were systematically considered with reference to their physiological relations.

In 1852, he moved to Göttingen, whence he issued three years later the first instalment of his great &quot;Handbook of Systematic Human Anatomy&quot;, the last volume of which was not published until 1873. This work was perhaps the most complete and comprehensive of its kind at that time, and it was remarkable not only for the fullness and minuteness of its anatomical descriptions but also for the number and excellence of the illustrations with which they elucidated minute anatomy of the blood vessels, serous membranes, kidney, eye, nails, central nervous system, etc. He discovered the loop of Henle and Henle&#x27;s tubules, two anatomical structures in the kidney.

Other anatomical and pathological findings associated with his name are:
* Crypts of Henle: microscopic pockets located in the conjunctiva of the eye.
* Hassall–Henle bodies: transparent growths in the periphery of the Descemet&#x27;s membrane of the eye.
* Henle&#x27;s fissure: fibrous tissue between the cardiac muscle fibers.
* Henle&#x27;s ampulla: ampulla of the uterine tube.
* Henle&#x27;s layer: outer layer of cells of root sheath of a hair follicle.
* Henle&#x27;s ligament: tendon of the transversus abdominis muscle.
* Henle&#x27;s membrane: Bruch&#x27;s layer forming inner boundary of the choroid of the eye.
* Henle&#x27;s sheath: connective tissue which supports outer layer of nerve fibres in a funiculus.
* Henle&#x27;s spine: the supra-meateal spine that serves as a landmark in the mastoid area.
* Glands of Henle: depressions in the eye in which epithelial cells accumulate in cases of cicatrial trachoma.
* Tubes of Henle: numerous tiny tubes connecting the choroid to retina, carrying vessels and nerves.

Henle developed the concepts of contagium vivum and contagium animatum, respectively (&quot;Von den Miasmen und Kontagien&quot;, 1840) – thereby following ideas of Girolamo Fracastoro and the work of Agostino Bassi; thus co-founding the theory of microorganisms as the cause of infective diseases. He did not find a special species of bacteria himself – this was achieved by his student Robert Koch. Those two put up the fundamental rules of cleanly defining disease-causing microbes: the Henle Koch postulates.

In 1870, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He died in Göttingen, 13 May 1885.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Ueber die Ausbreitung des Epithelium im menschlichen Körper&quot; (1838)
* &quot;Allgemeine Anatomie: Lehre von den Mischungs- und Formbestandtheilen des menschlichen Körpers&quot; (1841)
* &quot;Handbuch der rationellen Pathologie&quot; (1846–1853)
* &quot;Handbuch der systematischen Anatomie des Menschen&quot; (1855–1871)
* &quot;Vergleichend-anatomische Beschreibung des Kehlkopfes mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des Kehlkopfes der Reptilien&quot; (1839)
* &quot;Pathologische Untersuchungen&quot; (1840)
* &quot;Zur Anatomie der Niere&quot; (1863)

==See also==
*:Category:Taxa named by Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle

==References==

;Attribution
==External links==
* Neurotree: Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle Details
* Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle. WhoNamedIt.
* Biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="0" end="28" title="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle" label="Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="83" end="94" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="100" end="109" title="anatomist" label="anatomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813955" start="152" end="165" title="loop of Henle" label="loop of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="173" end="179" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="258" end="280" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075" start="382" end="387" title="Fürth" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="487" end="497" title="university of Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="505" end="509" title="university of Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q222845" start="569" end="578" title="prosector" label="prosector"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="582" end="589" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57992" start="593" end="608" title="Johannes Peter Müller" label="Johannes Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="612" end="618" title="Charité" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="803" end="819" title="lymphatic system" label="lymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="841" end="851" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="935" end="940" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="945" end="948" title="pus" label="pus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="1015" end="1030" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Theodor Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q177935" start="1066" end="1077" title="cell theory" label="cell theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="1114" end="1121" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="1125" end="1131" title="university of Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="1198" end="1208" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="1214" end="1223" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132197" start="1365" end="1392" title="Samuel Thomas von Sömmering" label="Samuel Thomas von Sömmering"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="1423" end="1430" title="university of Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="1517" end="1522" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="1528" end="1532" title="batoidea" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="1949" end="1958" title="university of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364005" start="2436" end="2451" title="serous membrane" label="serous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="2454" end="2460" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="2474" end="2496" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813955" start="2521" end="2534" title="loop of Henle" label="loop of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2539" end="2559" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s tubules" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s tubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241169" start="2678" end="2693" title="Crypts of Henle" label="Crypts of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273554" start="2730" end="2741" title="conjunctiva" label="conjunctiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679479" start="2756" end="2776" title="Hassall–Henle bodies" label="Hassall–Henle bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706844" start="2822" end="2846" title="Descemet&amp;#x27;s membrane" label="Descemet&amp;#x27;s membrane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2861" end="2881" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s fissure" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s fissure"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="2910" end="2924" title="cardiac muscle" label="cardiac muscle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2935" end="2955" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s ampulla" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s ampulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748557" start="2957" end="2964" title="ampulla" label="ampulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975896" start="2988" end="3006" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s layer" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s layer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3066" end="3087" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s ligament" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="3089" end="3095" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427665" start="3103" end="3131" title="transversus abdominis muscle" label="transversus abdominis muscle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3135" end="3156" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s membrane" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q991899" start="3158" end="3176" title="Bruch&amp;#x27;s membrane" label="Bruch&amp;#x27;s layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q271762" start="3207" end="3214" title="choroid" label="choroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q763062" start="3229" end="3248" title="Endoneurium" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s sheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509192" start="3316" end="3325" title="Funiculus (neurology)" label="funiculus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3329" end="3347" title="Henle&amp;#x27;s spine" label="Henle&amp;#x27;s spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543924" start="3406" end="3413" title="mastoid" label="mastoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3422" end="3437" title="Glands of Henle" label="Glands of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3533" end="3547" title="Tubes of Henle" label="Tubes of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q318593" start="3797" end="3816" title="Girolamo Fracastoro" label="Girolamo Fracastoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q395590" start="3833" end="3847" title="Agostino Bassi" label="Agostino Bassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="4020" end="4031" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="4122" end="4143" title="Henle Koch postulates" label="Henle Koch postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="4194" end="4227" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4860" end="4912" title=":Category:Taxa named by Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle" label=":Category:Taxa named by Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527919" start="5092" end="5110" title="Virtual Laboratory" label="Virtual Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q318118" start="5118" end="5165" title="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science" label="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382801" wikidata="Q848343" url="?curid=382801" title="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency">
<text>Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDD), also known as favism, is the most common enzyme deficiency anemia worldwide. It is an inborn error of metabolism that predisposes to red blood cell breakdown. Most of the time, those who are affected have no symptoms. Following a specific trigger, symptoms such as yellowish skin, dark urine, shortness of breath, and feeling tired may develop. Complications can include anemia and newborn jaundice. Some people never have symptoms.
It is an X-linked recessive disorder that results in defective glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is an enzyme that protects red blood cells, which carry oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body. A defect of the enzyme results in the premature breakdown of red blood cells. This destruction of red blood cells is called hemolysis. Red blood cell breakdown may be triggered by infections, certain medication, stress, or foods such as fava beans. Depending on the specific mutation the severity of the condition may vary. Diagnosis is based on symptoms and supported by blood tests and genetic testing.

Affected persons must avoid dietary triggers, notably fava beans. This can be difficult, as fava beans may be called &quot;broad beans&quot; and are used in many foods, whole or as flour. Falafel is probably the best known, but fava beans are often used as filler in meatballs and other foods. Since G6PD deficiency is not an allergy, food regulations in most countries do not require that fava beans be highlighted as an allergen on the label.
Treatment of acute episodes may include medications for infection, stopping the offending medication, or blood transfusions. Jaundice in newborns may be treated with bili lights. It is recommended that people be tested for G6PDD before certain medications, such as primaquine, are taken.
About 400 million people have the condition globally. It is particularly common in certain parts of Africa, Asia, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East. Males are affected more often than females. In 2015 it is believed to have resulted in 33,000 deaths.

==Signs and symptoms==
Most individuals with G6PD deficiency are asymptomatic. When it induces hemolysis, the effect is usually short-lived.

Most people who develop symptoms are male, due to the X-linked pattern of inheritance, but female carriers can be affected due to unfavorable lyonization or skewed X-inactivation, where random inactivation of an X-chromosome in certain cells creates a population of G6PD-deficient red blood cells coexisting with unaffected red blood cells. A female with one affected X chromosome will show the deficiency in approximately half of her red blood cells. However, in some cases, including double X-deficiency, the ratio can be much more than half, making the individual almost as sensitive as males.

Red blood cell breakdown (also known as hemolysis) in G6PD deficiency can manifest in a number of ways, including the following:
* Prolonged neonatal jaundice, possibly leading to kernicterus (arguably the most serious complication of G6PD deficiency)
* Hemolytic crises in response to:
** Illness (especially infections)
** Certain drugs (see below)
** Certain foods, most notably broad beans, from which the word &quot;favism&quot; derives
** Certain chemicals
** Diabetic ketoacidosis
* Hemoglobinuria (red or brown urine)
* Very severe crisis can cause acute kidney injury

Favism is a hemolytic response to the consumption of fava beans, also known as broad beans. Though all individuals with favism show G6PD deficiency, not all individuals with G6PD deficiency show favism. The condition is known to be more prevalent in infants and children, and the G6PD genetic variant can influence chemical sensitivity. Other than this, the specifics of the chemical relationship between favism and G6PD are not well understood.

==Cause==
G6PD deficiency results from mutations in the G6PD gene. G6PD gene contributes to the production of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Chemical reactions involving glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase produce compounds that prevent reactive oxygen species from building up to toxic levels within red blood cells. If a reduction in the amount of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase or alteration of structure occurs due to the mutations of the G6PD gene, the enzyme loses its protective role and leads to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species and thus damages red blood cells.

===Triggers===
Carriers of the underlying mutation do not show any symptoms unless their red blood cells are exposed to certain triggers, which can be of four main types:
* Foods (fava beans is the hallmark trigger for G6PD mutation carriers),
* Certain medicines including aspirin, quinine and other antimalarials derived from quinine.
* Moth balls (naphthalene)
* Stress from a bacterial or viral infection.

====Drugs====
Many substances are potentially harmful to people with G6PD deficiency. Variation in response to these substances makes individual predictions difficult. Antimalarial drugs that can cause acute hemolysis in people with G6PD deficiency include primaquine, pamaquine, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine. There is evidence that other antimalarials may also exacerbate G6PD deficiency, but only at higher doses. Sulfonamides (such as sulfanilamide, sulfamethoxazole, and mafenide), thiazolesulfone, methylene blue, and naphthalene should also be avoided by people with G6PD deficiency as they antagonize folate synthesis, as should certain analgesics (such as phenazopyridine and acetanilide) and a few non-sulfa antibiotics (nalidixic acid, nitrofurantoin, isoniazid, dapsone, and furazolidone). Henna has been known to cause hemolytic crisis in G6PD-deficient infants. Rasburicase is also contraindicated in G6PD deficiency. High dose intravenous vitamin C has also been known to cause hemolysis in G6PD deficiency carriers; therefore, G6PD deficiency testing is routine before infusion of doses of 25 g or more.

===Genetics===
Two variants (G6PD A− and G6PD Mediterranean) are the most common in human populations. G6PD A− has an occurrence of 10% of Africans and African-Americans while G6PD Mediterranean is prevalent in the Middle East. The known distribution of the mutated allele is largely limited to people of Mediterranean origins (Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, Armenians, Sephardi Jews, and other Semitic peoples). Both variants are believed to stem from a strongly protective effect against &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; and &quot;Plasmodium vivax&quot; malaria. It is particularly frequent in the Kurdish Jewish population, wherein approximately 1 in 2 males have the condition and the same rate of females are carriers. It is also common in African American, Saudi Arabian, Sardinian males, some African populations, and Asian groups.

All mutations that cause G6PD deficiency are found on the long arm of the X chromosome, on band Xq28. The G6PD gene spans some 18.5 kilobases. The following variants and mutations are well-known and described:
==Pathophysiology==

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway (see image, also known as the HMP shunt pathway). G6PD converts glucose-6-phosphate into 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone and is the rate-limiting enzyme of this metabolic pathway that supplies reducing energy to cells by maintaining the level of the reduced form of the co-enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). The NADPH maintains the supply of reduced glutathione in the cells that are used to mop up free radicals that cause oxidative damage. The pathway also stimulates catalase, an antioxidant enzyme.

The G6PD / NADPH pathway is the &quot;only&quot; source of reduced glutathione in red blood cells (erythrocytes). The role of red cells as oxygen carriers puts them at substantial risk of damage from oxidizing free radicals except for the protective effect of G6PD/NADPH/glutathione.

People with G6PD deficiency are therefore at risk of hemolytic anemia in states of oxidative stress. Oxidative stress can result from infection and from chemical exposure to medication and certain foods. Broad beans, e.g., fava beans, contain high levels of vicine, divicine, convicine and isouramil, all of which create oxidants.

When all remaining reduced glutathione is consumed, enzymes and other proteins (including hemoglobin) are subsequently damaged by the oxidants, leading to cross-bonding and protein deposition in the red cell membranes. Damaged red cells are phagocytosed and sequestered (taken out of circulation) in the spleen. The hemoglobin is metabolized to bilirubin (causing jaundice at high concentrations). The red cells rarely disintegrate in the circulation, so hemoglobin is rarely excreted directly by the kidney, but this can occur in severe cases, causing acute kidney injury.

Deficiency of G6PD in the alternative pathway causes the buildup of glucose and thus there is an increase of advanced glycation endproducts (AGE). The deficiency also reduces the amount of NADPH, which is required for the formation of nitric oxide (NO). The high prevalence of diabetes mellitus type 2 and hypertension in Afro-Caribbeans in the West could be directly related to the incidence of G6PD deficiency in those populations.

Although female carriers can have a mild form of G6PD deficiency (dependent on the degree of inactivation of the unaffected X chromosome – see &quot;Skewed X-inactivation&quot;), homozygous females have been described; in these females, there is co-incidence of a rare immune disorder termed chronic granulomatous disease (CGD).

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis is generally suspected when patients from certain ethnic groups (see epidemiology) develop anemia, jaundice, and symptoms of hemolysis after challenges from any of the above causes, especially when there is a positive family history.

Generally, tests will include:
* Complete blood count and reticulocyte count; in active G6PD deficiency, Heinz bodies can be seen in red blood cells on a blood film;
* Liver enzymes (to exclude other causes of jaundice);
* Lactate dehydrogenase (elevated in hemolysis and a marker of hemolytic severity)
* Haptoglobin (decreased in hemolysis);
* A &quot;direct antiglobulin test&quot; (Coombs&#x27; test) – this should be negative, as hemolysis in G6PD is not immune-mediated;

When there are sufficient grounds to suspect G6PD, a direct test for G6PD is the &quot;Beutler fluorescent spot test&quot;, which has largely replaced an older test (the Motulsky dye-decolouration test). Other possibilities are direct DNA testing and/or sequencing of the G6PD gene.

The &quot;Beutler fluorescent spot test&quot; is a rapid and inexpensive test that visually identifies NADPH produced by G6PD under ultraviolet light. When the blood spot does not fluoresce, the test is positive; it can be falsely negative in patients who are actively hemolysing. It can therefore only be done 2–3 weeks after a hemolytic episode.

When a macrophage in the spleen identifies an RBC with a Heinz body, it removes the precipitate and a small piece of the membrane, leading to characteristic &quot;bite cells&quot;. However, if a large number of Heinz bodies are produced, as in the case of G6PD deficiency, some Heinz bodies will nonetheless be visible when viewing RBCs that have been stained with crystal violet. This easy and inexpensive test can lead to an initial presumption of G6PD deficiency, which can be confirmed with the other tests.

Testing during and for many weeks after a hemolytic episode will lead to false negative results as the G6PD deficient RBC will have been excreted and the young RBC (reticulocytes) will not yet be G6PD deficient. False-negative results will also be likely following any blood transfusions. For this reason, many hospitals wait three months after a hemolytic episode before testing for G6PD deficiency. Females should have their G6PD activity measured by quantitative assay to avoid being misclassified by screening tests.

===Classification===
The World Health Organization classifies G6PD genetic variants into five classes, the first three of which are deficiency states.
* Class I: Severe deficiency (&lt;10% activity) with chronic (nonspherocytic) hemolytic anemia
* Class II: Severe deficiency (&lt;10% activity), with intermittent hemolysis
* Class III: Moderate deficiency (10–60% activity), hemolysis with stressors only
* Class IV: Non-deficient variant, no clinical sequelae
* Class V: Increased enzyme activity, no clinical sequelae

===Differential diagnosis===
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) deficiency has similar symptoms and is often mistaken for G6PD deficiency, as the affected enzyme is within the same pathway, however, these diseases are not linked and can be found within the same person.

==Treatment==
The most important measure is prevention – avoidance of the drugs and foods that cause hemolysis. Vaccination against some common pathogens (e.g. hepatitis A and hepatitis B) may prevent infection-induced attacks.

In the acute phase of hemolysis, blood transfusions might be necessary, or even dialysis in acute kidney failure. Blood transfusion is an important symptomatic measure, as the transfused red cells are generally not G6PD deficient and will live a normal lifespan in the recipient&#x27;s circulation. Those affected should avoid drugs such as aspirin.

Some patients may benefit from the removal of the spleen (splenectomy), as this is an important site of red cell destruction. Folic acid should be used in any disorder featuring a high red cell turnover. Although vitamin E and selenium have antioxidant properties, their use does not decrease the severity of G6PD deficiency.

AG1, a recently discovered small molecule, has been shown to increase the activity of the G6PD enzyme in the three common variants of the deficiency. Due to the absence of medications to treat G6PD, AG1 is a promising precursor in developing a pharmacological treatment effective for multiple G6PD enzymopathies.

==Prognosis==
G6PD-deficient individuals do not appear to acquire any illnesses more frequently than other people, and may have less risk than other people for acquiring ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease.
However, a recent study revealed that G6PD deficiency increases cardiovascular risk by up to 70%. The risk conferred by G6PD deficiency is moderate compared with the impact of primary cardiovascular risk factors. Besides, a published review hypothesized that G6PD deficiency could reduce the antiplatelet efficacy of clopidogrel (clopidogrel resistance).

==Epidemiology==

G6PD deficiency is the second most common human enzyme defect after ALDH2 deficiency, being present in more than 400 million people worldwide. G6PD deficiency resulted in 4,100 deaths in 2013 and 3,400 deaths in 1990. The Mediterranean Basin is where favism is most common, especially among Kurds, Sardinians, Cypriots, Greeks, Egyptians and some African populations, including those who have these ancestries. Favism has also been documented outside of the Mediterranean basin, in other Middle Eastern and East Asian nations like Iraq, Iran, Bulgaria and China. Sardinia has the highest reported frequency of favism, with five instances per every 1,000 people.

A side effect of this disease is that it confers protection against malaria, in particular the form of malaria caused by &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;, the most deadly form of malaria. A similar relationship exists between malaria and sickle-cell disease. One theory to explain this is that cells infected with the &quot;Plasmodium&quot; parasite are cleared more rapidly by the spleen. This phenomenon might give G6PD deficiency carriers an evolutionary advantage by increasing their fitness in malarial endemic environments.
In vitro studies have shown that &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; is very sensitive to oxidative damage. This is the basis for another theory: the genetic defect confers resistance since the G6PD-deficient host has a higher level of oxidative agents that, while generally tolerable by the host, are deadly to the parasite.

==History==
The modern understanding of the condition began with the analysis of patients who exhibited sensitivity to primaquine. The discovery of G6PD deficiency relied heavily upon the testing of prisoner volunteers at Illinois State Penitentiary, a type of study which today is considered unethical and cannot be performed. When some prisoners were given the drug primaquine, some developed hemolytic anemia but others did not. Despite these results, the US military administered the drug widely during the Korean War to prevent the relapsing infection caused by &quot;Plasmodium vivax&quot; hypnozoites. Numerous cases of hemolytic anemia were observed in US soldiers of North African and Mediterranean descent.

After studying the mechanism through Cr51 testing, it was conclusively shown that the hemolytic effect of primaquine was due to an intrinsic defect of erythrocytes.

==Society and culture==
In both legend and mythology, favism has been known since antiquity. The priests of various Greco-Roman era cults were forbidden to eat or even mention beans, and Pythagoras had a strict rule that to join the society of the Pythagoreans one had to swear off beans. This ban was supposedly because beans resembled male genitalia, but it is possible that this was because of a belief that beans and humans were created from the same material.

==References==
== External links ==

* Family Practice Notebook/G6PD Deficiency (Favism)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="0" end="44" title="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="46" end="51" title="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="G6PDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="68" end="74" title="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="favism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="113" end="119" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013981" start="140" end="166" title="Inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism" label="inborn error of metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="187" end="211" title="hemolysis" label="red blood cell breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="319" end="333" title="jaundice" label="yellowish skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="347" end="366" title="shortness of breath" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="425" end="431" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755487" start="436" end="452" title="newborn jaundice" label="newborn jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988987" start="496" end="514" title="X-linked recessive" label="X-linked recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q421793" start="550" end="583" title="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase" label="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="653" end="668" title="red blood cells" label="red blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="860" end="869" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="916" end="925" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="973" end="983" title="fava beans" label="fava beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="1011" end="1019" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="1124" end="1139" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188788" start="1330" end="1337" title="Falafel" label="Falafel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="1692" end="1710" title="blood transfusions" label="blood transfusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698543" start="1753" end="1763" title="bili light" label="bili light"/>
<link wikidata="Q419834" start="1852" end="1862" title="primaquine" label="primaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1993" end="2006" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2016" end="2027" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="2197" end="2209" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142188" start="2328" end="2336" title="X-linked" label="X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q898914" start="2416" end="2427" title="lyonization" label="lyonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534814" start="2431" end="2452" title="skewed X-inactivation" label="skewed X-inactivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="2555" end="2569" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="2912" end="2921" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755487" start="3013" end="3030" title="neonatal jaundice" label="neonatal jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q861845" start="3052" end="3063" title="kernicterus" label="kernicterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="3126" end="3142" title="Hemolysis" label="Hemolytic crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="3205" end="3210" title="medication" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="3254" end="3264" title="broad bean" label="broad bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q877827" start="3338" end="3359" title="Diabetic ketoacidosis" label="Diabetic ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553850" start="3362" end="3376" title="Hemoglobinuria" label="Hemoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="3429" end="3448" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q421793" start="4007" end="4040" title="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase" label="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="4136" end="4159" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981783" start="4683" end="4691" title="Pathognomonic" label="hallmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="4759" end="4766" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="4768" end="4775" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="4786" end="4799" title="Antimalarial medication" label="antimalarials"/>
<link wikidata="Q910044" start="4824" end="4834" title="Mothball" label="Moth balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="4836" end="4847" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="4865" end="4874" title="Pathogenic bacteria" label="bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="4878" end="4893" title="Viral disease" label="viral infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="5064" end="5081" title="Antimalarial drug" label="Antimalarial drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q419834" start="5153" end="5163" title="primaquine" label="primaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391724" start="5165" end="5174" title="pamaquine" label="pamaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="5176" end="5187" title="chloroquine" label="chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421094" start="5193" end="5211" title="hydroxychloroquine" label="hydroxychloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="5319" end="5331" title="Sulfonamide (medicine)" label="Sulfonamides"/>
<link wikidata="Q423423" start="5341" end="5354" title="sulfanilamide" label="sulfanilamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415843" start="5356" end="5372" title="sulfamethoxazole" label="sulfamethoxazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843044" start="5378" end="5386" title="mafenide" label="mafenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422134" start="5406" end="5420" title="methylene blue" label="methylene blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="5426" end="5437" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="5547" end="5556" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114549" start="5567" end="5582" title="phenazopyridine" label="phenazopyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421761" start="5587" end="5598" title="acetanilide" label="acetanilide"/>
<link wikidata="Q281082" start="5633" end="5647" title="nalidixic acid" label="nalidixic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422669" start="5649" end="5663" title="nitrofurantoin" label="nitrofurantoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423169" start="5665" end="5674" title="isoniazid" label="isoniazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422226" start="5676" end="5683" title="dapsone" label="dapsone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467555" start="5689" end="5701" title="furazolidone" label="furazolidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10521987" start="5704" end="5709" title="Henna" label="Henna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088229" start="5778" end="5789" title="Rasburicase" label="Rasburicase"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="5844" end="5855" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="5856" end="5865" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="6517" end="6538" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311376" start="6555" end="6571" title="Plasmodium vivax" label="Plasmodium vivax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750102" start="6622" end="6636" title="History of the Jews in Kurdistan" label="Kurdish Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="6767" end="6783" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="6785" end="6797" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="6800" end="6809" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61333" start="6936" end="6948" title="X chromosome" label="X chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="6994" end="7002" title="kilobase" label="kilobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="7140" end="7146" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q827489" start="7154" end="7179" title="pentose phosphate pathway" label="pentose phosphate pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q74566546" start="7244" end="7263" title="glucose-6-phosphate" label="glucose-6-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q245503" start="7269" end="7295" title="6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone" label="6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q68685" start="7336" end="7353" title="metabolic pathway" label="metabolic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="7368" end="7376" title="redox" label="reducing"/>
<link wikidata="Q407280" start="7445" end="7454" title="co-enzyme" label="co-enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="7455" end="7498" title="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate" label="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q116907" start="7550" end="7561" title="glutathione" label="glutathione"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="7624" end="7633" title="oxidation" label="oxidative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="7803" end="7814" title="erythrocyte" label="erythrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145668" start="8042" end="8058" title="hemolytic anemia" label="hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="8072" end="8088" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="8163" end="8173" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="8193" end="8203" title="Broad bean" label="Broad bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961382" start="8247" end="8253" title="vicine" label="vicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283993" start="8255" end="8263" title="divicine" label="divicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099450" start="8279" end="8288" title="5,6-Dihydroxycytosine" label="isouramil"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="8310" end="8317" title="oxidant" label="oxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q116907" start="8348" end="8359" title="glutathione" label="glutathione"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="8411" end="8421" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="8524" end="8538" title="cell membranes" label="cell membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="8562" end="8574" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="8625" end="8631" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="8666" end="8675" title="bilirubin" label="bilirubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="8685" end="8693" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="8822" end="8828" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="8874" end="8893" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556837" start="9005" end="9034" title="advanced glycation endproduct" label="advanced glycation endproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="9173" end="9197" title="diabetes mellitus type 2" label="diabetes mellitus type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="9202" end="9214" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534814" start="9480" end="9501" title="Skewed X-inactivation" label="Skewed X-inactivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q929833" start="9595" end="9599" title="rare disease" label="rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="9600" end="9615" title="immunology" label="immune disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165663" start="9623" end="9652" title="chronic granulomatous disease" label="chronic granulomatous disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="9780" end="9786" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="9788" end="9796" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="9814" end="9823" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="9957" end="9977" title="Complete blood count" label="Complete blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404923" start="9982" end="9994" title="reticulocyte" label="reticulocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433921" start="10029" end="10041" title="Heinz body" label="Heinz bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="10057" end="10071" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q886475" start="10078" end="10088" title="blood film" label="blood film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359801" start="10092" end="10104" title="Liver enzyme" label="Liver enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="10134" end="10142" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="10147" end="10168" title="Lactate dehydrogenase" label="Lactate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422025" start="10230" end="10241" title="Haptoglobin" label="Haptoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q740056" start="10278" end="10302" title="Coombs test" label="direct antiglobulin test"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="10359" end="10368" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899306" start="10489" end="10518" title="Beutler fluorescent spot test" label="Beutler fluorescent spot test"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="10789" end="10794" title="Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate" label="NADPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="10818" end="10835" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251798" start="11198" end="11208" title="bite cells" label="bite cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="12095" end="12120" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641571" start="12621" end="12671" title="6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="12980" end="12991" title="Vaccination" label="Vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="13028" end="13039" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="13044" end="13055" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="13130" end="13147" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="13177" end="13185" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="13189" end="13209" title="acute kidney failure" label="acute kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="13438" end="13445" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="13498" end="13504" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q580383" start="13506" end="13517" title="splenectomy" label="splenectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="13574" end="13584" title="Folic acid" label="Folic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="13661" end="13670" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="13675" end="13683" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="14259" end="14281" title="ischemic heart disease" label="ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="14286" end="14309" title="cerebrovascular disease" label="cerebrovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640417" start="14753" end="14758" title="ALDH2" label="ALDH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="14907" end="14926" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="14976" end="14981" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="14983" end="14993" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341965" start="14995" end="15003" title="Demographics of Cyprus" label="Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="15005" end="15011" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="15013" end="15022" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="15248" end="15256" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="15416" end="15423" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="15475" end="15496" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="15587" end="15606" title="sickle-cell disease" label="sickle-cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="15731" end="15737" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419834" start="16323" end="16333" title="primaquine" label="primaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338618" start="16426" end="16453" title="Illinois State Penitentiary" label="Illinois State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145668" start="16599" end="16615" title="hemolytic anemia" label="hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311376" start="16777" end="16793" title="Plasmodium vivax" label="Plasmodium vivax"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="16959" end="16963" title="Chromium" label="Cr51"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="17204" end="17219" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="17275" end="17285" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="17336" end="17348" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382802" wikidata="Q1056861" url="?curid=382802" title="Relaxed stability">
<text>In aviation, an aircraft is said to have relaxed stability if it has low or negative stability.

An aircraft with negative stability will have a tendency to change its pitch and bank angles spontaneously. An aircraft with negative stability cannot be trimmed to maintain a certain attitude, and will, when disturbed in pitch or roll, continue to pitch or roll in the direction of the disturbance at an ever-increasing rate.

This can be contrasted with the behaviour of an aircraft with positive stability, which can be trimmed to fly at a certain attitude, which it will continue to maintain in the absence of control input, and, if perturbed, will oscillate in simple harmonic motion on a decreasing scale around, and eventually return to, the trimmed attitude. A positively stable aircraft will also resist any bank movement. A Cessna 152 is an example of a stable aircraft. Similarly, an aircraft with neutral stability will not return to its original attitude without control input, but will continue to roll or pitch at a steady (neither increasing nor decreasing) rate.

== Early aircraft ==
Early attempts at heavier-than-air flight were marked by a differing concept of stability from that used today. Most aeronautical investigators regarded flight as if it were not so different from surface locomotion, except the surface was elevated. They thought of changing direction in terms of a ship&#x27;s rudder, so the flying machine would remain essentially level in the air, as did an automobile or a ship at the surface. The idea of deliberately leaning, or rolling, to one side either seemed undesirable or did not enter their thinking.

Some of these early investigators, including Langley, Chanute, and later Santos-Dumont and the Voisin brothers, sought the ideal of &quot;inherent stability&quot; in a very strong sense, believing a flying machine should be built to automatically roll to a horizontal (lateral) position after any disturbance. They achieved this with the help of Hargrave cellular wings (wings with a box kite structure, including the vertical panels) and strongly dihedral wings. In most cases they did not include any means for a pilot to control the aircraft roll—they could control only the elevator and rudder. The unpredicted effect of this was that it was very hard to turn the aircraft without rolling. They were also strongly affected by side gusts and side winds upon landing.

The Wright brothers designed their 1903 first powered Flyer with anhedral (drooping) wings, which are inherently unstable. They showed that a pilot can maintain control of lateral roll and it was a good way for a flying machine to turn—to &quot;bank&quot; or &quot;lean&quot; into the turn just like a bird or just like a person riding a bicycle. Equally important, this method would enable recovery when the wind tilted the machine to one side. Although used in 1903, it would not become widely known in Europe until August 1908, when Wilbur Wright demonstrated to European aviators the importance of the coordinated use of elevator, rudder and roll control for making effective turns.

== Vertical wing position ==
The vertical positioning of the wing changes the roll stability of an aircraft.

* An aircraft with a &quot;high&quot; wing position (i.e., set on top of the fuselage) has a higher roll stability. For example, the Cessna 152.
* An aircraft with a &quot;low&quot; wing (i.e., underneath the fuselage) has less roll stability. The Piper Pawnee uses a &quot;low&quot; wing.

== Unstable aircraft ==
Modern military aircraft, particularly low observable (&quot;stealth&quot;) designs, often exhibit instability as a result of their shape. The Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk, for instance, employs a highly non-traditional fuselage and wing shape in order to reduce its radar cross section and enable it to penetrate air defenses with relative impunity. However, the flat facets of the design reduce its stability to the point where a computerized fly-by-wire system is required for it to fly.

Relaxed stability designs are not limited to military jets. The McDonnell Douglas MD-11 has a neutral stability design which was implemented to save fuel. To ensure stability for safe flight, an LSAS (Longitudinal Stability Augmentation System) was introduced to compensate for the MD-11&#x27;s rather short horizontal stabilizer and ensure that the aircraft would remain stable. However, there have been incidents in which the MD-11&#x27;s relaxed stability caused an &quot;inflight upset&quot;.

== Intentional instability ==
Many modern fighter aircraft often employ design elements that reduce stability to increase maneuverability. Greater stability leads to lesser control surface authority; therefore, a less stable design will have a faster response to control inputs. This is highly sought after in fighter aircraft design.

A less stable aircraft requires smaller control deflections to initiate maneuvering; consequently, drag and control surface imposed stresses will be reduced and aircraft responsiveness will be enhanced. Since these characteristics will typically make control by the pilot difficult or impossible, artificial stability will typically be imposed using computers, servos, and sensors as parts of a fly-by-wire control system.

== See also ==
* Index of aviation articles
* Dual control (aviation)
* Trim drag

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="3" end="11" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056861" start="41" end="58" title="Relaxed stability" label="relaxed stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="85" end="94" title="Aircraft stability" label="stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="168" end="182" title="Aircraft principal axes" label="pitch and bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="251" end="258" title="trim (aircraft)" label="trimmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="281" end="289" title="Flight dynamics (fixed-wing aircraft)" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="650" end="659" title="oscillate" label="oscillate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835975" start="663" end="685" title="simple harmonic motion" label="simple harmonic motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348731" start="831" end="841" title="Cessna 152" label="Cessna 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="1409" end="1415" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="1692" end="1699" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351565" start="1701" end="1708" title="Octave Chanute" label="Chanute"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="1720" end="1733" title="Santos-Dumont" label="Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041271" start="1742" end="1757" title="Voisin brothers" label="Voisin brothers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1916" end="1923" title="Flight dynamics (aircraft)#Lateral modes" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q522744" start="1993" end="2015" title="Hargrave cellular wing" label="Hargrave cellular wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356218" start="2031" end="2039" title="box kite" label="box kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972636" start="2095" end="2103" title="Dihedral (aircraft)" label="dihedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="2422" end="2437" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="2453" end="2477" title="1903 Wright Flyer" label="1903 first powered Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2483" end="2491" title="Dihedral (aircraft)#Anhedral" label="anhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339425" start="2663" end="2667" title="banked turn" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="2954" end="2967" title="Wilbur Wright" label="Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684794" start="3024" end="3039" title="Coordinated flight" label="coordinated use"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348731" start="3349" end="3359" title="Cessna 152" label="Cessna 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650274" start="3464" end="3476" title="Piper PA-25 Pawnee" label="Piper Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q753283" start="3592" end="3599" title="stealth aircraft" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="3674" end="3682" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="3683" end="3688" title="F-117" label="F-117"/>
<link wikidata="Q560430" start="3794" end="3813" title="radar cross section" label="radar cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="3972" end="3983" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q62161" start="4083" end="4106" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-11" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="4233" end="4262" title="Stability Augmentation System" label="Stability Augmentation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962597" start="4630" end="4654" title="supermaneuverability" label="increase maneuverability"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="5248" end="5259" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786556" start="5294" end="5320" title="Index of aviation articles" label="Index of aviation articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q120912813" start="5323" end="5346" title="Dual control (aviation)" label="Dual control (aviation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050404" start="5349" end="5358" title="Trim drag" label="Trim drag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382805" wikidata="Q25303602" url="?curid=382805" title="Cantor–Bernstein theorem">
<text>In set theory and order theory, the Cantor–Bernstein theorem states that the cardinality of the second type class, the class of countable order types, equals the cardinality of the continuum. It was used by Felix Hausdorff and named by him after Georg Cantor and Felix Bernstein. Cantor constructed a family of countable order types with the cardinality of the continuum, and in his 1901 inaugural dissertation Bernstein proved that such a family can have no higher cardinality.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="3" end="13" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="18" end="30" title="order theory" label="order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303602" start="36" end="60" title="Cantor–Bernstein theorem" label="Cantor–Bernstein theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="77" end="88" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="128" end="137" title="Countable set" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q620006" start="138" end="148" title="order type" label="order type"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="162" end="190" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q75856" start="207" end="222" title="Felix Hausdorff" label="Felix Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="246" end="258" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q77523" start="263" end="278" title="Felix Bernstein (mathematician)" label="Felix Bernstein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382813" wikidata="Q447689" url="?curid=382813" title="IGS">
<text>IGS may stand for:

== Computers/Video Games ==
*Information Global Service, Japanese video game company
*Initial Graphics Exchange Specification, file extension .igs
*InteGraphics Systems a former chip manufacturer
*Interactive geometry software
*Internet Go server, for the game of Go
**IGS Go server, Japanese Go server

== Technology ==
*Image guided surgery
*Information Gathering Satellites, Japan
*Instrument guidance system

== Science ==
*Institute of General Semantics
*Intergenic spacer
*International Glaciological Society
*International Graphonomics Society
*International GNSS Service

== Schools ==
*Ilkley Grammar School
*International Grammar School, Sydney
*Ipswich Grammar School
*Islington Green School

== Other ==
*Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome
*International Graduates Scheme, a UK immigration scheme
*Irish Georgian Society
* Ingolstadt Manching Airport, is a military airbase with civil usage located in Manching near Ingolstadt, Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q447689" start="0" end="3" title="IGS" label="IGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030727" start="49" end="75" title="Information Global Service" label="Information Global Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q616714" start="106" end="145" title="Initial Graphics Exchange Specification" label="Initial Graphics Exchange Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632448" start="168" end="188" title="InteGraphics Systems" label="InteGraphics Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q21680473" start="217" end="246" title="Interactive geometry software" label="Interactive geometry software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055545" start="248" end="266" title="Internet Go server" label="Internet Go server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667968" start="289" end="302" title="IGS Go server" label="IGS Go server"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011334" start="342" end="362" title="Image guided surgery" label="Image guided surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038838" start="364" end="395" title="Information Gathering Satellite" label="Information Gathering Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="405" end="431" title="Instrument landing system#Variant" label="Instrument guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="448" end="478" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675666" start="480" end="497" title="Intergenic spacer" label="Intergenic spacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288272" start="499" end="534" title="International Glaciological Society" label="International Glaciological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597333" start="536" end="570" title="Graphonomics" label="International Graphonomics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639820" start="572" end="598" title="International GNSS Service" label="International GNSS Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228323" start="615" end="636" title="Ilkley Grammar School" label="Ilkley Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050770" start="638" end="666" title="International Grammar School" label="International Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065569" start="676" end="698" title="Ipswich Grammar School" label="Ipswich Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155401" start="700" end="722" title="Islington Green School" label="Islington Green School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625072" start="737" end="764" title="Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome" label="Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987055" start="766" end="796" title="International Graduates Scheme" label="International Graduates Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070784" start="823" end="845" title="Irish Georgian Society" label="Irish Georgian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q472400" start="848" end="875" title="Ingolstadt Manching Airport" label="Ingolstadt Manching Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382821" wikidata="Q5327645" url="?curid=382821" title="East African">
<text>East African may refer to:
*Any person or object of, or pertaining to, East Africa
*East African Safari Air, an airline based in Kenya, now trading as Fly-SAX
*&quot;The EastAfrican&quot;, a weekly newspaper in East Africa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="71" end="82" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652981" start="84" end="107" title="East African Safari Air" label="East African Safari Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636583" start="166" end="181" title="The EastAfrican" label="The EastAfrican"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382824" wikidata="Q11632" url="?curid=382824" title="The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan">
<text>The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan is the second studio album by the American singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, released on May 27, 1963, by Columbia Records. Whereas his self-titled debut album &quot;Bob Dylan&quot; had contained only two original songs, this album represented the beginning of Dylan&#x27;s writing contemporary lyrics to traditional melodies. Eleven of the thirteen songs on the album are Dylan&#x27;s original compositions. It opens with &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;, which became an anthem of the 1960s, and an international hit for folk trio Peter, Paul and Mary soon after the release of the album. The album featured several other songs which came to be regarded as among Dylan&#x27;s best compositions and classics of the 1960s folk scene: &quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;, &quot;Masters of War&quot;, &quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Think Twice, It&#x27;s All Right&quot;.

Dylan&#x27;s lyrics embraced news stories drawn from headlines about the ongoing civil rights movement and he articulated anxieties about the fear of nuclear warfare. Balancing this political material were love songs, sometimes bitter and accusatory, and material that features surreal humor. &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; showcased Dylan&#x27;s songwriting talent for the first time, propelling him to national and international fame. The success of the album and Dylan&#x27;s subsequent recognition led to his being named as &quot;Spokesman of a Generation&quot;, a label Dylan repudiated.

&quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; reached number 22 in the US (eventually going platinum), and became a number-one album in the UK in 1965. In 2003, the album was ranked number 97 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; list of the &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2002, &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; was one of the first 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry for being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.
==Recording sessions==
Neither critics nor the public took much notice of Dylan&#x27;s self-titled debut album, &quot;Bob Dylan&quot;, which sold only 5,000 copies in its first year, just enough to break even. In a pointed rebuke to John Hammond, who had signed Dylan to Columbia Records, some within the company referred to the singer as &quot;Hammond&#x27;s Folly&quot; and suggested dropping his contract. Hammond defended Dylan vigorously and was determined that Dylan&#x27;s second album should be a success. The recording of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; took place from April 1962 to April 1963, and the album was assembled from eight recording sessions at Columbia Records Studio A, located at 799 Seventh Avenue in New York City.

===Political and personal background===

Many critics have noted the extraordinary development of Dylan&#x27;s songwriting immediately after completing his first album. One of Dylan&#x27;s biographers, Clinton Heylin, connects the sudden increase in lyrics written along topical and political lines to the fact that Dylan had moved into an apartment on West 4th Street with his girlfriend Suze Rotolo (1943–2011) in January 1962. Rotolo&#x27;s family had strong left-wing political commitments; both of her parents were members of the American Communist Party. Dylan acknowledged her influence when he told an interviewer: &quot;Suze was into this equality-freedom thing long before I was. I checked out the songs with her&quot;.

Dylan&#x27;s relationship with Rotolo also provided an important emotional dynamic in the composition of the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album. After six months of living with Dylan, Rotolo agreed to her mother&#x27;s proposal that she travel to Italy to study art. Dylan missed her and wrote long letters to her conveying his hope that she would return soon to New York. She postponed her return several times, finally coming back in January 1963. Critics have connected the intense love songs expressing longing and loss on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; to Dylan&#x27;s fraught relationship with Rotolo. In her autobiography, Rotolo explains that musicians&#x27; girlfriends were routinely described as &quot;chicks&quot;, and she resented being regarded as &quot;a possession of Bob, who was the center of attention&quot;.

The speed and facility with which Dylan wrote topical songs attracted the attention of other musicians in the New York folk scene. In a radio interview on WBAI in June 1962, Pete Seeger described Dylan as &quot;the most prolific songwriter on the scene&quot; and then asked Dylan how many songs he had written recently. Dylan replied, &quot;I might go for two weeks without writing these songs. I write a lot of stuff. In fact, I wrote five songs last night but I gave all the papers away in some place called the Bitter End.&quot; Dylan also expressed the impersonal idea that the songs were not his own creation. In an interview with &quot;Sing Out!&quot; magazine, Dylan said, &quot;The songs are there. They exist all by themselves just waiting for someone to write them down. I just put them down on paper. If I didn&#x27;t do it, somebody else would&quot;.

===Recording in New York===
Dylan began work on his second album at Columbia&#x27;s Studio A in New York on April 24, 1962. The album was provisionally entitled &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Blues&quot;, and as late as July 1962, this would remain the working title. At this session, Dylan recorded four of his own compositions: &quot;Sally Gal&quot;, &quot;The Death of Emmett Till&quot;, &quot;Rambling, Gambling Willie&quot;, and &quot;Talkin&#x27; John Birch Paranoid Blues&quot;. He also recorded two traditional folk songs, &quot;Going To New Orleans&quot; and &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;, and Hank Williams&#x27; &quot;(I Heard That) Lonesome Whistle&quot;.

Returning to Studio A the following day, Dylan recorded his new song about fallout shelters, &quot;Let Me Die in My Footsteps&quot;. Other original compositions followed: &quot;Rocks and Gravel&quot;, &quot;Talking Hava Negiliah Blues&quot;, &quot;Talkin&#x27; Bear Mountain Picnic Massacre Blues&quot;, and two more takes of &quot;Sally Gal&quot;. Dylan recorded cover versions of &quot;Wichita&quot;, Big Joe Williams&#x27; &quot;Baby, Please Don&#x27;t Go&quot;, and Robert Johnson&#x27;s &quot;Milk Cow&#x27;s Calf&#x27;s Blues&quot;. Because Dylan&#x27;s songwriting talent was developing so rapidly, nothing from the April sessions appeared on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;.

The recording sessions at Studio A resumed on July 9, when Dylan recorded &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;, a song that he had first performed live at Gerde&#x27;s Folk City on April 16. Dylan also recorded &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Blues&quot;, &quot;Down the Highway&quot;, and &quot;Honey, Just Allow Me One More Chance&quot;, all of which ended up on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;, plus one other original composition, &quot;Baby, I&#x27;m in the Mood for You&quot;, which did not.

At this point, music manager Albert Grossman began to take an interest in Dylan&#x27;s business affairs. Grossman persuaded Dylan to transfer the publishing rights of his songs from Duchess Music, whom he had signed a contract with in January 1962, to Witmark Music, a division of Warner&#x27;s music publishing operation. Dylan signed a contract with Witmark on July 13, 1962. Unknown to Dylan, Grossman had also negotiated a deal with Witmark. This gave Grossman fifty percent of Witmark&#x27;s share of the publishing income generated by any songwriter Grossman had brought to the company. This &quot;secret deal&quot; resulted in a bitter legal battle between Dylan and Grossman in the 1980s.

Albert Grossman became Dylan&#x27;s manager on August 20, 1962. Since Dylan was under twenty-one when he had signed his contract with CBS, Grossman argued that the contract was invalid and had to be re-negotiated. Instead, Hammond responded by inviting Dylan to his office and persuading him to sign a &quot;reaffirment&quot;—agreeing to abide by the original contract. This effectively neutralized Grossman&#x27;s strategy, and led to some animosity between Grossman and Hammond. Grossman enjoyed a reputation in the folk scene of being commercially aggressive, generating more income and defending his clients&#x27; interests more fiercely than &quot;the nicer, more amateurish managers in the Village&quot;. Dylan critic Andy Gill has suggested that Grossman encouraged Dylan to become more reclusive and aloof, even paranoid.

On September 22, Dylan appeared for the first time at Carnegie Hall, part of an all-star hootenanny. On this occasion, he premiered his new composition &quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot;, a complex and powerful song built upon the question and answer refrain pattern of the traditional British ballad &quot;Lord Randall&quot;. &quot;Hard Rain&quot; would gain added resonance one month later, when President Kennedy appeared on national television on October 22, and announced the discovery of Soviet missiles on the island of Cuba, initiating the Cuban Missile Crisis. In the sleeve notes on the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album, Nat Hentoff quotes Dylan as saying that he wrote &quot;Hard Rain&quot; in response to the Cuban Missile Crisis: &quot;Every line in it is actually the start of a whole new song. But when I wrote it, I thought I wouldn&#x27;t have enough time alive to write all those songs so I put all I could into this one&quot;. In fact, Dylan had written the song more than a month before the crisis broke.

Dylan resumed work on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; at Columbia&#x27;s Studio A on October 26, when a major innovation took place—Dylan made his first studio recordings with a backing band. Accompanied by Dick Wellstood on piano, Howie Collins and Bruce Langhorne on guitar, Leonard Gaskin on bass, and Herb Lovelle on drums, Dylan recorded three songs. Several takes of Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Mixed-Up Confusion&quot; and Arthur Crudup&#x27;s &quot;That&#x27;s All Right Mama&quot; were deemed unusable, but a master take of &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot; was selected for the final album. An &#x27;alternate take&#x27; of &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot; from the same session would also be selected for the b-side of &quot;Mixed Up Confusion&quot;, Dylan&#x27;s first electric single issued later in the year. At the next recording session on November 1, the band included Art Davis on bass, while jazz guitarist George Barnes replaced Howie Collins. &quot;Mixed-Up Confusion&quot; and &quot;That&#x27;s All Right Mama&quot; were re-recorded, and again the results were deemed unsatisfactory. A take of the third song, &quot;Rocks and Gravel&quot;, was selected for the album, but the track was subsequently dropped.

On November 14, Dylan resumed work with his backup band, this time with Gene Ramey on bass, devoting most of the session to recording &quot;Mixed-Up Confusion&quot;. Although this track did not appear on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;, it was released as a single on December 14, 1962, and then swiftly withdrawn. Unlike the other material which Dylan recorded between 1961 and 1964, &quot;Mixed-Up Confusion&quot; attempted a rockabilly sound. Cameron Crowe described it as &quot;a fascinating look at a folk artist with his mind wandering towards Elvis Presley and Sun Records&quot;.

Also recorded on November 14 was the new composition &quot;Don&#x27;t Think Twice, It&#x27;s All Right&quot; (Clinton Heylin writes that, although the sleeve notes of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; describe this song as being accompanied by a backing band, no band is audible on the released version). Langhorne then accompanied Dylan on three more original compositions: &quot;Ballad of Hollis Brown&quot;, &quot;Kingsport Town&quot;, and &quot;Whatcha Gonna Do&quot;, but these performances were not included on &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;.

Dylan held another session at Studio A on December 6. Five songs, all original compositions, were recorded, three of which were eventually included on &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot;: &quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot;, &quot;Oxford Town&quot;, and &quot;I Shall Be Free&quot;. Dylan also made another attempt at &quot;Whatcha Gonna Do&quot; and recorded a new song, &quot;Hero Blues&quot;, but both songs were ultimately rejected and left unreleased.

===Traveling to England===
Twelve days later, Dylan made his first trip abroad. British TV director Philip Saville had heard Dylan perform in Greenwich Village, and invited him to take part in a BBC television drama: &quot;Madhouse on Castle Street&quot;. Dylan arrived in London on December 17. In the play, Dylan performed &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot; and two other songs. Dylan also immersed himself in the London folk scene, making contact with the Troubadour folk club organizer Anthea Joseph and folk singers Martin Carthy and Bob Davenport. &quot;I ran into some people in England who really knew those [traditional English] songs&quot;, Dylan recalled in 1984. &quot;Martin Carthy, another guy named [Bob] Davenport. Martin Carthy&#x27;s incredible. I learned a lot of stuff from Martin.&quot;

Carthy taught Dylan two English songs that would prove important for the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album. Carthy&#x27;s arrangement of &quot;Scarborough Fair&quot; would be used by Dylan as the basis of his own composition, &quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;. A 19th-century ballad commemorating the death of Sir John Franklin in 1847, &quot;Lady Franklin&#x27;s Lament&quot;, gave Dylan the melody for his composition &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Dream&quot;. Both songs displayed Dylan&#x27;s fast-growing ability to take traditional melodies and use them as a basis for highly personal songwriting.

From England, Dylan traveled to Italy, and joined Albert Grossman, who was touring with his client Odetta. Dylan was also hoping to make contact with his girlfriend, Suze Rotolo, unaware that she had already left Italy and was on her way back to New York. Dylan worked on his new material, and when he returned to London, Martin Carthy received a surprise: &quot;When he came back from Italy, he&#x27;d written &#x27;Girl From the North Country&#x27;; he came down to the Troubadour and said, &#x27;Hey, here&#x27;s &quot;Scarborough Fair&quot;&#x27; and he started playing this thing&quot;.

===Returning to New York===
Dylan flew back to New York on January 16, 1963. In January and February, he recorded some of his new compositions in sessions for the folk magazine &quot;Broadside&quot;, including a new anti-war song, &quot;Masters of War&quot;, which he had composed in London. Dylan was happy to be reunited with Suze Rotolo, and he persuaded her to move back into the apartment they had shared on West 4th Street.

Dylan&#x27;s keenness to record his new material for &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; paralleled a dramatic power struggle in the studio: Albert Grossman&#x27;s determination to have John Hammond replaced as Dylan&#x27;s producer at CBS. According to Dylan biographer Howard Sounes, &quot;The two men could not have been more different. Hammond was a WASP, so relaxed during recording sessions that he sat with feet up, reading &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. Grossman was a Jewish businessman with a shady past, hustling to become a millionaire&quot;.

Because of Grossman&#x27;s hostility to Hammond, Columbia paired Dylan with a young, African-American jazz producer, Tom Wilson. Wilson recalled: &quot;I didn&#x27;t even particularly like folk music. I&#x27;d been recording Sun Ra and Coltrane ... I thought folk music was for the dumb guys. [Dylan] played like the dumb guys, but then these words came out. I was flabbergasted.&quot; At a recording session on April 24, produced by Wilson, Dylan recorded five new compositions: &quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;, &quot;Masters of War&quot;, &quot;Talkin&#x27; World War III Blues&quot;, &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Dream&quot;, and &quot;Walls of Red Wing&quot;. &quot;Walls of Red Wing&quot; was ultimately rejected, but the other four were included in a revised album sequence.

The final drama of recording &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; occurred when Dylan was scheduled to appear on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; on May 12, 1963. Dylan had told Sullivan he would perform &quot;Talkin&#x27; John Birch Paranoid Blues&quot;, but the &quot;head of program practices&quot; at CBS Television informed Dylan that this song was potentially libelous to the John Birch Society, and asked him to perform another number. Rather than comply with TV censorship, Dylan refused to appear on the show. There is disagreement between Dylan&#x27;s biographers about the consequences of this censorship row. Anthony Scaduto writes that after &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; debacle, CBS lawyers were alarmed to discover that the controversial song was to be included on Dylan&#x27;s new album, only a few weeks from its release date. They insisted that the song be dropped, and four songs (&quot;John Birch&quot;, &quot;Let Me Die in My Footsteps&quot;, &quot;Rambling Gambling Willie&quot;, &quot;Rocks and Gravel&quot;) on the album were replaced with Dylan&#x27;s newer compositions recorded in April (&quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;, &quot;Masters of War&quot;, &quot;Talkin&#x27; World War III Blues&quot;, &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Dream&quot;). Scaduto writes that Dylan felt &quot;crushed&quot; by being compelled to submit to censorship, but he was in no position to argue.

According to Heylin, &quot;There remains a common belief that [Dylan] was forced by Columbia to pull &#x27;Talkin&#x27; John Birch Paranoid Blues&#x27; from the album &quot;after&quot; he walked out on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;.&quot; However, the &quot;revised&quot; version of &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; was released on May 27, 1963; this would have given Columbia Records only two weeks to recut the album, reprint the record sleeves, and press and package enough copies of the new version to fill orders. Heylin suggests that CBS had probably forced Dylan to withdraw &quot;John Birch&quot; from the album some weeks earlier and that Dylan had responded by recording his new material on April 24. Whether the songs were substituted before or after &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, critics agree that the new material gave the album a more personal feel, distanced from the traditional folk-blues material which had dominated his first album, &quot;Bob Dylan&quot;.

A few copies of the original pressing of the LP with the four deleted tracks have turned up over the years, despite Columbia&#x27;s supposed destruction of all copies during the pre-release phase (all copies found were in the standard album sleeve with the revised track selection). Other permutations of the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album include versions with a different running order of the tracks on the album, and a Canadian version of the album that listed the tracks in the wrong order. The original pressing of &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; is considered the most valuable and rarest record in America, with one copy having sold for $35,000.

==Songs and themes==
===Side one===
====&quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;====
&quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot; is among Dylan&#x27;s most celebrated compositions. In his sleeve notes for &quot;The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991&quot;, John Bauldie writes that it was Pete Seeger who first identified the melody of &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot; as Dylan&#x27;s adaptation of the old Negro spiritual &quot;No More Auction Block&quot;. According to Alan Lomax&#x27;s &quot;The Folk Songs of North America&quot;, the song originated in Canada and was sung by former slaves who fled there after Britain abolished slavery in 1833. In 1978, Dylan acknowledged the source when he told journalist Marc Rowland: &quot;&#x27;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&#x27; has always been a spiritual. I took it off a song called &#x27;No More Auction Block&#x27;—that&#x27;s a spiritual and &#x27;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&#x27; follows the same feeling.&quot; Dylan&#x27;s performance of &quot;No More Auction Block&quot; was recorded at the Gaslight Cafe in October 1962, and appeared on &quot;The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991&quot;.

Critic Andy Gill wrote: Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&#x27; marked a huge jump in Dylan&#x27;s songwriting: for the first time, Dylan discovered the effectiveness of moving from the particular to the general. Whereas &#x27;The Ballad of Donald White&#x27; would become completely redundant as soon as the eponymous criminal was executed, a song as vague as &#x27;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&#x27; could be applied to just about any freedom issue. It remains the song with which Dylan&#x27;s name is most inextricably linked, and safeguarded his reputation as a civil libertarian through any number of changes in style and attitude.&quot;

&quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot; became world-famous when Peter, Paul and Mary issued the song as a single three weeks after the release of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;. They and Dylan both shared the same manager: Albert Grossman. The single sold a phenomenal three hundred thousand copies in the first week of release. On July 13, 1963, it reached number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; chart with sales exceeding one million copies. Dylan later recalled that he was astonished when Peter Yarrow told him he was going to make $5,000 from the publishing rights.

====&quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;====
There has been much speculation in print about the identity of the girl in &quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;. Clinton Heylin states that the most frequently mooted candidates are Echo Helstrom, an early girlfriend of Dylan from his hometown of Hibbing, and Suze Rotolo, for whom Dylan was pining as he finished the song in Italy. Howard Sounes suggests the girl Dylan probably had in mind was Bonnie Beecher, a girlfriend of Dylan&#x27;s when he was at the University of Minnesota. There&#x27;s no proof of any of this, and musicologist Todd Harvey notes that &quot;the lyrics do not, however, contain enough specific information to suggest that Dylan was leaving clues about his personal life&quot;.

Harvey notes that Dylan not only took the tune of &quot;Scarborough Fair&quot;, which he learned from Martin Carthy in London but also adapted the theme of that song. &quot;Scarborough Fair&quot; derives from &quot;The Elfin Knight&quot; (Child Ballad Number 2), which was first transcribed in 1670. In the song, a supernatural character poses a series of questions to an innocent, requesting her to perform impossible tasks. Harvey points out that Dylan &quot;retains the idea of the listener being sent upon a task, a northern place setting, and an antique lyric quality&quot;. Dylan returned to this song on &quot;Nashville Skyline&quot; (1969), recording it as a duet with Johnny Cash, and he returned to it again in the studio with an unreleased organ and sax version in 1978.

Later in his book about Dylan, Howard Sounes offers the opinion that Dylan may have been utilizing the largely autobiographical song as a way to gain favor with different girlfriends whom he dated over the years. Sounes states: &quot;... one wondered which girlfriend Bob was singing about... Bob later gave Echo (Helstrom) the impression (that it) was her song. But, no doubt thinking that women were flattered by having songs written about them, Bob led another north country girlfriend, Bonnie Beecher, to think the same... Later in 1963, when he performed the song on a radio show... Bob indicated that the song was about an idealized woman, saying, &#x27;This is dedicated to &quot;all&quot; the north country girls.&#x27;&quot;

====&quot;Masters of War&quot;====
A scathing song directed against the war industry, &quot;Masters of War&quot; is based on Jean Ritchie&#x27;s arrangement of &quot;Nottamun Town&quot;, an English riddle song. It was written in late 1962 while Dylan was in London; eyewitnesses (including Martin Carthy and Anthea Joseph) recall Dylan performing the song in folk clubs at the time. Ritchie would later assert her claim on the song&#x27;s arrangement; according to one Dylan biography, the suit was settled when Ritchie received $5,000 from Dylan&#x27;s lawyers.

====&quot;Down the Highway&quot;====
Dylan composed &quot;Down the Highway&quot; in the form of a 12-bar blues. In the sleeve notes of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot;, Dylan explained to Nat Hentoff: &quot;What made the real blues singers so great is that they were able to state all the problems they had; but at the same time, they were standing outside of them and could look at them. And in that way, they had them beat.&quot; Into this song, Dylan injected one explicit mention of an absence that was troubling him: the sojourn of Suze Rotolo in Perugia: &quot;My baby took my heart from me/ She packed it all up in a suitcase/ Lord, she took it away to Italy, Italy.&quot;

====&quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Blues&quot;====
&quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Blues&quot; begins with a spoken intro where Dylan describes the origins of folk songs in a satirical vein: &quot;most of the songs that are written uptown in Tin Pan Alley, that&#x27;s where most of the folk songs come from nowadays&quot;. What follows has been characterized as an absurd, improvised blues which Dylan, in the sleeve notes, describes as &quot;a really off-the-cuff-song. I start with an idea and then I feel what follows. Best way I can describe this one is that it&#x27;s sort of like walking by a side street. You gaze in and walk on.&quot; Harvey points out that Dylan subsequently elaborated this style of self-deprecatory, absurdist humor into more complex songs, such as &quot;I Shall Be Free No.10&quot; (1964).

====&quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot;====
Dylan was only 21 years old when he wrote one of his most complex songs, &quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot;, often referred to as &quot;Hard Rain&quot;. Dylan is said to have premiered &quot;Hard Rain&quot; at the Gaslight Cafe, where Village performer Peter Blankfield recalled: &quot;He put out these pieces of loose-leaf paper ripped out of a spiral notebook. And he starts singing [&#x27;Hard Rain&#x27;] ... He finished singing it, and no one could say anything. The length of it, the episodic sense of it. Every line kept building and bursting&quot;. Dylan performed &quot;Hard Rain&quot; days later at Carnegie Hall on September 22, 1962, as part of a concert organized by Pete Seeger. The song gained added resonance during the Cuban Missile Crisis, just one month after Dylan&#x27;s first performance of &quot;Hard Rain&quot;, when U.S. President John F. Kennedy gave his warning to the Soviet Union over their deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba. Critics have interpreted the lyric &#x27;hard rain&#x27; as a reference to nuclear fallout, but Dylan resisted the specificity of this interpretation. In a radio interview with Studs Terkel in 1963, Dylan said,

No, it&#x27;s not atomic rain, it&#x27;s just a hard rain. It isn&#x27;t the fallout rain. I mean some sort of end that&#x27;s just gotta happen ... In the last verse, when I say, &quot;the pellets of poison are flooding the waters&quot;, that means all the lies that people get told on their radios and in their newspapers.

Many people were astonished by the power and complexity of this work. For Robert Shelton, who had given Dylan an important boost in his 1961 review in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, this song was &quot;a landmark in topical, folk-based songwriting. Here blooms the promised fruit of the 1950s poetry-jazz fusion of Ginsberg, Ferlinghetti, and Rexroth.&quot; Folk singer Dave Van Ronk later commented: &quot;I was acutely aware that it represented the beginning of an artistic revolution.&quot; Seeger expressed the opinion that this song would last longer than any other written by Dylan.

===Side two===
====&quot;Don&#x27;t Think Twice, It&#x27;s All Right&quot;====
Dylan wrote &quot;Don&#x27;t Think Twice, It&#x27;s All Right&quot; on hearing from Suze Rotolo that she was considering staying in Italy indefinitely, and he used a melody he adapted from Paul Clayton&#x27;s song &quot;Who&#x27;s Gonna Buy You Ribbons (When I&#x27;m Gone)&quot;. In the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; sleeve notes, Dylan comments: &quot;It isn&#x27;t a love song. It&#x27;s a statement that maybe you can say to make yourself feel better. It&#x27;s as if you were talking to yourself&quot;.

Dylan&#x27;s contemporaries hailed the song as a masterpiece: Bob Spitz quotes Paul Stookey saying &quot;I thought it was a masterful statement&quot;, while Dave Van Ronk called it &quot;self-pitying but brilliant&quot;. Dylan biographer Howard Sounes commented: &quot;The greatness of the song was in the cleverness of the language. The phrase &quot;don&#x27;t think twice, it&#x27;s all right&quot; could be snarled, sung with resignation, or delivered with an ambiguous mixture of bitterness and regret. Seldom have the contradictory emotions of a thwarted lover been so well expressed, and the song transcended the autobiographical origins of Dylan&#x27;s pain&quot;.

====&quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Dream&quot;====
&quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s Dream&quot; was based on the melody of the traditional &quot;Lady Franklin&#x27;s Lament&quot;, in which the title character dreams of finding her husband, Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin, alive and well. (Sir John Franklin had vanished on an expedition searching for the North West Passage in 1845; a stone cairn on King William Island detailing his demise was found by a later expedition in 1859.) Todd Harvey points out that Dylan transforms the song into a personal journey, yet he retains both the theme and the mood of the original ballad. The world outside is depicted as stormy and harsh, and Dylan&#x27;s most fervent wish, like Lady Franklin&#x27;s, is to be reunited with departed companions and to relive the fond memories they represent.

====&quot;Oxford Town&quot;====
&quot;Oxford Town&quot; is Dylan&#x27;s sardonic account of events at the University of Mississippi in September 1962. U.S. Air Force veteran James Meredith was the first black student to enroll at the University of Mississippi, in Oxford, Mississippi. When Meredith first tried to attend classes at the school, some Mississippians pledged to keep the university segregated, including the state governor Ross Barnett. Ultimately, the University of Mississippi had to be integrated with the help of U.S. federal troops. Dylan responded rapidly: his song was published in the November 1962 issue of &quot;Broadside&quot;.

====&quot;Talkin&#x27; World War III Blues&quot;====
The &quot;talkin&#x27; blues&quot; was a style of improvised songwriting that Woody Guthrie had developed to a high plane. (A Minneapolis domestic recording that Dylan made in September 1960 includes his performances of Guthrie&#x27;s &quot;Talking Columbia&quot; and &quot;Talking Merchant Marine&quot;.) &quot;Talkin&#x27; World War III Blues&quot; was a spontaneous composition Dylan created in the studio during the final session for &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot;. He recorded five takes of the song and the fifth was selected for the album. The format of the &quot;talkin&#x27; blues&quot; permitted Dylan to address the serious subject of nuclear annihilation with humor, and &quot;without resorting to his finger-pointing or apocalyptical-prophetic persona&quot;.

====&quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;====
&quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot; was recorded by the Mississippi Sheiks, and by their leader Bo Carter in 1928. The song was covered by artists as diverse as Bob Wills, Big Joe Turner, and Doc Watson. Dylan&#x27;s version borrows phrases from a few Robert Johnson songs: &quot;Stones In My Passway&quot;, &quot;32-20 Blues&quot;, and &quot;Hellhound On My Trail&quot;. An alternate take of the song was used as a B-side for his &quot;Mixed-Up Confusion&quot; single.

====&quot;Honey, Just Allow Me One More Chance&quot;====
&quot;Honey, Just Allow Me One More Chance&quot; is based on &quot;Honey, Won&#x27;t You Allow Me One More Chance?&quot;, a song dating back to the 1890s that was popularized by Henry Thomas in his 1928 recording. &quot;However, Thomas&#x27;s original provided no more than a song title and a notion&quot;, writes Heylin, &quot;which Dylan turned into a personal plea to an absent lover to allow him &#x27;one more chance to get along with you.&#x27; It is a vocal tour de force and ... showed a Dylan prepared to make light of his own blues by using the form itself.&quot;

====&quot;I Shall Be Free&quot;====
&quot;I Shall Be Free&quot; is a rewrite of Lead Belly&#x27;s &quot;We Shall Be Free&quot;, which was performed by Lead Belly, Sonny Terry, Cisco Houston, and Woody Guthrie. According to Todd Harvey, Dylan&#x27;s version draws its melody from the Guthrie recording but omits its signature chorus (&quot;We&#x27;ll soon be free/When the Lord will call us home&quot;). Critics have been divided about the worth of this final song. Robert Shelton dismissed the song as &quot;a decided anticlimax. Although the album has at least a half dozen blockbusters, two of the weakest songs are tucked in at the end, like shirttails.&quot; Todd Harvey has argued that by placing the song at the close of the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; LP, Dylan ends on a note of levity which is a relief after the weighty sentiments expressed in several songs on the album.

==Outtakes==
The known outtakes from the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album are as follows. All songs released in 1991 on &quot;The Bootleg Series 1–3&quot; are discussed in that album&#x27;s liner notes, while songs that have never been released have been documented by biographer Clinton Heylin, except where noted. All songs written by Bob Dylan, except where noted.
==Release==

Dylan promoted his upcoming album with radio appearances and concert performances. In May 1963, Dylan performed with Joan Baez at the Monterey Folk Festival, where she joined him on stage for a duet of a new Dylan song, &quot;With God on Our Side&quot;. Baez was at the pinnacle of her fame, having appeared on the cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine the previous November. The performance not only gave Dylan and his songs a new prominence, it also marked the beginning of a romantic relationship between Baez and Dylan, the start of what Dylan biographer Sounes termed &quot;one of the most celebrated love affairs of the decade&quot;.

&quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; was released at the end of May. According to Scaduto, it was an immediate success, selling 10,000 copies a month and bringing Dylan an income of about $2,500 a month (). An article by Nat Hentoff on folk music appeared in the June issue of &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine and devoted considerable space to Dylan&#x27;s achievements, calling him &quot;the most vital of the younger citybillies&quot;.

In July, Dylan appeared at the second Newport Folk Festival. That weekend, Peter, Paul and Mary&#x27;s rendition of &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot; reached number two on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s pop chart. Baez was also at Newport, appearing twice on stage with Dylan. The combination of the chart success of &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;, and the glamor of Baez and Dylan singing together generated excitement about Dylan and his new album. Tom Paxton recalled: &quot;That was a big breakout festival for Bob. The buzz kept growing exponentially and it was like a coronation of Bob and Joan. They were King and Queen of the festival&quot;. His friend Bob Fass recalled that after Newport, Dylan told him that &quot;suddenly I just can&#x27;t walk around without a disguise. I used to walk around and go wherever I wanted. But now it&#x27;s gotten very weird. People follow me into the men&#x27;s room just so they can say that they saw me pee&quot;.

In September, the album entered &quot;Billboard&quot;″s album charts; the highest position &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; reached was number 22, but it eventually came to sell one million copies in the U.S. Dylan himself came to acknowledge &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; as the album that marked the start of his success. During his dispute with Albert Grossman, Dylan stated in a deposition: &quot;Although I didn&#x27;t know it at the time, the second album was destined to become a great success because it was to include &#x27;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&#x27;.&quot; Besides &quot;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;, &quot;Masters of War&quot;, &quot;Girl from the North Country&quot;, &quot;A Hard Rain&#x27;s a-Gonna Fall&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Think Twice, It&#x27;s All Right&quot; have all been acclaimed as masterpieces, and they have been mainstays of Dylan&#x27;s performing repertory to the present day. The album&#x27;s balance between serious subject matter and levity, earnest finger-pointing songs and surreal jokes captured a wide audience, including The Beatles, who were on the cusp of global success. John Lennon recalled: &quot;In Paris in 1964 was the first time I ever heard Dylan at all. Paul got the record (&quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot;) from a French DJ. For three weeks in Paris we didn&#x27;t stop playing it. We all went potty about Dylan&quot;.

The album was re-issued in 2010 as part of &quot;The Original Mono Recordings&quot;, a Columbia Legacy box set that included the monaural versions of Dylan&#x27;s first eight albums.

==Artwork==
The album cover features a photograph of Dylan with Suze Rotolo. It was taken in February 1963—a few weeks after Rotolo had returned from Italy—by CBS staff photographer Don Hunstein as Dylan and Rotolo walked in the middle of Jones Street, approximately 50 feet from West 4th Street in the West Village, New York City, close to the apartment where the couple lived at the time. In 2008, Rotolo described the circumstances surrounding the famous photo to &quot;The New York Times&quot;: &quot;He wore a very thin jacket, because image was all. Our apartment was always cold, so I had a sweater on, plus I borrowed one of his big, bulky sweaters. On top of that I put on a coat. So I felt like an Italian sausage. Every time I look at that picture, I think I look fat.&quot; In her memoir, &quot;A Freewheelin&#x27; Time&quot;, Rotolo analyzed the significance of the cover art:
Critic Janet Maslin summed up the iconic impact of the cover as &quot;a photograph that inspired countless young men to hunch their shoulders, look distant, and let the girl do the clinging&quot;.

==In popular culture==
The album&#x27;s cover photo was carefully recreated by Cameron Crowe for his 2001 Tom Cruise–starring film &quot;Vanilla Sky&quot; and by Todd Haynes for his 2007 Dylan biopic &quot;I&#x27;m Not There.&quot; It also served as a visual reference for the Coen brothers&#x27; 2013 film &quot;Inside Llewyn Davis&quot; and James Mangold&#x27;s 2024 film &quot;A Complete Unknown&quot;.

A copy of the vinyl album itself is an important prop in Jacques Rivette&#x27;s 1969 film &quot;L&#x27;Amour fou&quot;. In one key scene, the male lead, Sebastien (Jean-Pierre Kalfon), is in the apartment of his girlfriend, Marta (Josée Destoop), helping her sort through LPs she could potentially re-sell in order to raise some quick cash. He holds up her copy of &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot;, which she declines to sell on the grounds that she still listens to it.

In November 2023, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; cited &quot;Bob Dylan Core&quot;, a TikTok trend inspired by the album cover, as turning Generation Z on to Dylan. According to the article, videos tagged with the #BobDylanCore hashtag had been viewed 11.5 million times.

==Legacy==
The success of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; transformed the public perception of Dylan. Before the album&#x27;s release, he was one among many folk-singers. Afterwards, at the age of 22, Dylan was regarded as a major artist, perhaps even a spokesman for disaffected youth. As one critic described the transformation, &quot;In barely over a year, a young plagiarist had been reborn as a songwriter of substance, and his first album of fully realized original material got the 1960s off their musical starting block.&quot; Janet Maslin wrote of the album: &quot;These were the songs that established him as the voice of his generation—someone who implicitly understood how concerned young Americans felt about nuclear disarmament and the growing Civil Rights Movement: his mixture of moral authority and nonconformity was perhaps the most timely of his attributes&quot;.

This title of &quot;Spokesman of a Generation&quot; was viewed by Dylan with disgust in later years. He came to feel it was a label that the media had pinned on him, and in his autobiography, &quot;Chronicles&quot;, Dylan wrote: &quot;The press never let up. Once in a while I would have to rise up and offer myself for an interview so they wouldn&#x27;t beat the door down. Later an article would hit the streets with the headline &#x27;Spokesman Denies That He&#x27;s A Spokesman&#x27;. I felt like a piece of meat that someone had thrown to the dogs&quot;.

The album secured for Dylan an &quot;unstoppable cult following&quot; of fans who preferred the harshness of his performances to the softer cover versions released by other singers. Richard Williams has suggested that the richness of the imagery in &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; transformed Dylan into a key performer for a burgeoning college audience hungry for a new cultural complexity: &quot;For students whose exam courses included Eliot and Yeats, here was something that flattered their expanding intellect while appealing to the teenage rebel in their early-sixties souls. James Dean had walked around reading James Joyce; here were both in a single package, the words and the attitude set to music.&quot; Andy Gill adds that in the few months between the release of &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; in May 1963, and Dylan&#x27;s next album &quot;The Times They Are A-Changin&#x27;&quot; in January 1964, Dylan became the hottest property in American music, stretching the boundaries of what had been previously viewed as a collegiate folk music audience.

Critical opinion about &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; has been consistently favorable in the years since its release. Dylan biographer Howard Sounes called it &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s first great album&quot;. In a survey of Dylan&#x27;s work published by &quot;Q&quot; magazine in 2000, the &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; album was described as &quot;easily the best of [Dylan&#x27;s] acoustic albums and a quantum leap from his debut—which shows the frantic pace at which Dylan&#x27;s mind was moving.&quot; The magazine went on to comment, &quot;You can see why this album got The Beatles listening. The songs at its core must have sounded like communiques from another plane&quot;.

For Patrick Humphries, &quot;rarely has one album so effectively reflected the times which produced it. &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; spoke directly to the concerns of its audience and addressed them in a mature and reflective manner: it mirrored the state of the nation.&quot; Stephen Thomas Erlewine&#x27;s verdict on the album in the AllMusic guide was: &quot;It&#x27;s hard to overestimate the importance of &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot;, the record that firmly established Dylan as an unparalleled songwriter ... This is rich, imaginative music, capturing the sound and spirit of America as much as that of Louis Armstrong, Hank Williams, or Elvis Presley. Dylan, in many ways, recorded music that equaled this, but he never topped it&quot;.

In March 2000, Van Morrison told the Irish rock magazine &quot;Hot Press&quot; about the impact that &quot;Freewheelin″&quot; made on him: &quot;I think I heard it in a record shop in Smith Street. And I just thought it was incredible that this guy&#x27;s not singing about &#x27;moon in June&#x27; and he&#x27;s getting away with it. That&#x27;s what I thought at the time. The subject matter wasn&#x27;t pop songs, ya know, and I thought this kind of opens the whole thing up ... Dylan put it into the mainstream that this could be done&quot;.

&quot;Freewheelin″&quot; was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry in 2002. The citation read: &quot;This album is considered by some to be the most important collection of original songs issued in the 1960s. It includes &#x27;Blowin&#x27; in the Wind,&#x27; the era&#x27;s popular and powerful protest anthem.&quot; The following year (2003), &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; &quot;Magazine&quot; ranked it number 97 on their list of the 500 greatest albums of all time, maintaining the rating in a 2012 revised list, before dropping to number 255 in a 2020 revised list.

The album was included in Robert Christgau&#x27;s &quot;Basic Record Library&quot; of 1950s and 1960s recordings, published in &quot;Christgau&#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies&quot; (1981). It was also included in Robert Dimery&#x27;s &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;. It was voted number 127 in the third edition of Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot; (2000).

Taylor Swift cited the album as the inspiration for her song &quot;Betty&quot; on &quot;Folklore&quot;. As &quot;Betty&quot;&#x27;s co-writer, The National&#x27;s Aaron Dessner explained to &quot;Vulture&quot;, &quot;She wanted it to have an early Bob Dylan, sort of a &quot;Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; feel&quot;.

==Track listing==

Note:
Some very early first pressing copies contained four songs that were ultimately replaced by Columbia on all subsequent pressings. These songs were &quot;Rocks and Gravel&quot;, &quot;Let Me Die in My Footsteps&quot;, &quot;Rambling Gambling Willie&quot; and &quot;Talkin&#x27; John Birch Blues&quot;. Copies of the &quot;original&quot; version of &quot;The Freewheelin&#x27; Bob Dylan&quot; (in either mono or stereo) are extremely rare.

The original track listing was as follows:

==Personnel==
*Bob Dylan – acoustic guitar, harmonica, vocals

Additional musicians
*Howie Collins – guitar on &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;
*Leonard Gaskin – double bass on &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;
*Bruce Langhorne – guitar on &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;
*Herbie Lovelle – drums on &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;
*Dick Wellstood – piano on &quot;Corrina, Corrina&quot;

Technical
*John H. Hammond – production
*Nat Hentoff  – liner notes
*Don Hunstein – album cover photographer
*Tom Wilson – production

==Charts==
==Certifications==

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="93" end="102" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="133" end="149" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q251309" start="193" end="202" title="Bob Dylan (album)" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q640529" start="456" end="480" title="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind" label="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q654716" start="564" end="584" title="Peter, Paul and Mary" label="Peter, Paul and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526765" start="771" end="798" title="Girl from the North Country" label="Girl from the North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q659944" start="812" end="826" title="Masters of War" label="Masters of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292385" start="840" end="871" title="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall" label="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705721" start="888" end="931" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="1021" end="1042" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="1090" end="1105" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="1218" end="1231" title="surreal humor" label="surreal humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1727" end="1740" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1765" end="1796" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1887" end="1906" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="1926" end="1953" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q251309" start="2150" end="2159" title="Bob Dylan (album)" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="2265" end="2277" title="John H. Hammond" label="John Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="2303" end="2319" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2691" end="2716" title="Columbia Records#Studio A" label="Columbia Records Studio A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134135" start="2969" end="2983" title="Clinton Heylin" label="Clinton Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q439920" start="3156" end="3167" title="Suze Rotolo" label="Suze Rotolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="3302" end="3326" title="Communist Party USA" label="American Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651267" start="4472" end="4476" title="WBAI" label="WBAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="4491" end="4502" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q919751" start="4827" end="4841" title="the Bitter End" label="the Bitter End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289006" start="4959" end="4968" title="Sing Out!" label="Sing Out!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664705" start="5532" end="5556" title="The Death of Emmett Till" label="The Death of Emmett Till"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980445" start="5613" end="5651" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; John Birch Paranoid Blues" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; John Birch Paranoid Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="5775" end="5788" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571844" start="5916" end="5931" title="fallout shelter" label="fallout shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532862" start="5940" end="5966" title="Let Me Die in My Footsteps" label="Let Me Die in My Footsteps"/>
<link wikidata="Q106942616" start="6089" end="6137" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; Bear Mountain Picnic Massacre Blues" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; Bear Mountain Picnic Massacre Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q519289" start="6244" end="6260" title="Big Joe Williams" label="Big Joe Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q797806" start="6273" end="6299" title="Baby, Please Don&amp;#x27;t Go" label="Baby, Please Don&amp;#x27;t Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="6311" end="6325" title="Robert Johnson (musician)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q640529" start="6598" end="6622" title="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind" label="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550513" start="6673" end="6695" title="Gerde&amp;#x27;s Folk City" label="Gerde&amp;#x27;s Folk City"/>
<link wikidata="Q708584" start="7030" end="7045" title="Albert Grossman" label="Albert Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="8584" end="8597" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140338" start="8619" end="8629" title="hootenanny" label="hootenanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292385" start="8688" end="8719" title="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall" label="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836782" start="8846" end="8858" title="Lord Randall" label="Lord Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="8937" end="8954" title="John F. Kennedy" label="President Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="9087" end="9107" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371409" start="9168" end="9179" title="Nat Hentoff" label="Nat Hentoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209838" start="9763" end="9777" title="Dick Wellstood" label="Dick Wellstood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977835" start="9806" end="9821" title="Bruce Langhorne" label="Bruce Langhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818977" start="9833" end="9847" title="Leonard Gaskin" label="Leonard Gaskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736124" start="9861" end="9873" title="Herb Lovelle" label="Herb Lovelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439944" start="9948" end="9966" title="Mixed-Up Confusion" label="Mixed-Up Confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q709044" start="9977" end="9990" title="Arthur Crudup" label="Arthur Crudup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016244" start="10004" end="10030" title="That&amp;#x27;s All Right" label="That&amp;#x27;s All Right Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q705506" start="10424" end="10433" title="Art Davis (bassist)" label="Art Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q939527" start="10464" end="10477" title="George Barnes (musician)" label="George Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="11190" end="11200" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="11208" end="11221" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="11312" end="11325" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q898618" start="11330" end="11341" title="Sun Records" label="Sun Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705721" start="11409" end="11452" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881101" start="11722" end="11744" title="Ballad of Hollis Brown" label="Ballad of Hollis Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559154" start="12161" end="12176" title="I Shall Be Free" label="I Shall Be Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086433" start="12459" end="12473" title="Philip Saville" label="Philip Saville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12554" end="12557" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727392" start="12582" end="12607" title="Madhouse on Castle Street" label="Madhouse on Castle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770338" start="12816" end="12830" title="The Troubadour (London)" label="the Troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="12882" end="12895" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66918484" start="12900" end="12913" title="Bob Davenport (singer)" label="Bob Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053575" start="13310" end="13326" title="Scarborough Fair (ballad)" label="Scarborough Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526765" start="13399" end="13426" title="Girl from the North Country" label="Girl from the North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="13483" end="13500" title="Sir John Franklin" label="Sir John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216001" start="13516" end="13543" title="Lady Franklin&amp;#x27;s Lament" label="Lady Franklin&amp;#x27;s Lament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605213" start="13599" end="13621" title="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q237633" start="13870" end="13876" title="Odetta" label="Odetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972295" start="14547" end="14556" title="Broadside (magazine)" label="Broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="14970" end="14982" title="John H. Hammond" label="John Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787242" start="15055" end="15068" title="Howard Sounes" label="Howard Sounes"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="15138" end="15142" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" label="WASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="15221" end="15235" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007168" start="15454" end="15464" title="Tom Wilson (producer)" label="Tom Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q354508" start="15562" end="15568" title="Sun Ra" label="Sun Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="15573" end="15581" title="John Coltrane" label="Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="16228" end="16248" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="16414" end="16428" title="CBS Television" label="CBS Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="16491" end="16509" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773426" start="16730" end="16745" title="Anthony Scaduto" label="Anthony Scaduto"/>
<link wikidata="Q640529" start="19260" end="19284" title="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind" label="Blowin&amp;#x27; in the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574733" start="19373" end="19437" title="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991" label="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="19477" end="19488" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="19807" end="19840" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="Britain abolished slavery in 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574733" start="20285" end="20349" title="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991" label="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q654716" start="21051" end="21071" title="Peter, Paul and Mary" label="Peter, Paul and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="21363" end="21372" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033344" start="21475" end="21487" title="Peter Yarrow" label="Peter Yarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526765" start="21683" end="21710" title="Girl from the North Country" label="Girl from the North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q109180618" start="21787" end="21800" title="Echo Helstrom" label="Echo Helstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q828736" start="21852" end="21859" title="Hibbing, Minnesota" label="Hibbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q439920" start="21865" end="21876" title="Suze Rotolo" label="Suze Rotolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11898550" start="22001" end="22015" title="Bonnie Beecher" label="Bonnie Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="22065" end="22088" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22145" end="22156" title="Todd Harvey (musicologist)" label="Todd Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053575" start="22366" end="22382" title="Scarborough Fair (ballad)" label="Scarborough Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963020" start="22525" end="22541" title="The Elfin Knight" label="The Elfin Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568351" start="22549" end="22570" title="List of the Child Ballads" label="Child Ballad Number 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q120631" start="22927" end="22944" title="Nashville Skyline" label="Nashville Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="22987" end="22998" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q659944" start="23920" end="23934" title="Masters of War" label="Masters of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661396" start="23953" end="23965" title="Jean Ritchie" label="Jean Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063542" start="23994" end="24007" title="Nottamun Town" label="Nottamun Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694920" start="24450" end="24466" title="Down the Highway (song)" label="Down the Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="24490" end="24502" title="Twelve-bar blues" label="12-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371409" start="24572" end="24583" title="Nat Hentoff" label="Nat Hentoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="24936" end="24943" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932338" start="25114" end="25136" title="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Blues" label="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="25290" end="25303" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="25777" end="25792" title="absurdist humor" label="absurdist humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292385" start="26000" end="26031" title="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall" label="A Hard Rain&amp;#x27;s a-Gonna Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511772" start="26140" end="26157" title="the Gaslight Cafe" label="the Gaslight Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="26539" end="26552" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="26666" end="26686" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="26786" end="26801" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555170" start="26864" end="26880" title="nuclear missiles" label="nuclear missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="26965" end="26980" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q529276" start="27067" end="27079" title="Studs Terkel" label="Studs Terkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q568356" start="27502" end="27516" title="Robert Shelton (critic)" label="Robert Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="27585" end="27603" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="27744" end="27752" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="27754" end="27766" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q516447" start="27772" end="27779" title="Kenneth Rexroth" label="Rexroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173376" start="27799" end="27812" title="Dave Van Ronk" label="Dave Van Ronk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705721" start="28116" end="28159" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Think Twice, It&amp;#x27;s All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609767" start="28287" end="28299" title="Paul Clayton (folksinger)" label="Paul Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133611" start="28681" end="28693" title="Paul Stookey" label="Paul Stookey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173376" start="28759" end="28772" title="Dave Van Ronk" label="Dave Van Ronk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787242" start="28840" end="28853" title="Howard Sounes" label="Howard Sounes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605213" start="29324" end="29346" title="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Bob Dylan&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216001" start="29402" end="29429" title="Lady Franklin&amp;#x27;s Lament" label="Lady Franklin&amp;#x27;s Lament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="29513" end="29530" title="Sir John Franklin" label="Sir John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="29615" end="29633" title="North West Passage" label="North West Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321974" start="29651" end="29656" title="cairn" label="cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q143246" start="29660" end="29679" title="King William Island" label="King William Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499615" start="30133" end="30144" title="Oxford Town" label="Oxford Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085899" start="30187" end="30193" title="Ole Miss riot of 1962" label="events"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="30201" end="30226" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="30246" end="30260" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040" start="30269" end="30283" title="James Meredith" label="James Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="30329" end="30354" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="30359" end="30378" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q881524" start="30531" end="30543" title="Ross Barnett" label="Ross Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972295" start="30730" end="30739" title="Broadside (magazine)" label="Broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="30879" end="30892" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9355362" start="31113" end="31145" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; World War III Blues" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; World War III Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173006" start="31630" end="31646" title="Corrine, Corrina" label="Corrina, Corrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q938570" start="31669" end="31691" title="the Mississippi Sheiks" label="the Mississippi Sheiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q323669" start="31713" end="31722" title="Bo Carter" label="Bo Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="31778" end="31787" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q358350" start="31789" end="31803" title="Big Joe Turner" label="Big Joe Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q465636" start="31809" end="31819" title="Doc Watson" label="Doc Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="31869" end="31883" title="Robert Johnson (musician)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439944" start="32054" end="32072" title="Mixed-Up Confusion" label="Mixed-Up Confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10525923" start="32151" end="32187" title="Honey, Just Allow Me One More Chance" label="Honey, Just Allow Me One More Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559154" start="32762" end="32777" title="I Shall Be Free" label="I Shall Be Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="32800" end="32810" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="32871" end="32881" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q781878" start="32883" end="32894" title="Sonny Terry" label="Sonny Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q324353" start="32896" end="32909" title="Cisco Houston" label="Cisco Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="32915" end="32928" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574733" start="33724" end="33746" title="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991" label="The Bootleg Series 1–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="34096" end="34105" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039318" start="34205" end="34225" title="With God on Our Side (song)" label="With God on Our Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="34309" end="34313" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="34907" end="34914" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q654566" start="35097" end="35118" title="Newport Folk Festival" label="Newport Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q654716" start="35134" end="35154" title="Peter, Paul and Mary" label="Peter, Paul and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="35240" end="35249" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351527" start="35512" end="35522" title="Tom Paxton" label="Tom Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932402" start="35722" end="35730" title="Bob Fass" label="Bob Fass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="37078" end="37089" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="37131" end="37142" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="37222" end="37226" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755383" start="37450" end="37478" title="The Original Mono Recordings" label="The Original Mono Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="37488" end="37503" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="37504" end="37511" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="37601" end="37612" title="album cover" label="album cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q439920" start="37649" end="37660" title="Suze Rotolo" label="Suze Rotolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="37744" end="37747" title="Columbia Records" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24206437" start="37767" end="37779" title="Don Hunstein" label="Don Hunstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706709" start="37824" end="37836" title="Jones Street" label="Jones Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639456" start="37870" end="37880" title="4th Street (Manhattan)" label="4th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191048" start="37888" end="37900" title="West Village" label="West Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="38058" end="38076" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="38464" end="38473" title="cover art" label="cover art"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="38482" end="38494" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="38752" end="38765" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="38779" end="38789" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q110278" start="38810" end="38821" title="Vanilla Sky" label="Vanilla Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q446580" start="38835" end="38846" title="Todd Haynes" label="Todd Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q816772" start="38879" end="38897" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not There" label="I&amp;#x27;m Not There"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="38950" end="38963" title="Coen brothers" label="Coen brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340655" start="38986" end="39005" title="Inside Llewyn Davis" label="Inside Llewyn Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q433893" start="39016" end="39029" title="James Mangold" label="James Mangold"/>
<link wikidata="Q118175825" start="39053" end="39071" title="A Complete Unknown" label="A Complete Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q167475" start="39137" end="39152" title="Jacques Rivette" label="Jacques Rivette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558569" start="39170" end="39198" title="L&amp;#x27;Amour fou (film)" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;#x27;Amour fou&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q961525" start="39244" end="39262" title="Jean-Pierre Kalfon" label="Jean-Pierre Kalfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="39587" end="39600" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="39643" end="39649" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062606" start="39696" end="39708" title="Generation Z in the United States" label="Generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="40358" end="40370" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="40545" end="40564" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="40581" end="40602" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755205" start="40905" end="40915" title="Chronicles, Volume One" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330008" start="41450" end="41466" title="Richard Williams (journalist)" label="Richard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="41700" end="41705" title="T. S. Eliot" label="Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="41710" end="41715" title="W. B. Yeats" label="Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="41844" end="41854" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="41881" end="41892" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q902572" start="42110" end="42144" title="The Times They Are a-Changin&amp;#x27; (album)" label="The Times They Are A-Changin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787242" start="42449" end="42462" title="Howard Sounes" label="Howard Sounes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="42573" end="42574" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="43265" end="43288" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="43324" end="43332" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="43613" end="43628" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="43630" end="43643" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="43648" end="43661" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="43764" end="43776" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308877" start="43812" end="43821" title="Hot Press (magazine)" label="Hot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="44360" end="44379" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="44399" end="44426" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="44710" end="44723" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="44788" end="44823" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="the 500 greatest albums of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="44953" end="44969" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45060" end="45119" title="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies" label="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="45185" end="45225" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="45281" end="45293" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="45307" end="45331" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="45347" end="45359" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q97929991" start="45414" end="45419" title="Betty (Taylor Swift song)" label="Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q97620733" start="45429" end="45449" title="Folklore (Taylor Swift album)" label="&amp;quot;Folklore&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142566" start="45490" end="45502" title="The National (band)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661964" start="45510" end="45523" title="Aaron Dessner" label="Aaron Dessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="45537" end="45556" title="Vulture (website)" label="&amp;quot;Vulture&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818977" start="46318" end="46332" title="Leonard Gaskin" label="Leonard Gaskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977835" start="46380" end="46395" title="Bruce Langhorne" label="Bruce Langhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736124" start="46438" end="46452" title="Herbie Lovelle" label="Herbie Lovelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209838" start="46494" end="46508" title="Dick Wellstood" label="Dick Wellstood"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="46561" end="46576" title="John H. Hammond" label="John H. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371409" start="46591" end="46602" title="Nat Hentoff" label="Nat Hentoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="46606" end="46617" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007168" start="46660" end="46670" title="Tom Wilson (producer)" label="Tom Wilson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382831" wikidata="Q3990599" url="?curid=382831" title="Thomas Cartwright">
<text>Thomas Cartwright may refer to:

*Thomas Cartwright (bishop) (1634–1689), nonjuring Bishop of Chester
*Thomas Cartwright (diplomat) (1795–1850), British envoy to the Netherlands and Sweden
*Thomas Cartwright (politician) (1671–1748), English MP for Northamptonshire 1695–1698 and 1701–1748
*Thomas Cartwright (stonemason) (c. 1635–1703), English stonemason, building contractor and sculptor
*Thomas Cartwright (theologian) (c. 1535–1603), English Puritan churchman
*Tom Cartwright (1935–2007), English cricketer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5604207" start="34" end="60" title="Thomas Cartwright (bishop)" label="Thomas Cartwright (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604209" start="103" end="131" title="Thomas Cartwright (diplomat)" label="Thomas Cartwright (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20950354" start="190" end="220" title="Thomas Cartwright (politician)" label="Thomas Cartwright (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788264" start="291" end="321" title="Thomas Cartwright (stonemason)" label="Thomas Cartwright (stonemason)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501553" start="392" end="422" title="Thomas Cartwright (theologian)" label="Thomas Cartwright (theologian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530682" start="466" end="480" title="Tom Cartwright" label="Tom Cartwright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382841" wikidata="Q5329256" url="?curid=382841" title="East Riding">
<text>East Riding may refer to:

*East Riding of Yorkshire, England
*East Riding, York Shire (Province of New York) (1664-1683)
*East Riding of County Cork, Ireland
*East Riding of County Galway, Ireland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="28" end="52" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="63" end="74" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="East Riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055546" start="76" end="109" title="York Shire (Province of New York)" label="York Shire (Province of New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="138" end="149" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="175" end="188" title="County Galway" label="County Galway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382847" wikidata="Q146198" url="?curid=382847" title="Sorbus aucuparia">
<text>Sorbus aucuparia, commonly called rowan (, also ) and mountain-ash, is a species of deciduous tree or shrub in the rose family.

The tree has a slender trunk with smooth bark, a loose and roundish crown, and its leaves are pinnate in pairs of leaflets on a central vein with a terminal leaflet. It blossoms from May to June in dense corymbs of small yellowish white flowers and develops small red pomes as fruit that ripen from August to October and are eaten by many bird species.

It is a highly variable species, and botanists have used different definitions of the species to include or exclude trees native to certain areas. A recent definition includes trees native to most of Europe and parts of Asia, as well as northern Africa. The range extends from Madeira, the British Isles and Iceland to Russia and northern China. Unlike many plants with similar distributions, it is not native to Japan. The plant is frost hardy and colonizes disrupted and inaccessible places as a short-lived pioneer species.

The fruit and foliage have been used in the creation of dishes and beverages, as a folk medicine, and as fodder for livestock. Its tough and flexible wood has traditionally been used for woodworking. It is planted to fortify soil in mountain regions or as an ornamental tree and has several cultivars.

==Description==
&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; is a small tree or shrub that grows up to between about in height. The crown is loose and roundish or irregularly shaped but wide and the plant often grows multiple trunks. A trunk is slender and cylindrical and reaches up to in diameter, and the branches stick out and are slanted upwards. The bark of a young plant is yellowish gray and gleaming and becomes gray-black with lengthwise cracks in advanced age; it descales in small flakes. Lenticels in the bark are elongated and colored a bright ocher. The plant does not often grow older than 80 years and is one of the shortest-lived trees in temperate climate. The wood has a wide reddish white sapwood and a light brown to reddish brown heartwood. It is diffuse-porous, flexible, elastic, and tough, but not durable, with a density of in a dried state. The roots grow wide and deep, and the plant is capable of root sprouting and can regenerate after coppicing.

The compound leaves are pinnate with four to nine pairs of leaflets on either side of a central vein and with a terminal leaflet. The leaves are up to long, wide. They have paired leaf-like stipules at the base of the petiole, and are arranged alternately along a branch, distinguishing them from those of ash, &quot;Fraxinus excelsior&quot;, which are opposite and without stipules. The leaflets are elongated-lanceolate in shape, long, and wide with a sharply serrated edge, and have short stems or sit close to the central vein except for the outermost leaflet. Leaflets are covered in gray-silvery hairs after sprouting but become mostly bare after they unfold. Their upper side is dark green and their underside is a grayish green and felted. Young leaflets smell like marzipan when ed. The leaflets are asymmetrical at the bottom. The foliage grows in May and turns yellow in autumn or a dark red in dry locations.

The buds are often longer than and have flossy to felted hairs. These hairs, which disappear over time, cover dark brown to black bud scales. The terminal buds are oval and pointed and larger than axillary buds, which are narrow, oval and pointed, close to the twig, and often curved towards it.

The species is monoecious. It reaches maturity at age 10 and carries ample fruit almost every year. The plant flowers from May to June (on occasion again in September) in many yellowish white corymbs that contain about 250 flowers. The corymbs are large, upright, and bulging. The flowers are between in diameter and have five small, yellowish green, and triangular sepals that are covered in hairs or bare. The five round or oval petals are yellowish white and the flower has up to 25 stamens fused with the corolla to form a hypanthium and an ovary with two to five styles; the style is fused with the receptacle. The flowers have an unpleasant trimethylamine smell. Their nectar is high in fructose and glucose.

Its berries are round pomes between in diameter that ripen from August to October. The fruit are green before they ripen and then typically turn to orange or scarlet in color. The sepals persist as a black, five-pointed star on the ripe fruit. A corymb carries 80 to 100 pomes. A pome contains a star-shaped ovary with two to five locules each containing one or two flat, narrow, and pointed reddish seeds. The flesh of the fruit contains carotenoids, citric acid, malic acid, parasorbic acid, pectin, provitamin A, sorbitol, tannin, and vitamin C. The seeds contain glycoside.

The species has a chromosome number of 2&quot;n&quot;=34.

== Taxonomy ==

=== Fossil record ===
Fossils of &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; have been described from the fossil flora of Kızılcahamam district in Turkey, which is of early Pliocene age.

=== Names ===

The binomial name &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; is composed of the Latin words &quot;sorbus&quot; for service tree and &quot;aucuparia&quot;, which derives from the words &quot;avis&quot; for &quot;bird&quot; and &quot;capere&quot; for &quot;catching&quot; and describes the use of the fruit of &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; as bait for fowling. The plant is commonly known as rowan and mountain-ash, and has also been called Amur mountain-ash, European mountain-ash, quick beam, quickbeam, or rowan-berry. The names rowan and mountain ash may be applied to other species in &quot;Sorbus&quot; subgenus &quot;Sorbus&quot;, and mountain ash may be used for several other distantly related trees. The species is not closely related to either the true ash trees (genus &quot;Fraxinus&quot;), which also carry pinnate leaves, or the species &quot;Eucalyptus regnans&quot;, also called mountain ash, native to Tasmania and Victoria in southeastern Australia.

The common name mountain ash dates from the 16th century. It was first used by John Gerard in 1597, translating it directly from the then botanists&#x27; Latin &quot;Montana fraxinus&quot; 

&quot;S. aucuparia&quot; was previously categorized as &quot;Pyrus aucuparia&quot;. 

&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; L. belongs to Carl Linnaeus.

== Distribution and habitat ==
&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; is found in five subspecies:
*&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; subsp. &quot;aucuparia&quot;: found in most of the species&#x27; range, less in the South
*&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; subsp. &quot;fenenkiana&quot; (Georgiev &amp; Stoj.): has thin, sparsely hairy leaflets and depressed-globose fruit, restricted to Bulgaria
*&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; subsp. &quot;glabrata&quot; (Wimm. &amp; Grab.): less hairy, found in Northern Europe and Central European mountains
*&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; subsp. &quot;praemorsa&quot; (Guss.): has hairy leaflets and ovoid fruit, found in Southern Italy, Sicily, and Corsica
*&quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; subsp. &quot;sibirica&quot; (Hedl.): nearly hairless, found in North Eastern Russia

It can be found in almost all of Europe and the Caucasus up to Northern Russia and Siberia, but it is not native to Southern Spain, Southern Greece, Sardinia, the Balearic Islands, the Azores, and the Faroe Islands. The species was introduced as an ornamental species in North America. It is widespread from plains to mountains up to the tree line where it grows as the only deciduous tree species among krummholz. In the Alps it grows at elevations of up to . &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; appears north of the boreal forest at the arctic tree line; in Norway, it is found up to the 71st parallel north.
It has naturalized in America from Washington to Alaska and eastward in Canada and the northeast of the US very successfully.

&quot;S. aucuparia&quot; is an undemanding species and can withstand shade. It is frost hardy and can tolerate winter dryness and a brief growing season. The plant is also resistant to air pollution, wind, and snow pressure. It mostly grows on soil that is moderately dry to moderately damp, acidic, low on nutrients, sandy, and loose. It often grows in stony soil or clay soil, but also sandy soil or wet peat. The plant grows best on fresh, loose, and fertile soil, prefers average humidity, and does not tolerate saline soil or waterlogging. It can be found in light woodland of all kinds and as a pioneer species over fallen dead trees or in clearcuttings, and at the edge of forests or at the sides of roads. The seeds germinate easily, so the plant may appear on inaccessible rock, ruins, branch forks, or on hollow trees.

The tallest &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; in the United Kingdom stands in the Chiltern Hills in South East England. This exceptional specimen is tall and has a trunk diameter of . In Germany, an unusually large specimen is located near Wendisch Waren, a village in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. This tree stands at more than tall, is around 100 years old, and has a diameter of . The tallest known specimen in Ireland is an tall specimen at Glenstal Abbey, County Limerick.

==Ecology==
The species is pollinated by bees and flies. Its seeds are not digested by birds and are thus propagated by being passed intact in their droppings. The fruit are eaten by about 60 bird species and several mammals. They are liked particularly by thrushes and other songbirds, and are also eaten by cloven-hoofed game, red fox, European badger, dormouse, and squirrel. The fruit are eaten by migratory birds in winter, including Bohemian waxwing, spotted nutcracker, and redwing. Cloven-hoofed game also excessively browse foliage and bark. The plant roots can be found in symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal and less commonly with ectomycorrhizal fungi.

It is usually later superseded by larger forest trees. In Central Europe it often grows in association with red elderberry, goat willow, Eurasian aspen, and silver birch. The plant is highly flammable and tends not to accumulate plant litter.

Other species of the genus &quot;Sorbus&quot; easily hybridize with &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; and hybrid speciation can result; hybrids include &quot;Sorbus × hybrida&quot;, a small tree with oval serrated leaves and two to three pairs of leaflets, which is a hybrid with &quot;Sorbus × intermedia&quot;, and &quot;S. thuringiaca&quot;, a medium-size tree with elongated leaves and one to three pairs of leaflets that are sometimes fused at the central vein, which is a hybrid with &quot;S. aria&quot;.

The main pests for &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; are the apple fruit moth &quot;Argyresthia conjugella&quot; and the mountain-ash sawfly &quot;Hoplocampa alpina&quot;. The rust fungus &quot;Gymnosporangium cornutum&quot; produces leaf galls. The leaves are not palatable to insects, but are used by insect larvae, including by the moth &quot;Venusia cambrica&quot;, the case-bearer moth &quot;Coleophora anatipennella&quot;, and leaf miners of the genus &quot;Stigmella&quot;. The snail &quot;Cornu aspersum&quot; feeds on the leaves. The plant can suffer from fire blight.

==Uses==
===Culinary===
The fruit of &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; were used in the past to lure and catch birds. To humans, the fruit are bitter, astringent, laxative, diuretic and a cholagogue. They have vitamin C, so they prevent scurvy, but the parasorbic acid irritates the gastric mucosa. Pharmacist Mannfried Pahlow wrote that he questioned the toxicity of the fruit but advised against consuming large amounts. The fruit contain sorbitol, which can be used as a sugar substitute by diabetics, but its production is no longer relevant. &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; fruits have been used in the traditional Austrian medicine internally (as tea, syrup, jelly or liqueur) for treatment of disorders of the respiratory tract, fever, infections, colds, flu, rheumatism and gout.

Due to their bitterness, raw rowan berries normally are not very palatable, but can be debittered and made into compote, jelly, jam, a tart syrup or chutney, pressed into juice. It is also used to make wine, liqueurs, teas, and flour. Fruit are served as a side dish to lamb or game. Debittering can be accomplished by freezing, cooking, or drying, which degrades the parasorbic acid. The fruit are red colored in August but usually only harvested in October after the first frost by cutting the corymbs. The robust qualities of &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; make it a source for fruit in harsh mountain climate and Maria Theresa, ruler of the Habsburg monarchy, recommended the planting of the species in 1779. The oldest Finnish candy still commercially produced, &quot;Pihlaja&quot;, is named after and originally contained rowanberries.

A more palatable variety, named &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; var. &quot;dulcis&quot; Kraetzl, or var. &quot;edulis&quot; Dieck, or var. &quot;moravica&quot; Dippel, was first discovered in 1810 near Ostružná in the Hrubý Jeseník mountain range of Northern Moravia and became widespread in Germany and Austria the early 20th century. Its leaves are larger and pointed, only the front part of the leaflets is serrated, and they have darker bark, larger buds and larger fruit. Similar non-bitter varieties found in Southern Russia were first introduced in Central Europe in 1900 as &#x27;Rossica&#x27; and &#x27;Rossica Major&#x27;, which has large fruit up to in diameter.

Two widespread cultivars of the Moravian variety are &#x27;Konzentra&#x27; and &#x27;Rosina&#x27;, which were selected beginning in 1946 by the Institut für Gartenbau Dresden-Pillnitz, an agricultural research institute in Saxony, from 75 specimens found mostly in the Ore Mountains, and made available in 1954. Fruit of the more widely used &#x27;Konzentra&#x27; are small to medium-sized, mildly aromatic and tart, easier to transport because of their thicker peel, and used for juicing, while fruit of &#x27;Rosina&#x27; are larger, sweet and tart, and aromatic, and candied or used in compote. The two cultivars are self-pollinating, yield fruit early, and the sugar content increases while the acid content decreases as the fruit ripen. &#x27;Beissneri&#x27; is a cultivar with reddish foliage and bark and serrated leaves. Other edible varieties originate in and are named after Klosterneuburg, Lower Austria.

Russian botanist Ivan Vladimirovich Michurin began in 1905 to crossbreed common &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; with other species to create fruit trees. His experiments resulted in the cultivars &#x27;Burka&#x27;, &#x27;Likjornaja&#x27;, &#x27;Dessertnaja&#x27;, &#x27;Granatnaja&#x27;, &#x27;Rubinovaja&#x27;, and &#x27;Titan&#x27;. Other &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; hybrids planted in Western Europe beginning in the 1980s include &#x27;Apricot Queen&#x27;, &#x27;Brilliant Yellow&#x27;, &#x27;Chamois Glow&#x27;, &#x27;Pink Queen&#x27;, and &#x27;Salmon Queen&#x27;.

The leaves were fermented with leaves of sweet gale and oak bark to create herb beer. Fruits are eaten as a mash in small amounts against lack of appetite or an upset stomach and stimulate production of gastric acid. In folk medicine they are used as a laxative, against rheumatism and kidney disease, and as a gargled juice against hoarseness.

===Timber===

The wood is used for cartwright&#x27;s work, turner&#x27;s work, and woodcarving. Wood can be used from trees as young as 20 years. The sapwood is golden and white, while the heart-wood is brown. In almost treeless regions it is used as firewood. The leaves are sometimes used as fodder for livestock while the fruit are used against erysipeloid infections in domestic pigs and goats. Bark of the plant was used to dye wool brown or red. Honey from the flowers is strongly aromatic and has a reddish color.

The species is planted in mountain ranges to fortify landslide and avalanche zones.

===Ornamental===
It is also used as an ornamental plant in parks, gardens, or as an avenue tree. Ornamental cultivars include &#x27;Asplenifolia&#x27;, which has divided and sharply serrated leaflets, &#x27;Blackhawk&#x27;, which has large fruit and dark green foliage, &#x27;Fastigiata&#x27;, which has an upright columnar form, &#x27;Fructu Luteo&#x27;, which has orange yellow fruit, &#x27;Michred&#x27;, which has brilliant red fruit, &#x27;Pendula&#x27;, which is a weeping tree, and &#x27;Xanthocarpa&#x27;, which has orange yellow fruit.

‘Sheerwater Seedling&#x27;, an upright and slender cultivar, and &#x27;Wisley Gold&#x27; with yellow fruits, have received the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

Cultivars are vegetatively propagated via cuttings, grafting, or shield budding.

==In culture==
In the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, the Norse god Thor saves himself from a rapid river created by the giantess Gjálp by grabbing hold of a rowan, which became known as &quot;Thor&#x27;s protection&quot;.

In English folklore, twigs of &quot;S. aucuparia&quot; were believed to ward off evil spirits and witches. The plant was called &quot;the witch&quot; in England and dowsing rods to find ores were made out of its wood. Twigs were used to drive cattle to the pasture for the first time in spring to ensure their health and fertility. The wooden shafts of forks and other farm implements were constructed from the species to protect farm animals and production from witches&#x27; spells. In weather lore, a year with plentiful rowan fruit would have a good grain harvest but be followed by a severe winter.

In Scottish folklore, boughs of rowan were traditionally taken into cattle byres in May to protect livestock from evil, and rowan trees were planted in pastures for similar purposes.
&quot;S. aucuparia&quot; is used in the coats of arms of the German municipalities Ebernhahn, Eschenrode, and Hermsdorf, and of the Vysočina Region of the Czech Republic. Rowan is part of the coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan and the logo of both Wigan Athletic and Wigan Warriors.

==Footnotes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* &quot;Sorbus aucuparia&quot; - information, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="34" end="39" title="Sorbus aucuparia" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="54" end="66" title="Sorbus aucuparia" label="mountain-ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="84" end="93" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="115" end="126" title="rose family" label="rose family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="223" end="230" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322325" start="333" end="339" title="corymb" label="corymb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41274" start="397" end="401" title="pome" label="pome"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="520" end="528" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="550" end="561" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="definitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="760" end="767" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="802" end="808" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="813" end="827" title="northern China" label="northern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q927054" start="993" end="1008" title="pioneer species" label="pioneer species"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="1094" end="1107" title="folk medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="1302" end="1310" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138208" start="1430" end="1435" title="crown (botany)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2008" end="2015" title="Sapwood (wood)" label="sapwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2051" end="2060" title="heartwood" label="heartwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q960522" start="2225" end="2236" title="root sprout" label="root sprout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360410" start="2265" end="2274" title="coppicing" label="coppicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2290" end="2296" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="2301" end="2308" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q887004" start="2336" end="2344" title="leaflet (botany)" label="leaflets"/>
<link wikidata="Q156907" start="2594" end="2612" title="Fraxinus excelsior" label="Fraxinus excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q106252" start="3051" end="3059" title="marzipan" label="marzipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66368485" start="3511" end="3521" title="monoecious" label="monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322325" start="3688" end="3694" title="corymb" label="corymb"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3862" end="3867" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3982" end="3988" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4005" end="4012" title="Petal#corolla" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q887231" start="4023" end="4033" title="hypanthium" label="hypanthium"/>
<link wikidata="Q497512" start="4100" end="4110" title="Receptacle (botany)" label="receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q423953" start="4143" end="4157" title="trimethylamine" label="trimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41274" start="4234" end="4238" title="pome" label="pome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818113" start="4543" end="4549" title="locule" label="locule"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="4651" end="4661" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="4664" end="4675" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="4677" end="4687" title="malic acid" label="malic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104991451" start="4689" end="4704" title="parasorbic acid" label="parasorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="4706" end="4712" title="pectin" label="pectin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4714" end="4726" title="provitamin A" label="provitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="4728" end="4736" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="4738" end="4744" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4750" end="4759" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="4779" end="4788" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="4809" end="4826" title="chromosome number" label="chromosome number"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675025" start="4957" end="4994" title="fossil flora of Kızılcahamam district" label="fossil flora of Kızılcahamam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4998" end="5004" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="5024" end="5032" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="5058" end="5071" title="binomial name" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036226" start="5155" end="5167" title="service tree" label="service tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281130" start="5385" end="5392" title="fowling" label="fowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="5565" end="5570" title="rowan" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924866" start="5712" end="5741" title="Mountain ash (disambiguation)" label="other distantly related trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="5820" end="5828" title="Fraxinus" label="Fraxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="5854" end="5861" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542486" start="5891" end="5909" title="Eucalyptus regnans" label="Eucalyptus regnans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333338" start="6082" end="6093" title="John Gerard" label="John Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="6323" end="6336" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043036" start="6624" end="6629" title="Nikolai Stojanov" label="Stoj."/>
<link wikidata="Q87538" start="6777" end="6782" title="Christian Friedrich Heinrich Wimmer" label="Wimm."/>
<link wikidata="Q1361112" start="6925" end="6930" title="Giovanni Gussone" label="Guss."/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="7177" end="7185" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="7212" end="7219" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="7292" end="7308" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="7314" end="7320" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="7330" end="7343" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7400" end="7413" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="7467" end="7476" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518409" start="7533" end="7542" title="krummholz" label="krummholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="7636" end="7649" title="boreal forest" label="boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256519" start="7708" end="7727" title="71st parallel north" label="71st parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="7994" end="8008" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q927054" start="8457" end="8472" title="pioneer species" label="pioneer species"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="8759" end="8773" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chiltern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="8777" end="8795" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q706922" start="8917" end="8931" title="Wendisch Waren" label="Wendisch Waren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="8946" end="8968" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499783" start="9116" end="9130" title="Glenstal Abbey" label="Glenstal Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q178283" start="9132" end="9147" title="County Limerick" label="County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="9407" end="9415" title="Thrush (bird)" label="thrushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="9459" end="9477" title="even-toed_ungulate" label="cloven-hoofed game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="9479" end="9486" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="9488" end="9503" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q108235" start="9505" end="9513" title="dormouse" label="dormouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9482" start="9519" end="9527" title="squirrel" label="squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26135" start="9589" end="9605" title="Bohemian waxwing" label="Bohemian waxwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184820" start="9607" end="9625" title="spotted nutcracker" label="spotted nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q184825" start="9631" end="9638" title="redwing" label="redwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q520825" start="9748" end="9769" title="arbuscular mycorrhiza" label="arbuscular mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047120" start="9794" end="9808" title="ectomycorrhiza" label="ectomycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q157276" start="9926" end="9940" title="Sambucus racemosa" label="red elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159565" start="9942" end="9953" title="Salix caprea" label="goat willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q146110" start="9955" end="9969" title="Populus tremula" label="Eurasian aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156895" start="9975" end="9987" title="Betula pendula" label="silver birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512035" start="10047" end="10059" title="plant litter" label="plant litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138050" start="10159" end="10176" title="hybrid speciation" label="hybrid speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41202362" start="10211" end="10227" title="Sorbus × hybrida" label="Sorbus × hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q27980" start="10339" end="10358" title="Sorbus × intermedia" label="Sorbus × intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927401" start="10376" end="10390" title="Sorbus thuringiaca" label="S. thuringiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41068995" start="10549" end="10556" title="Sorbus aria" label="S. aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q793513" start="10640" end="10662" title="Argyresthia conjugella" label="Argyresthia conjugella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10703" end="10720" title="Hoplocampa alpina" label="Hoplocampa alpina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10750" end="10774" title="Gymnosporangium cornutum" label="Gymnosporangium cornutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247304" start="10902" end="10918" title="Venusia cambrica" label="Venusia cambrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5143184" start="10953" end="10977" title="Coleophora anatipennella" label="Coleophora anatipennella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544843" start="10989" end="10999" title="leaf miner" label="leaf miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566619" start="11014" end="11035" title="Stigmella (moth)" label="&amp;quot;Stigmella&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019793" start="11053" end="11067" title="Cornu aspersum" label="Cornu aspersum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41456487" start="11121" end="11132" title="fire blight" label="fire blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="11277" end="11287" title="astringent" label="astringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075876" start="11314" end="11324" title="cholagogue" label="cholagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="11363" end="11369" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104991451" start="11379" end="11394" title="parasorbic acid" label="parasorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="11567" end="11575" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q635999" start="12024" end="12031" title="compote" label="compote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12033" end="12038" title="Fruit preserves#Jelly" label="jelly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12040" end="12043" title="Fruit preserves#Jam" label="jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="12052" end="12057" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q275650" start="12061" end="12068" title="chutney" label="chutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="12083" end="12088" title="juice" label="juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="12114" end="12118" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="12120" end="12127" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="12130" end="12134" title="herbal tea" label="teas"/>
<link wikidata="Q104991451" start="12280" end="12295" title="parasorbic acid" label="parasorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="12523" end="12536" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="12551" end="12568" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116162" start="12679" end="12686" title="Pihlaja" label="Pihlaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015296" start="12948" end="12956" title="Ostružná" label="Ostružná"/>
<link wikidata="Q280987" start="12964" end="12977" title="Hrubý Jeseník" label="Hrubý Jeseník"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="13005" end="13012" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="13644" end="13650" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="13690" end="13703" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163138" start="13991" end="13998" title="Candied fruit" label="candied"/>
<link wikidata="Q487522" start="14306" end="14320" title="Klosterneuburg" label="Klosterneuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="14322" end="14335" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311499" start="14355" end="14382" title="Ivan Vladimirovich Michurin" label="Ivan Vladimirovich Michurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161681" start="14941" end="14951" title="Myrica gale" label="sweet gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607983" start="15594" end="15605" title="erysipeloid" label="erysipeloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450196" start="16324" end="16336" title="weeping tree" label="weeping tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="16526" end="16553" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="16561" end="16582" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="16695" end="16705" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="16727" end="16731" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q345799" start="16789" end="16794" title="Gjálp" label="Gjálp"/>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="16886" end="16902" title="English folklore" label="English folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739341" start="17491" end="17508" title="Scottish folklore" label="Scottish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="17563" end="17567" title="byre" label="byre"/>
<link wikidata="Q564021" start="17754" end="17763" title="Ebernhahn" label="Ebernhahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q529910" start="17765" end="17775" title="Eschenrode" label="Eschenrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724" start="17781" end="17790" title="Hermsdorf, Saxony" label="Hermsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q190930" start="17803" end="17818" title="Vysočina Region" label="Vysočina Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="17826" end="17840" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138564" start="17863" end="17912" title="coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan" label="coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="17934" end="17948" title="Wigan Athletic" label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210267" start="17953" end="17967" title="Wigan Warriors" label="Wigan Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324092" start="18147" end="18190" title="European Forest Genetic Resources Programme" label="European Forest Genetic Resources Programme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382850" wikidata="Q725982" url="?curid=382850" title="Ikeda school massacre">
<text>The Ikeda school massacre (sometimes referred to as the Osaka school massacre) was a school stabbing and mass murder that occurred in Ikeda, Osaka Prefecture, Japan, on 8 June 2001. Mamoru Takuma, a 37-year-old ex-convict with a history of mentally disturbed and anti-social behavior, stabbed eight students to death and seriously wounded fifteen others in a knife attack that lasted several minutes. Takuma was sentenced to death in August 2003, and executed in September 2004.

As of 2025, it is currently the deadliest school attack in Japanese history.

==Perpetrator==
Mamoru Takuma was a 37-year-old ex-convict from Itami, Hyōgo Prefecture, who had a long history of mentally disturbed and anti-social behavior since childhood and an extensive criminal record that included a conviction for rape. As a teenager, Takuma&#x27;s volatile behavior led to him being kicked out of school and his father eventually disowning him. After being released from prison in 1989, Takuma moved to the nearby city of Ikeda, Osaka Prefecture, working various part-time jobs in the area but often being fired for erratic or violent behavior.

In 1999, he was detained at a psychiatric hospital while working as a janitor at Itami City Ikejiri Elementary, after slipping his temazepam into tea he served in a teachers&#x27; room at the school, resulting in staff being hospitalized. Takuma attempted suicide at the psychiatric hospital but was soon determined as fit to be released. In October 2000, Takuma was charged with assaulting a bellhop while working as a taxi driver in Osaka. He was to attend a court hearing scheduled for 8 June 2001, the day on which the massacre occurred. 

==Attack==
On 8 June 2001, the day of his court hearing for the bellhop assault case, Takuma drove to the Ikeda Elementary School, an elite school affiliated with the Osaka Kyoiku University. Earlier that morning, he had unsuccessfully attempted to start a fire in his apartment using a lit cigarette in order to get revenge on his apartment tenant, whom he long disliked. Takuma then visited a knife shop at around 10:00 a.m., where he purchased a 15.8-centimetre (6.2-inch) long Deba knife, a type of kitchen knife used to cut fish, for ¥7,480 yen. There was also a second knife in his car, which he planned to use to murder his ex-wife. 

Takuma parked his car in front of the school&#x27;s east gate, before making his way to the south building, which housed multiple first- and second-year classrooms. The attack began just after 10:10 a.m.; Takuma first climbed through a window before crossing the hallway and entering a second-year classroom, where he stabbed five students to death. He then entered two more second-year classrooms and indiscriminately attacked those inside, killing two students in one of the rooms. All of the students killed in these classrooms were girls, and a first-year teacher was also stabbed in the back. Two other teachers began to chase Takuma, who briefly made a gesture as if he was going to chase after students who had fled from the first classroom he attacked, but then ran into a first-year classroom where he stabbed a young boy to death. He then attacked other students from the same classroom who were returning from a music class.

The massacre finally ended at around 10:20 a.m., after the vice principal and one of the teachers were able to subdue the attacker, though the teacher was slashed in the face while trying to hold back the knife. Takuma said nothing throughout the entire attack, though at the end of his rampage he began ranting incoherent statements but eventually calmed down. Takuma was taken into custody by law enforcement, but he was first treated at a hospital for minor injuries to his left hand. 

==Fatalities==
All of the victims were female second-graders, except for one first-grade boy.

*Yuki Hongo (本郷 優希 &quot;Hongō Yūki&quot;)
*Mayuko Isaka (猪阪 真宥子 &quot;Isaka Mayuko&quot;)
*Yuuka Kiso (木曽 友香 &quot;Kiso Yūka&quot;)
*Ayano Moriwaki (森脇 綾乃 &quot;Moriwaki Ayano&quot;)
*Maki Sakai (酒井 麻希 &quot;Sakai Maki&quot;)
*Takahiro Totsuka (戸塚 健大 &quot;Totsuka Takahiro&quot;) (the only boy to die in the attack)
*Hana Tsukamoto (塚本 花菜 &quot;Tsukamoto Hana&quot;)
*Rena Yamashita (山下 玲奈 &quot;Yamashita Rena&quot;)

==Aftermath==
Takuma was diagnosed with paranoid personality disorder. He was later convicted and sentenced to death by hanging. He was executed on September 14, 2004.

The attack is currently the sixth deadliest mass murder, along with the Matsumoto incident, in recent Japanese history, surpassed in fatalities only by the Tokyo subway sarin attack, the Osaka movie theater fire, the Sagamihara stabbings, the Kyoto Animation arson attack, and the Myojo 56 building fire. At the time, it was tied with the Matsumoto sarin attack as the second deadliest, behind the Tokyo subway sarin attack. The incident set itself apart, however, by the age of the victims, its venue (a school), and the perpetrator&#x27;s history of mental illness. Because of these factors, the attack raised questions about Japan&#x27;s social policies for dealing with mental illness, the rights of victims and criminals, and the accessibility and security of Japanese schools.

After the attack, Yoshio Yamane, the principal administrator of the school, announced that it would bring in a security guard, an at-the-time unheard-of practice at Japanese schools. J-pop artist Hikaru Utada rearranged her song &quot;Distance&quot; in honor of Rena Yamashita, one of the murdered schoolgirls, because of an essay contest the girl had won, talking about how she respected and wanted to be like Utada, renaming it &quot;Final Distance&quot;.

Some children, faculty, and parents developed post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

==See also==
*Akihabara massacre, which happened exactly 7 years after
*School massacre
*List of massacres in Japan

==References==
==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725982" start="4" end="25" title="Ikeda school massacre" label="Ikeda school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q725982" start="56" end="77" title="Ikeda school massacre" label="Osaka school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145436" start="85" end="100" title="school stabbing" label="school stabbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="105" end="116" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q817965" start="134" end="139" title="Ikeda, Osaka" label="Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q122723" start="141" end="157" title="Osaka Prefecture" label="Osaka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396592" start="182" end="195" title="Mamoru Takuma" label="Mamoru Takuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="211" end="221" title="ex-convict" label="ex-convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="240" end="258" title="mentally disturbed" label="mentally disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q734611" start="263" end="274" title="Anti-social behaviour" label="anti-social"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813020" start="359" end="371" title="knife attack" label="knife attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195495" start="412" end="430" title="Capital punishment in Japan" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396592" start="574" end="587" title="Mamoru Takuma" label="Mamoru Takuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="606" end="616" title="ex-convict" label="ex-convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q335444" start="622" end="627" title="Itami, Hyōgo" label="Itami"/>
<link wikidata="Q130290" start="629" end="645" title="Hyōgo Prefecture" label="Hyōgo Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="673" end="691" title="mentally disturbed" label="mentally disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q734611" start="696" end="707" title="Anti-social behaviour" label="anti-social"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070100" start="750" end="765" title="criminal record" label="criminal record"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="797" end="801" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q621474" start="914" end="923" title="disowning" label="disowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q817965" start="1006" end="1011" title="Ikeda, Osaka" label="Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q122723" start="1013" end="1029" title="Osaka Prefecture" label="Osaka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="1160" end="1180" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760141" start="1200" end="1207" title="janitor" label="janitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q414796" start="1261" end="1270" title="temazepam" label="temazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="1386" end="1393" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043489" start="1523" end="1530" title="bellhop" label="bellhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="1565" end="1570" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136138" start="1841" end="1864" title="Osaka Kyoiku University" label="Osaka Kyoiku University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111908" start="2155" end="2165" title="Deba bōchō" label="Deba knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q747735" start="4299" end="4328" title="paranoid personality disorder" label="paranoid personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195495" start="4357" end="4375" title="Capital punishment in Japan" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="4379" end="4386" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="4472" end="4483" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057839" start="4500" end="4518" title="Matsumoto incident" label="Matsumoto incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146739" start="4584" end="4609" title="Tokyo subway sarin attack" label="Tokyo subway sarin attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084467" start="4645" end="4665" title="Sagamihara stabbings" label="Sagamihara stabbings"/>
<link wikidata="Q65640303" start="4671" end="4699" title="Kyoto Animation arson attack" label="Kyoto Animation arson attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022490" start="4709" end="4731" title="Myojo 56 building fire" label="Myojo 56 building fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="4980" end="4994" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="5395" end="5400" title="J-pop" label="J-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q234598" start="5408" end="5420" title="Hikaru Utada" label="Hikaru Utada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010478" start="5648" end="5662" title="Final Distance" label="Final Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="5717" end="5747" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q925737" start="5771" end="5789" title="Akihabara massacre" label="Akihabara massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q473853" start="5829" end="5844" title="School massacre" label="School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627263" start="5846" end="5872" title="List of massacres in Japan" label="List of massacres in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382852" wikidata="Q295833" url="?curid=382852" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus">
<text>Titus Manlius Torquatus may refer to four Roman Republican consuls of the Manlia gens:

* Titus Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus, consul in 347, 344, and 340 BC.
* Titus Manlius Torquatus, grandson of the above, consul in 299 BC who died in office.
* Titus Manlius Torquatus, great-grandson of the above, consul in 235 and 224 BC.
* Titus Manlius Torquatus, grandson of the above, consul in 165 BC. 

==See also==
*Manlia (gens)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295833" start="0" end="23" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q409825" start="74" end="85" title="Manlia gens" label="Manlia gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q714821" start="90" end="124" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (consul 347 BC)" label="Titus Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q541532" start="160" end="183" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (consul 299 BC)" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q718133" start="247" end="270" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (dictator)" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q509399" start="329" end="352" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (consul 165 BC)" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q409825" start="411" end="424" title="Manlia (gens)" label="Manlia (gens)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382853" wikidata="Q120179935" url="?curid=382853" title="Osaka massacre">
<text>Osaka massacre may refer to:
* Ikeda school massacre (2001)
* Osaka movie theatre fire (2008)
* 2021 Osaka building fire</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725982" start="31" end="52" title="Ikeda school massacre" label="Ikeda school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11440048" start="62" end="86" title="Osaka movie theatre fire" label="Osaka movie theatre fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110157827" start="96" end="120" title="2021 Osaka building fire" label="2021 Osaka building fire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382857" wikidata="Q435392" url="?curid=382857" title="Marcus Manlius Capitolinus">
<text>Marcus Manlius Capitolinus (died 384 BC) was consul of the Roman Republic in 392 BC. He was a brother of Aulus Manlius Capitolinus, consular tribune five times between 389 and 370 BC. The Manlii were one of the leading patrician gentes that dominated the politics of the early Republic.

== Biography ==
During the Gallic siege of Rome in 390 BC, the account of which has been greatly mythologized, Marcus Manlius held out on the citadel with a small garrison, while the rest of Rome was abandoned. When Gauls under the command of Brennus attempted to scale the Capitoline, Manlius was roused by the cackling of the sacred geese, rushed to the spot, and threw down the foremost assailants.

After the sack of Rome left the plebeians in pitiful condition, they were forced to borrow large sums of money from the patricians, and once again became the poor debtor class of Rome. Manlius, the hero of Rome, fought for them. Livy says that he was the first patrician to act as a populist. Seeing a centurion led to prison for debt, he freed him with his own money, and even sold his estate to relieve other poor debtors, while he accused the senate of embezzling public money. He was charged with aspiring to kingly power, and condemned by the &quot;comitia&quot;, but not until the assembly had adjourned to a place outside the walls, where they could no longer see the Capitol which he had saved. The Senate condemned him to death in 385 BC, and he was thrown from the Tarpeian Rock. Some scholars suggest that Livy&#x27;s portrait of Manlius is modeled on the first-century rebel Catiline, and blends different moments in Rome&#x27;s recent past. 

Manlius&#x27; house on the Capitoline Hill was razed, and the Senate decreed that no patrician should live there henceforth. The Manlii themselves resolved that no patrician Manlius should bear the name of Marcus. According to Mommsen, the story of the saving of the Capitol was a later invention to justify his &quot;cognomen&quot;, which may be better explained by his domicile. Some scholars consider him the second martyr in the cause of social reform at Rome.

Pliny the Elder describes Manlius among his &quot;instances of extreme courage&quot;:

The military honours of Manlius Capitolinus would have been no less splendid than [those of Titus Caecilius Denter], if they had not been all effaced at the close of his life. Before his seventeenth year, he had gained two spoils, and was the first of equestrian rank who received a mural crown; he also gained six civic crowns, thirty seven donations, and had twenty-three scars on the fore-part of his body. He saved the life of P. Servilius, the master of the horse, receiving wounds on the same occasion in the shoulders and the thigh. Besides all this, unaided, he saved the Capitol, when it was attacked by the Gauls, and through that, the state itself; a thing that would have been the most glorious act of all, if he had not so saved it, in order that he might, as its king, become its master. But in all matters of this nature, although valour may effect much, fortune does still more.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q435392" start="0" end="26" title="Marcus Manlius Capitolinus" label="Marcus Manlius Capitolinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="45" end="51" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="59" end="73" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215757" start="105" end="130" title="Aulus Manlius Capitolinus" label="Aulus Manlius Capitolinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673808" start="132" end="148" title="consular tribune" label="consular tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q409825" start="188" end="194" title="Manlia (gens)" label="Manlii"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="219" end="228" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="229" end="235" title="gens" label="gentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q655777" start="315" end="335" title="Battle of the Allia" label="Gallic siege of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="385" end="397" title="Roman mythology" label="mythologized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802565" start="430" end="437" title="Arx (Roman)" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="504" end="509" title="Gauls" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q314911" start="531" end="538" title="Brennus (4th century)" label="Brennus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="562" end="572" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="723" end="732" title="plebs" label="plebeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="920" end="924" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="993" end="1002" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1137" end="1143" title="Roman Senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15842283" start="1204" end="1216" title="Rex (king)" label="kingly power"/>
<link wikidata="Q623086" start="1245" end="1252" title="Roman assemblies" label="comitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q752553" start="1466" end="1479" title="Tarpeian Rock" label="Tarpeian Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q75826" start="1578" end="1586" title="Catiline" label="Catiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="1874" end="1881" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="1965" end="1973" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2113" end="2128" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382859" wikidata="Q291766" url="?curid=382859" title="CQ">
<text>CQ may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;CQ&quot; (film), a 2001 film
* &quot;La CQ&quot;, a Cartoon Network sitcom
* Cinémathèque québécoise, a Montreal film museum

== People ==
* CQ (playwright) or C. Quintana, a Cuban-American playwright, poet, and writer
* Charles Q. Brown Jr., current Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

==Places==
* Cathedral Quarter, Belfast
* Cathedral Quarter, Derby
* Cathedral Quarter, Sheffield
* Central Queensland (geographical division of Queensland)
* Chongqing, China (Guobiao abbreviation CQ)
* Coal Quay, area in Belfast
* Northern Mariana Islands (FIPS Pub 10-4 or obsolete NATO digram CQ)
* Sark, Channel Islands (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 exceptionally reserved code CQ for Sark)

==Publications==
* &quot;CQ Amateur Radio&quot;
* &quot;CQ ham radio&quot;
* CQ Press, a US publisher in government and politics
*&quot;The China Quarterly&quot;, a journal published by Cambridge University Press
* Congressional Quarterly, a US publishing company

==Science and technology==

* Conjunctive query, in relational databases and database theory
* CQ (call), in radio communications, a general call, to anyone who receives it
* Norinco CQ, a variant of the AR-15 rifle
* &quot;Cissus quadrangularis&quot;, medicinal plant from the grape family
* Adobe Experience Manager, formerly CQ, a web content management system

==Other uses==

* &quot;Cadit quaestio&quot;, Latin for &quot;the question falls&quot;, in copy-editing means &quot;has been checked&quot;
* Carrier qualification, qualifications for modern US Navy carrier air operations
* Charge of Quarters, the military task of guarding the front entrance to a barracks
* Communication quotient, in business and organizational psychology
* Constellation Airlines (IATA airline designator CQ)
* Cultural Quotient, in business, education, government and academic research
* Knight of the National Order of Quebec (post-nominal letters CQ)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q291766" start="0" end="2" title="CQ" label="CQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931932" start="47" end="68" title="CQ (film)" label="&amp;quot;CQ&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962602" start="90" end="95" title="La CQ" label="La CQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973248" start="130" end="153" title="Cinémathèque québécoise" label="Cinémathèque québécoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q59660226" start="194" end="209" title="CQ (playwright)" label="CQ (playwright)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081790" start="274" end="294" title="Charles Q. Brown Jr." label="Charles Q. Brown Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="304" end="341" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052267" start="357" end="374" title="Cathedral Quarter, Belfast" label="Cathedral Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q692896" start="386" end="403" title="Cathedral Quarter, Derby" label="Cathedral Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052266" start="413" end="430" title="Cathedral Quarter, Sheffield" label="Cathedral Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061728" start="444" end="462" title="Central Queensland" label="Central Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="503" end="512" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270084" start="548" end="557" title="Coal Quay" label="Coal Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="577" end="601" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405693" start="647" end="651" title="Sark" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013798" start="756" end="772" title="CQ Amateur Radio" label="CQ Amateur Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013799" start="787" end="799" title="CQ ham radio" label="CQ ham radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013796" start="808" end="816" title="CQ Press" label="CQ Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722548" start="867" end="886" title="The China Quarterly" label="The China Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993018" start="946" end="969" title="Congressional Quarterly" label="Congressional Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781706" start="1026" end="1043" title="Conjunctive query" label="Conjunctive query"/>
<link wikidata="Q869389" start="1091" end="1100" title="CQ (call)" label="CQ (call)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502456" start="1171" end="1181" title="Norinco CQ" label="Norinco CQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157164" start="1220" end="1241" title="Cissus quadrangularis" label="Cissus quadrangularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927817" start="1289" end="1313" title="Adobe Experience Manager" label="Adobe Experience Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016505" start="1385" end="1399" title="Cadit quaestio" label="Cadit quaestio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888919" start="1502" end="1523" title="Carrier qualification" label="Carrier qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074265" start="1584" end="1602" title="Charge of Quarters" label="Charge of Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154142" start="1669" end="1691" title="Communication quotient" label="Communication quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348058" start="1737" end="1759" title="Constellation Airlines" label="Constellation Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193379" start="1791" end="1808" title="Cultural intelligence" label="Cultural Quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="1869" end="1907" title="Knight of the National Order of Quebec" label="Knight of the National Order of Quebec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382864" wikidata="Q230059" url="?curid=382864" title="DF">
<text>DF or df may refer to:
==Gaming==
* &quot;DeFRaG&quot;, a modification for the computer game &quot;Quake III Arena&quot;
* &quot;DragonFable&quot;, a 2006 video game by Artix Entertainment
* &quot;Dwarf Fortress&quot;, a 2006 sandbox-style computer game
==Places==
* Distrito Federal (Brazil), or the Federal District
* Distrito Federal (Mexico), or the Federal District, now known as Mexico City

==Politics==
* Danish People&#x27;s Party (&quot;Dansk Folkeparti&quot;)
* Democratic Front (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (Demokratska fronta)
* Democratic Front (Montenegro) (&quot;Demokratski front&quot;)

==Science and technology==
* df (Unix), a Unix command to report disk space usage by a filesystem
* Dairy free, identifying products that contain no milk
* Decapacitation factor, in biochemistry
* Degrees of freedom, various measures in statistics, mathematics and physics
* Density function, a mathematical function with a wide range of applications
* Dielectric loss
* Direction finding, a technique used to locate radio transmitters
* Direction flag, a flag stored in the FLAGS register on all x86-compatible CPUs
* Dissipation factor, a measure of loss-rate of energy of an oscillation mode in a dissipative system
* Dongfeng (missile), a Chinese intercontinental ballistic missile
* Dongfeng series of diesel locomotives
** China Railways DF
** China Railways DF4
** China Railways DF8
* Methylphosphonyl difluoride, a chemical weapons precursor
* Daylight factor (DF), the ratio of the light level inside a structure to the light level outside the structure.

==Other uses==
* Defender (association football)
* Delta Force, a component of the U.S. Army Joint Special Operations Command
* Design Factory, a department of Aalto University
* Duty Free, goods which are free from tax or duty
* New Zealand DF class locomotive (1979)
* Quantum Air (formerly AeBal), Spanish airline (IATA code DF)

==See also==
* Dongfeng (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230059" start="0" end="2" title="DF" label="DF"/>
<link wikidata="Q230059" start="6" end="8" title="DF" label="df"/>
<link wikidata="Q837961" start="42" end="48" title="DeFRaG" label="DeFRaG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702032" start="129" end="140" title="DragonFable" label="DragonFable"/>
<link wikidata="Q248810" start="197" end="211" title="Dwarf Fortress" label="Dwarf Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q119158" start="267" end="292" title="Distrito Federal (Brazil)" label="Distrito Federal (Brazil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="320" end="345" title="Distrito Federal (Mexico)" label="Distrito Federal (Mexico)"/>
<link wikidata="Q507170" start="413" end="439" title="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231807" start="473" end="514" title="Democratic Front (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Democratic Front (Bosnia and Herzegovina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q347411" start="538" end="567" title="Democratic Front (Montenegro)" label="Democratic Front (Montenegro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269484" start="630" end="639" title="df (Unix)" label="df (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="701" end="706" title="Dairy" label="Dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959494" start="757" end="778" title="Decapacitation factor" label="Decapacitation factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119040" start="798" end="816" title="Degrees of freedom" label="Degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="876" end="892" title="Density function" label="Density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417868" start="954" end="969" title="Dielectric loss" label="Dielectric loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="972" end="989" title="Direction finding" label="Direction finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280436" start="1039" end="1053" title="Direction flag" label="Direction flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040795" start="1120" end="1138" title="Dissipation factor" label="Dissipation factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024412" start="1222" end="1240" title="Dongfeng (missile)" label="Dongfeng (missile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871168" start="1330" end="1347" title="China Railways DF" label="China Railways DF"/>
<link wikidata="Q839790" start="1351" end="1369" title="China Railways DF4" label="China Railways DF4"/>
<link wikidata="Q747789" start="1373" end="1391" title="China Railways DF8" label="China Railways DF8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331638" start="1394" end="1421" title="Methylphosphonyl difluoride" label="Methylphosphonyl difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q210269" start="1454" end="1469" title="Daylight factor" label="Daylight factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="1584" end="1615" title="Defender (association football)" label="Defender (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="1618" end="1629" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264268" start="1695" end="1709" title="Design Factory" label="Design Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q545609" start="1746" end="1755" title="Duty Free" label="Duty Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015297" start="1797" end="1835" title="New Zealand DF class locomotive (1979)" label="New Zealand DF class locomotive (1979)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754131" start="1838" end="1849" title="Quantum Air" label="Quantum Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q293764" start="1915" end="1940" title="Dongfeng (disambiguation)" label="Dongfeng (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382866" wikidata="Q937415" url="?curid=382866" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray">
<text>James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray (c. 1531 – 23 January 1570) was a member of the House of Stewart as the illegitimate son of King James V of Scotland. At times a supporter of his half-sister Mary, Queen of Scots, he was the regent of Scotland for his half-nephew, the infant King James VI, from 1567 until his assassination in 1570. He was the first head of government to be assassinated with a firearm.

== Early life ==
Moray was born in about 1531, an illegitimate child of King James V of Scotland and his mistress Lady Margaret Erskine, daughter of John Erskine, 5th Lord Erskine, and wife of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven.

On 31 August 1536, he received a royal charter granting the lands of Tantallon and others. James was appointed Prior of St Andrews, Fife, in 1538. This position supplied his income. Clothes for &quot;lord James of Sanctandrois&quot; and his brothers were made by the king&#x27;s tailor, Thomas Arthur.

Lord James and his half-brother James Stewart, Commendator of Kelso and Melrose were at school in St Andrews after the death of James V. In June 1543, Regent Arran sent the Laird of Grange to collect them and take them to Linlithgow Palace. Instead, Robert Douglas took Lord James to Lochleven Castle.

== Rises in power, advises Queen Mary ==
In May 1553, the imperial ambassador to England, Jean Scheyfve, heard that Mary of Guise planned to make him regent in place of James Hamilton, Duke of Châtellerault. Mary of Guise was the widow of James V and the mother of his only surviving legitimate child, Mary, Queen of Scots, who was living in France at the time and had not yet reached adulthood. Guise herself became regent in 1554.

On 5 August 1557, Moray, his half-brother Lord Robert, and Lord Home led a raiding party from Edinburgh towards Ford Castle in Northumberland and burnt houses at Fenton before retreating on the approach of an English force led by Henry Percy, 8th Earl of Northumberland. In 1558, James attended the wedding in Paris of his half-sister Mary, Queen of Scots, to the Dauphin of France, who became King Francis II of France. To fund this trip, his mother obtained credit from Timothy Cagnioli, an Italian banker in Edinburgh.

James became a supporter of the Scottish Reformation. In June 1559, he plucked down the graven images in various churches at Perth. An English commentator praised James for his virtue, manhood, valour and stoutness as a leader of the Protestant Lords of the Congregation.

Despite their religious differences, Moray became one of the chief advisers to his half-sister Mary after her return from France in 1561. Her return was occasioned by the death of her first husband, King Francis of France. Although James disturbed her priests celebrating mass at Holyroodhouse in September 1561, she made him Earl of Moray and Earl of Mar (the Mar earldom was soon afterwards withdrawn) the following year, both earldoms being new creations. With the lucrative Moray earldom came Darnaway Castle with its medieval hall, notable even then as &quot;verie fayer and large builded.&quot; Moray also had a smaller house called Pitlethie near Leuchars in Fife, which his father had used.

He wrote to Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, a favourite of Queen Elizabeth I of England, in January 1562. In October 1562, Moray defeated a rebellion by George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly, at the Battle of Corrichie near Aberdeen. The very powerful and wealthy Huntly, who controlled large areas of northeastern Scotland, died immediately after this battle. In 1562, Alistair Gunn son-in-law of John Gordon, 11th Earl of Sutherland, led Gordon&#x27;s retinue and encountered James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, and his followers on the High Street of Aberdeen. The Earl of Moray was the bastard half-brother of Mary, Queen of Scots, as well as the son-in-law of William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal, chief of Clan Keith. It was the custom at the time to yield thoroughfares to the personage of greater rank, and in refusing to yield the middle of the street to Stewart and his train, Gunn insulted the Earl publicly. Stewart soon afterward had him pursued to a place called Delvines, near Nairn. There he was captured by Andrew Munro of Milntown and taken to Inverness, and following a mock trial, he was executed.

Moray went to Castle Campbell for the wedding of James Stewart, 1st Lord Doune, and Margaret Campbell (d. 1572), sister of the Earl of Argyll, on 10 January 1563. There was a masque involving courtiers and musicians dressed in white taffeta as shepherds. However, Moray became ill and withdrew to Stirling Castle. Mary, Queen of Scots, was also ill for a week.

== Chaseabout Raid ==

Moray opposed the marriage of his half-sister Mary, to Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, in July 1565, and he embarked upon the unsuccessful Chaseabout Raid, a revolt precipitated by the marriage, together with the Earl of Argyll and Clan Hamilton. He was subsequently declared an outlaw and took refuge in England. It was said that David Rizzio was involved in brokering pardons for Moray and the rebels, which aroused the jealousy of Lord Darnley.

Moray returned to Scotland after the murder of Rizzio, pardoned by the Queen, and once more became one of her key advisers. On 31 August 1566, Moray wrote from Stirling Castle to the treasurer Robert Richardson to ensure Nichola Wardlaw, one of the queen&#x27;s gentlewomen, received a velvet gown for her wedding day. He contrived nonetheless to be away at the time of Darnley&#x27;s assassination in 1567. He avoided the entanglements of Mary&#x27;s disastrous marriage to James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell, which followed the Darnley murder by mere weeks, by removing himself to France.

== The Gude Regent ==

Mary was forced into abdication at Lochleven Castle on 24 July 1567, where she was imprisoned for more than nine months. Moray returned to Edinburgh from France on 11 August 1567 by way of Berwick-upon-Tweed. William Cecil, the English Secretary of State, had arranged his transport from Dieppe in an English ship. He was appointed Regent of Scotland on 22 August for the infant King James VI (born 19 June 1566), son of Queen Mary and Lord Darnley. The appointment was confirmed by Parliament in December. To raise money, Moray sent his agent Nicolas Elphinstone to London to sell Mary&#x27;s jewels and pearls. Moray bought clothes for his lackeys and an African servant called Nageir the Moor in February 1568.

Mary escaped from Loch Leven on 2 May 1568, and the Duke of Châtellerault and other nobles rallied to her standard. Moray gathered his allies and defeated her forces at the Battle of Langside, near Glasgow, on 13 May 1568. Mary was compelled to flee and decided to seek refuge in England. She could have departed for France if she had liked, where she retained the status of queen dowager; however, this would have taken more time and resources to arrange.

For the subsequent management of the kingdom without Mary as queen, he secured both civil and ecclesiastical peace and earned the title of &quot;The Gude Regent&quot;. In August 1568, it was reported that Moray refused a letter from Mary&#x27;s supporter Lord Herries that was addressed simply to the &quot;Earl of Moray&quot; without his new title of Regent of Scotland.

=== York conference ===
In September 1568, Moray chose commissioners and travelled to York to discuss a treaty with England. Moray had a list of allegations against Mary compiled, known as the Book of Articles, which he sent to Cecil. During this conference, he produced the Casket letters, which were supposed to incriminate Queen Mary and justify his rule in Scotland. It was later said that a plan to assassinate him at Northallerton, Yorkshire, on his way back had been called off.

=== Military activities ===
Scotland was now in a state of civil war. Moray moved against the supporters of Queen Mary in their south-west homelands with a military expedition in June 1568 called the &#x27;Raid of Dumfries&#x27; or &#x27;Raid of Hoddom.&#x27; The Regent&#x27;s army and the royal artillery were taken to Biggar, where his allies were commanded to muster on 10 June and proceed on to Dumfries. The army was protected by a scouting party led by Alexander Hume of Manderston, and the vanguard was commanded by the Earl of Morton and Lord Home. Behind was the &#x27;carriage&#x27; (the artillery train), followed by Moray himself. The Laird of Cessford followed behind, and the army was flanked by the scouting parties of the Lairds of Merse and Buccleuch.

Along the way, Moray captured houses belonging to supporters of Queen Mary, including Lord Fleming&#x27;s Boghall, Skirling, Crawford, Sanquhar, Kenmure and Hoddom, where the cannon were deployed, and Annan, where he rendezvoused with Lord Scrope (the Captain of Carlisle Castle), to discuss border matters. Scrope estimated the army to number 6,000 men and returned to Carlisle, where he saw Queen Mary&#x27;s servants play football on 14 June. Moray then took Lochmaben Castle, which the Laird of Drumlanrig was left to hold, and then captured Lochwood and Lochhouse before returning to Edinburgh via Peebles. At Dumfries, a number of Lord Maxwell&#x27;s supporters surrendered. Moray was responsible for the destruction of Rutherglen castle, which he burned to the ground in 1569 in retribution against the Hamiltons for having supported Mary at the Battle of Langside.

In June 1569, Moray went north to Brechin, where he accepted hostages sent by George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly. At Dunnotar Castle, he proclaimed that he had &quot;reparit (arrived) in proper person (as Regent) to thir north partis of firm purpose and deliberation to reduce sic as hes neglectit their duty in time bypast ... intending to use lenitie (leniency) and moderation.&quot;

At Aberdeen, Moray held talks with Huntly himself. At Inverness, on 4 June 1569, Moray met the Highland and Island chiefs with the Earls of Caithness and Sutherland and Lord Lovat. His secretary, John Wood, said &quot;such a power had seldom been seen there,&quot; Moray wrote that &quot;the journey is to put down troubles in the north.&quot;

In March 1569 Moray came from Kelso to Liddesdale and spoke to the English border warden, Sir John Forster. He was accompanied by Lord Home, Ker of Cessford, Ker of Ferniehirst, Scot of Buccleuch and 4,000 men. After holding unsatisfactory talks with the local leaders, &quot;the best of the surname men&quot;, Moray burned the farmsteads in Liddesdale. He stayed at Mangerton, then had the house blown up with gunpowder and returned to Jedburgh.

== Marriages and issue ==
* Christina Stewart, 4th Countess of Buchan (c. 1548 – 20 September 1580), In January 1549/1550, though Christina was only a young child, a contract of marriage was arranged between her and James Stewart, afterwards Earl of Moray and Regent, which would give him possession of her lands; 
* Agnes Keith (c. 1540 – 16 July 1588), On 8 February 1562 at St Giles Cathedral in Edinburgh. daughter of William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal The marriage ceremony had most Scottish nobility present who afterwards attended a huge reception at Holyrood Palace. The marriage produced three daughters:
** Elizabeth Stuart, 2nd Countess of Moray (August 1565 – 18 November 1591), married James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray, on 23 January 1581;
** Lady Annabel Stuart (? – before 1572);
** Lady Margaret Stuart (8 April 1569 – 1586), contract for the marriage signed on 27 June 1584 with Francis Hay, 9th Earl of Erroll, without issue.

== Assassination ==
On Thursday 19 January 1570, Moray was at Stirling Castle, where he had invited the English diplomat Sir Henry Gates and the soldier Sir William Drury, Marshal of Berwick, for dinner in the Great Hall. Later, in his bedchamber, he told the English visitors he would meet them and certain Scottish nobles at Edinburgh on Monday or Tuesday to discuss the rendition of English rebels. Moray was troubled by the problem of Dumbarton Castle, which was held against him by supporters of Mary, Queen of Scots. On 21 January, he sent letters to summon the Earl of Morton, Lindsay and Home to the meeting in Edinburgh.

Moray was assassinated in Linlithgow on 23 January 1570 by James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh, a supporter of his half-sister Mary. As Moray was passing in a cavalcade in the main street below, Hamilton fatally wounded him with a carbine shot from a window of his uncle Archbishop Hamilton&#x27;s house. He was the first head of government to be assassinated by a firearm.

Moray&#x27;s body was shipped to Leith, then taken to Holyrood Abbey. Moray was buried on 14 February 1570 in St Anthony&#x27;s aisle at St Giles&#x27; Cathedral, Edinburgh. Seven earls and lords carried his body; William Kirkcaldy of Grange held his standard, and John Knox preached at the funeral. Knox&#x27;s own prohibition of funeral sermons (on the grounds that they glorified the deceased and displayed distinctions between rich and poor) was waived for the occasion. Moray&#x27;s tomb was carved by John Roytell and Murdoch Walker, with a brass engraved by James Gray. The contract for the tomb survives. It was written by the chaplain Robert Ewyn, the administrator of the craft of masons and wrights in Edinburgh.

His wife, Agnes Keith, was buried inside his tomb when she died in 1588.

Moray was succeeded by his eldest daughter and heir, Elizabeth Stewart, 2nd Countess of Moray, whose husband, James Stewart of Doune, acquired the earldom on their marriage.

== Cultural depictions ==
A stained-glass window installed in St. Giles&#x27; Cathedral, Edinburgh in the 1880s depicts Moray&#x27;s assassination and John Knox preaching at his funeral. There is a bas-relief sculpture by Amelia Hill in Linlithgow commemorating the assassination and a Regent Moray Street near the Kelvin Hall in Glasgow.

The Earl of Moray is depicted in many fictional works which focus on the life and times of Mary, Queen of Scots. These include the following:
* Sir Walter Scott&#x27;s 1820 novel &quot;The Monastery&quot;, identified as the Earl of Murray;
* The 1923 film &quot;The Loves of Mary, Queen of Scots&quot;, portrayed by Lionel d&#x27;Aragon;
* The 1936 film &quot;Mary of Scotland&quot;, portrayed by Ian Keith;
* The 1940 film &quot;Das Herz der Königin&quot;, portrayed by Walther Suessenguth;
* The 1971 film &quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot;, portrayed by Patrick McGoohan;
* Thea Musgrave&#x27;s 1977 opera &quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot;;
* The 2013–2017 television series &quot;Reign&quot;, portrayed by Dan Jeannotte;
* The 2018 film &quot;Mary Queen of Scots&quot;, portrayed by James McArdle.

== Ancestors ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="0" end="32" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="81" end="97" title="House of Stewart" label="House of Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="130" end="137" title="James V" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="191" end="211" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q173843" start="224" end="242" title="regent of Scotland" label="regent of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="280" end="288" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="482" end="501" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q532354" start="524" end="540" title="Margaret Erskine" label="Margaret Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231896" start="554" end="584" title="John Erskine, 5th Lord Erskine" label="John Erskine, 5th Lord Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q91929538" start="598" end="616" title="Robert Douglas of Lochleven" label="Sir Robert Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266807" start="620" end="629" title="Loch Leven (Kinross)" label="Lochleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="665" end="678" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q57803" start="701" end="710" title="Tantallon Castle" label="Tantallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245440" start="743" end="762" title="Prior of St Andrews" label="Prior of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="764" end="768" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q107123195" start="919" end="932" title="Thomas Arthur (tailor)" label="Thomas Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342114" start="967" end="1014" title="James Stewart, Commendator of Kelso and Melrose" label="James Stewart, Commendator of Kelso and Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="1033" end="1043" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="1086" end="1098" title="Regent Arran" label="Regent Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137388" start="1108" end="1123" title="James Kirkcaldy" label="Laird of Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q564868" start="1157" end="1174" title="Linlithgow Palace" label="Linlithgow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q514388" start="1219" end="1235" title="Lochleven Castle" label="Lochleven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113401" start="1328" end="1341" title="Jean Scheyfve" label="Jean Scheyfve"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="1354" end="1367" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="1407" end="1444" title="James Hamilton, Duke of Châtellerault" label="James Hamilton, Duke of Châtellerault"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="1540" end="1560" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719150" start="1731" end="1740" title="Alexander Home, 5th Lord Home" label="Lord Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1766" end="1775" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185866" start="1784" end="1795" title="Ford Castle" label="Ford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="1799" end="1813" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790391" start="1902" end="1941" title="Henry Percy, 8th Earl of Northumberland" label="Henry Percy, 8th Earl of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123593181" start="1971" end="1987" title="Wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Francis, Dauphin of France" label="wedding in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="2071" end="2091" title="Francis II of France" label="Francis II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q96221031" start="2144" end="2160" title="Timothy Cagnioli" label="Timothy Cagnioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="2227" end="2247" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="2320" end="2325" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446391" start="2440" end="2465" title="Lords of the Congregation" label="Lords of the Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="2748" end="2761" title="Holyroodhouse" label="Holyroodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q606844" start="2794" end="2807" title="Earl of Moray" label="Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="2812" end="2823" title="Earl of Mar" label="Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224104" start="2965" end="2980" title="Darnaway Castle" label="Darnaway Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011960" start="3122" end="3130" title="Leuchars" label="Leuchars"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="3134" end="3138" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="3180" end="3216" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3239" end="3261" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q495531" start="3327" end="3360" title="George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly" label="George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870792" start="3369" end="3388" title="Battle of Corrichie" label="Battle of Corrichie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="3394" end="3402" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235735" start="3568" end="3604" title="John Gordon, 11th Earl of Sutherland" label="John Gordon, 11th Earl of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="3722" end="3730" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="3782" end="3802" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616592" start="3833" end="3866" title="William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal" label="William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936830" start="4189" end="4213" title="Munro of Milntown" label="Andrew Munro of Milntown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975734" start="4298" end="4313" title="Castle Campbell" label="Castle Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q75268485" start="4333" end="4362" title="James Stewart, 1st Lord Doune" label="James Stewart, 1st Lord Doune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368509" start="4411" end="4425" title="Archibald Campbell, 5th Earl of Argyll" label="Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q909391" start="4517" end="4524" title="taffeta" label="taffeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="4581" end="4596" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q312381" start="4724" end="4750" title="Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley" label="Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087234" start="4804" end="4819" title="Chaseabout Raid" label="Chaseabout Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368509" start="4878" end="4892" title="Archibald Campbell, 5th Earl of Argyll" label="Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039257" start="4897" end="4910" title="Clan Hamilton" label="Clan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="4944" end="4950" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q769549" start="4996" end="5008" title="David Rizzio" label="David Rizzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="5274" end="5289" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836758" start="5297" end="5306" title="treasurer of Scotland" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349275" start="5307" end="5324" title="Robert Richardson (Lord Treasurer)" label="Robert Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130485679" start="5335" end="5350" title="Nicolas Wardlaw, Lady Bonnyton" label="Nichola Wardlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q361184" start="5589" end="5624" title="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell" label="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150804" start="5751" end="5761" title="Act Anent the demission of the Crown in favour of our Sovereign Lord, and his Majesty&amp;#x27;s Coronation 1567" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q514388" start="5765" end="5781" title="Lochleven Castle" label="Lochleven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="5919" end="5937" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="5939" end="5952" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="William Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="6018" end="6024" title="Dieppe" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q173843" start="6062" end="6080" title="Regent of Scotland" label="Regent of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="6213" end="6223" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q96220156" start="6274" end="6293" title="Nicolas Elphinstone" label="Nicolas Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858307" start="6312" end="6341" title="jewels of Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary&amp;#x27;s jewels and pearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q114088923" start="6410" end="6425" title="Nageir the Moor" label="Nageir the Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="6497" end="6518" title="James Hamilton, Duke of Châtellerault" label="Duke of Châtellerault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087439" start="6618" end="6636" title="Battle of Langside" label="Battle of Langside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="6643" end="6650" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6997" end="7011" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q18731731" start="7158" end="7170" title="John Maxwell, 4th Lord Herries of Terregles" label="Lord Herries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="7362" end="7366" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q125358499" start="7469" end="7485" title="Book of Articles" label="Book of Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048965" start="7551" end="7565" title="Casket letters" label="Casket letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q920381" start="7699" end="7712" title="Northallerton" label="Northallerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="7714" end="7723" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762017" start="7822" end="7831" title="Marian civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250089" start="8084" end="8090" title="Biggar, South Lanarkshire" label="Biggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="8163" end="8171" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222930" start="8233" end="8237" title="Clan Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747989" start="8241" end="8251" title="Manderston" label="Manderston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266779" start="8291" end="8305" title="James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton" label="Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719150" start="8310" end="8319" title="Alexander Home, 5th Lord Home" label="Lord Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065559" start="8420" end="8428" title="Cessford Castle" label="Cessford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966089" start="8522" end="8531" title="Walter Scott, 4th Baron of Buccleuch" label="Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233415" start="8620" end="8632" title="John Fleming, 5th Lord Fleming" label="Lord Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626447" start="8649" end="8657" title="List of listed buildings in Skirling, Scottish Borders" label="Skirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182835" start="8659" end="8667" title="Crawford Castle" label="Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q996600" start="8669" end="8677" title="Sanquhar" label="Sanquhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893264" start="8679" end="8686" title="Kenmure Castle" label="Kenmure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875994" start="8691" end="8697" title="Hoddom" label="Hoddom"/>
<link wikidata="Q564495" start="8735" end="8740" title="Annan, Dumfries and Galloway" label="Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728148" start="8769" end="8780" title="Henry Scrope, 9th Baron Scrope of Bolton" label="Lord Scrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="8797" end="8812" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920767" start="8996" end="9012" title="Lochmaben Castle" label="Lochmaben Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132756" start="9024" end="9043" title="James Douglas, 7th Baron Drumlanrig" label="Laird of Drumlanrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011507" start="9137" end="9144" title="Peebles" label="Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247267" start="9171" end="9183" title="John Maxwell, 8th Lord Maxwell" label="Lord Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11045622" start="9260" end="9277" title="Rutherglen castle" label="Rutherglen castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45848" start="9442" end="9449" title="Brechin" label="Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q351198" start="9486" end="9519" title="George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly" label="George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q746983" start="9524" end="9539" title="Dunnotar Castle" label="Dunnotar Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="9797" end="9805" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="9848" end="9857" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669851" start="9889" end="9915" title="Scottish clan chief" label="Highland and Island chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869887" start="9963" end="9973" title="Lord Lovat" label="Lord Lovat"/>
<link wikidata="Q654945" start="10169" end="10174" title="Kelso, Scottish Borders" label="Kelso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238140" start="10178" end="10188" title="Liddesdale" label="Liddesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065559" start="10287" end="10295" title="Cessford Castle" label="Cessford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445113" start="10304" end="10315" title="Ferniehirst Castle" label="Ferniehirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q107392814" start="10506" end="10515" title="Mangerton Tower" label="Mangerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110876" start="10615" end="10656" title="Christina Stewart, 4th Countess of Buchan" label="Christina Stewart, 4th Countess of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q606844" start="10829" end="10842" title="Earl of Moray" label="Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q173843" start="10847" end="10853" title="Regent of Scotland" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693069" start="10904" end="10915" title="Agnes Keith, Countess of Moray" label="Agnes Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="10964" end="10982" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="10986" end="10995" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616592" start="11009" end="11042" title="William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal" label="William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="11144" end="11159" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363584" start="11203" end="11242" title="Elizabeth Stuart, 2nd Countess of Moray" label="Elizabeth Stuart, 2nd Countess of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143627" start="11285" end="11317" title="James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481257" start="11482" end="11513" title="Francis Hay, 9th Earl of Erroll" label="Francis Hay, 9th Earl of Erroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="11593" end="11608" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721834" start="11656" end="11667" title="Henry Gates (MP)" label="Henry Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568571" start="11688" end="11701" title="William Drury" label="William Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q427513" start="11904" end="11931" title="Rising of the North" label="rendition of English rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="11970" end="11986" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266779" start="12099" end="12113" title="James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton" label="Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719150" start="12127" end="12131" title="Alexander Home, 5th Lord Home" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016911" start="12188" end="12198" title="Linlithgow" label="Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680520" start="12221" end="12252" title="James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh" label="James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737226" start="12317" end="12326" title="cavalcade" label="cavalcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="12389" end="12396" title="Matchlock" label="carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q711983" start="12429" end="12448" title="John Hamilton (archbishop of St Andrews)" label="Archbishop Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="12566" end="12571" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="12670" end="12694" title="St Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral" label="St Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q934847" start="12747" end="12774" title="William Kirkcaldy of Grange" label="William Kirkcaldy of Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="12798" end="12807" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320039" start="13057" end="13071" title="Murdoch Walker" label="Murdoch Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107803333" start="13098" end="13108" title="James Gray (goldsmith)" label="James Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363584" start="13385" end="13425" title="Elizabeth Stewart, 2nd Countess of Moray" label="Elizabeth Stewart, 2nd Countess of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143627" start="13442" end="13464" title="James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart of Doune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="13535" end="13555" title="stained-glass window" label="stained-glass window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="13569" end="13594" title="St. Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral" label="St. Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="13658" end="13667" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="13705" end="13715" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308747" start="13729" end="13740" title="Amelia Hill" label="Amelia Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386674" start="13822" end="13833" title="Kelvin Hall" label="Kelvin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="13991" end="14007" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224650" start="14032" end="14045" title="The Monastery" label="The Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749079" start="14109" end="14142" title="The Loves of Mary, Queen of Scots" label="The Loves of Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627854" start="14163" end="14183" title="Lionel d&amp;#x27;Aragon" label="Lionel d&amp;#x27;Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154202" start="14207" end="14223" title="Mary of Scotland (film)" label="Mary of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541016" start="14244" end="14253" title="Ian Keith" label="Ian Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168931" start="14277" end="14297" title="Das Herz der Königin" label="Das Herz der Königin"/>
<link wikidata="Q119573" start="14318" end="14337" title="Walther Suessenguth" label="Walther Suessenguth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856597" start="14361" end="14381" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (1971 film)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q298908" start="14402" end="14418" title="Patrick McGoohan" label="Patrick McGoohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q539794" start="14422" end="14435" title="Thea Musgrave" label="Thea Musgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601323" start="14460" end="14480" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (opera)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099470" start="14528" end="14533" title="Reign (TV series)" label="Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q30728970" start="14554" end="14567" title="Dan Jeannotte" label="Dan Jeannotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q37909408" start="14591" end="14610" title="Mary Queen of Scots (2018 film)" label="Mary Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139160" start="14631" end="14644" title="James McArdle" label="James McArdle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382871" wikidata="Q483217" url="?curid=382871" title="HB">
<text>HB or Hb may refer to:

==Academia==
* H-b index, an extension of the h-index used in determining academic impact
* H-B Woodlawn, a secondary education program in Arlington, Virginia, US
* Hathaway Brown School, an all-girls private school in Shaker Heights, Ohio, US

==Arts and media==
* HB (band), a Finnish Christian symphonic metal musical group
* Hanna-Barbera, a former American production company
* Heaven Below, an American rock band
* Helluva Boss, an adult animated TV show

==Businesses and brands==
* HB (car), a 1920s automobile
* HB (cigarette), a German brand of cigarettes
* HB Construction, a private US general contractor construction business
* HB Ice Cream, an Irish brand
* Asia Atlantic Airlines (IATA code HB; ceased)
* Greater Bay Airlines (IATA code: HB), an airline based in Hong Kong
* Hamilton Bradshaw, a London-based private equity firm
* Hampton and Branchville Railroad (H&amp;B)
* Holland &amp; Barrett (H&amp;B), a UK health food shop chain
* Hasbro, an American toy company
* HB, logo for the Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München, also &quot;Hofbräu München&quot;, a brewery owned by the Bavaria government

==Places==
* Bremen (state) (license plate: HB), a German state
* Hanuabada, a village in Papua New Guinea, known as HB to the locals
* Hermosa Beach, California, a city in southern California, US
* Hubei (Guobiao abbreviation HB), a province of China
* Huntington Beach, California, a city in southern California, US
* Switzerland and Liechtenstein (aircraft registration prefix), distinguished by use of emblems
* Zürich Hauptbahnhof (often shortened to HB), the central train station in Zürich, Switzerland

==Science and technology==
* Ford-Cosworth HB engine, a Formula One racing engine
* HB pencil (hard black), a classification of pencils
* HB, a flammability rating as set forth in UL 94
* Horizontal branch, in astrophysics
* HB, a level in the Brinell scale hardness test

==Medicine==

* Heart block, cardiovascular system disease that involves the heart&#x27;s electrical conduction system
* Hemoglobin (Hb), a group of iron-containing proteins found in most animals, whose primary function is to carry oxygen to the tissues
* Hepatitis B, a human viral infection
* His bundle, a specialized collection of cells in the vertebrate heart

==Sport==
* Half-back line, the positions of three players in Australian rules football
* Halfback (American football), an American football position
* Half back (association football), another name for a midfielder
* Handball (disambiguation), a number of sports
* Havnar Bóltfelag, a football team in the Faroe Islands
* Herfølge Boldklub, a football team in Denmark
* Holstebro Boldklub, a football team in Denmark

==People==
* H. B. Acton (1908–1974), political philosopher
* H. B. Bailey (1936–2003), NASCAR driver
* H. B. Higgins (1851–1929), Australian politician
* H. B. Reese (1879–1956), candy maker
* H. B. Warner (1875–1958), motion picture executive

== Politics ==

* Herri Batasuna, defunct far-left Basque nationalist political party in Spain

==Other uses==
* Half-board, a housing arrangement in which the host provides only breakfast and dinner meals

* Housing Bureau, a policy bureau of the Government of Hong Kong

==See also==
* Hull and Barnsley Railway (H&amp;BR)
* &quot;2HB&quot;, a song by Roxy Music
* HB2, North Carolina House Bill 2
* BH (disambiguation)
* Њ, Nje, a letter of the Cyrillic script</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483217" start="0" end="2" title="HB" label="HB"/>
<link wikidata="Q483217" start="6" end="8" title="HB" label="Hb"/>
<link wikidata="Q310663" start="39" end="48" title="H-b index" label="H-b index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627828" start="116" end="128" title="H-B Woodlawn" label="H-B Woodlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681447" start="189" end="210" title="Hathaway Brown School" label="Hathaway Brown School"/>
<link wikidata="Q176402" start="290" end="299" title="HB (band)" label="HB (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="353" end="366" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694618" start="407" end="419" title="Heaven Below" label="Heaven Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q76759345" start="445" end="457" title="Helluva Boss" label="Helluva Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q819976" start="514" end="522" title="HB (car)" label="HB (car)"/>
<link wikidata="Q596421" start="545" end="559" title="HB (cigarette)" label="HB (cigarette)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765124" start="592" end="607" title="HB Construction" label="HB Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993800" start="665" end="677" title="HB Ice Cream" label="HB Ice Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125952" start="696" end="718" title="Asia Atlantic Airlines" label="Asia Atlantic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q109346639" start="744" end="764" title="Greater Bay Airlines" label="Greater Bay Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644856" start="814" end="831" title="Hamilton Bradshaw" label="Hamilton Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646333" start="870" end="902" title="Hampton and Branchville Railroad" label="Hampton and Branchville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880870" start="915" end="936" title="Holland &amp;amp; Barrett" label="Holland &amp;amp; Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="978" end="984" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q697534" start="1029" end="1063" title="Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München" label="Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209" start="1155" end="1169" title="Bremen (state)" label="Bremen (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651329" start="1208" end="1217" title="Hanuabada" label="Hanuabada"/>
<link wikidata="Q828712" start="1278" end="1303" title="Hermosa Beach, California" label="Hermosa Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="1341" end="1346" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917" start="1396" end="1424" title="Huntington Beach, California" label="Huntington Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211021" start="1493" end="1521" title="List of aircraft registration prefixes" label="aircraft registration prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q224494" start="1558" end="1577" title="Zürich Hauptbahnhof" label="Zürich Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q11332989" start="1682" end="1705" title="Ford-Cosworth HB engine" label="Ford-Cosworth HB engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14674" start="1737" end="1746" title="HB pencil" label="HB pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q697356" start="1833" end="1838" title="UL 94" label="UL 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q50076" start="1841" end="1858" title="Horizontal branch" label="Horizontal branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q714750" start="1897" end="1910" title="Brinell scale" label="Brinell scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361515" start="1942" end="1953" title="Heart block" label="Heart block"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="2047" end="2057" title="Hemoglobin" label="Hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="2182" end="2193" title="Hepatitis B" label="Hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577202" start="2221" end="2231" title="His bundle" label="His bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641586" start="2304" end="2318" title="Half-back line" label="Half-back line"/>
<link wikidata="Q589410" start="2382" end="2410" title="Halfback (American football)" label="Halfback (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="2444" end="2476" title="Half back (association football)" label="Half back (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q398407" start="2510" end="2535" title="Handball (disambiguation)" label="Handball (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q369420" start="2558" end="2574" title="Havnar Bóltfelag" label="Havnar Bóltfelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q289720" start="2615" end="2632" title="Herfølge Boldklub" label="Herfølge Boldklub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037974" start="2663" end="2681" title="Holstebro Boldklub" label="Holstebro Boldklub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628058" start="2724" end="2735" title="H. B. Acton" label="H. B. Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628062" start="2773" end="2785" title="H. B. Bailey" label="H. B. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628078" start="2815" end="2828" title="H. B. Higgins" label="H. B. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628080" start="2866" end="2877" title="H. B. Reese" label="H. B. Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562547" start="2905" end="2917" title="H. B. Warner" label="H. B. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748435" start="2975" end="2989" title="Herri Batasuna" label="Herri Batasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399402" start="3070" end="3080" title="Half-board" label="Half-board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075477" start="3166" end="3180" title="Housing Bureau" label="Housing Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q659169" start="3245" end="3270" title="Hull and Barnsley Railway" label="Hull and Barnsley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633125" start="3290" end="3293" title="2HB" label="2HB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23785494" start="3324" end="3327" title="HB2" label="HB2"/>
<link wikidata="Q218025" start="3359" end="3378" title="BH (disambiguation)" label="BH (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108" start="3381" end="3382" title="Nje" label="Њ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382879" wikidata="Q212667" url="?curid=382879" title="Gnaeus Naevius">
<text>Gnaeus Naevius (; c. 270 – c. 201 BC) was a Roman epic poet and dramatist of the Old Latin period. He had a notable literary career at Rome until his satiric comments delivered in comedy angered the Metellus family, one of whom was consul. After a sojourn in prison he recanted and was set free by the tribunes (who had the tribunician power, in essence the power of habeas corpus). After a second offense he was exiled to Tunisia, where he wrote his own epitaph and committed suicide. His comedies were in the genre of Palliata Comoedia, an adaptation of Greek New Comedy. A soldier in the Punic Wars, he was highly patriotic, inventing a new genre called &quot;Praetextae Fabulae&quot;, an extension of tragedy to Roman national figures or incidents, named after the &quot;Toga praetexta&quot; worn by high officials. Of his writings there survive only fragments of several poems preserved in the citations of late ancient grammarians (Charisius, Aelius Donatus, Sextus Pompeius Festus, Aulus Gellius, Isidorus Hispalensis, Macrobius, Nonius Marcellus, Priscian, Marcus Terentius Varro).

==Biography==

Much of the information concerning the life of Naevius is coloured by uncertainty. Aulus Gellius describes the epitaph of Naevius as demonstrating &quot;Campanian arrogance,&quot; based on which statement it has been suggested that Naevius was a native of Campania. The phrase &quot;Campanian arrogance&quot; seems, however, to have been a proverbial or idiomatic phrase indicating boastfulness. Further, the fact that there was a plebeian gens Naevia in Rome, makes it quite possible, even likely, that Naevius was a Roman citizen by birth. He served either in the Roman army or among the &quot;socii&quot; in the First Punic War, and thus must have reached manhood before 241.

His career as a dramatic author began with the exhibition of a drama in or about the year 235, and continued for thirty years. Towards the close he incurred the hostility of some of the nobility, especially, it is said, of the Metelli, by the attacks which he made upon them on the stage, and at their insistence he was imprisoned. After writing two plays during his imprisonment, in which he is said to have apologized for his former rudeness, he was liberated through the interference of the tribunes of the commons; but he had shortly afterwards to retire from Rome (in or about 204) to Utica. It may have been during his exile, when withdrawn from his active career as a dramatist, that he composed or completed his poem on the First Punic War. Probably his latest composition was his own epitaph, written in saturnian verse:

If these lines were dictated by a jealousy of the growing ascendancy of Ennius, the life of Naevius must have been prolonged considerably beyond 204, the year in which Ennius began his career as an author in Rome. Unlike Livius Andronicus, Naevius was a native Italian, not a Greek; he was also an original writer, not a mere adapter or translator. If it is due to Livius that the forms of Latin literature were, from the first, molded on those of Greek literature, it is due to Naevius that much of its spirit and substance was of native growth.

==Works==
Like Livius, Naevius professed to adapt Greek tragedies and comedies to the Roman stage. Among the titles of his tragedies are &quot;Aegisthus&quot;, &quot;Lycurgus&quot;, &quot;Andromache&quot; or &quot;Hector Proficiscens&quot;, &quot;Equus Troianus&quot;, the last named being performed at the opening of Pompey&#x27;s theatre (55 BC). The national cast of his genius and temper was shown by his deviating from his Greek originals, and producing at least two specimens of the &quot;fabula praetexta&quot; (national drama), one founded on the childhood of Romulus and Remus (&quot;Lupus&quot; or &quot;Alimonium Romuli et Remi&quot;), the other called &quot;Clastidium&quot;, which celebrated the victory of Marcus Claudius Marcellus over the Celts (222 BC).

But it was as a writer of comedy that he was most famous, most productive and most original. While he is never ranked as a writer of tragedy with Ennius, Pacuvius, or Accius, he is placed in the canon of the grammarian Volcatius Sedigitus third (immediately after Caecilius and Plautus) in the rank of Roman comic authors. He is there characterized as ardent and impetuous in character and style. He is also appealed to, with Plautus and Ennius, as a master of his art in one of the prologues of Terence. Naevius&#x27; comedy, like that of Plautus, seems to have been rather a free adaptation of his originals than a rude copy of them, as those of Livius probably were, or an artistic copy like those of Terence. The titles of most of them, like those of Plautus, and unlike those of Caecilius and Terence, are Latin, not Greek. He drew from the writers of the old political comedy of Athens, as well as from the new comedy of manners, and he attempted to make the stage at Rome, as it had been at Athens, an arena of political and personal warfare. A strong spirit of partisanship is recognized in more than one of the fragments; and this spirit is thoroughly popular and adverse to the senatorial ascendancy which became more and more confirmed with the progress of the second Punic war. Besides his attack on the Metelli and other members of the aristocracy, the great Scipio is the object of a censorious criticism on account of a youthful escapade attributed to him. Among the few lines still remaining from his lost comedies, we seem to recognize the idiomatic force and rapidity of movement characteristic of the style of Plautus. There is also found that love of alliteration which is a marked feature in all the older Latin poets down even to Lucretius.

He was not only the oldest native dramatist, but the first author of an epic poem (Bellum Punicum) which, by combining the representation of actual contemporary history with a mythical background, may be said to have created the Roman type of epic poetry. The poem was one continuous work, but was divided into seven books by a grammarian of a later age. The earlier part of it treated of the mythical adventures of Aeneas in Sicily, Carthage, and Italy, and borrowed from the interview of Zeus and Thetis in the first book of the &quot;Iliad&quot; the idea of the interview of Jupiter and Venus; which Virgil has made one of the cardinal passages in the &quot;Aeneid&quot;. The later part treated of the events of the First Punic War in the style of a metrical chronicle. An important influence in Roman literature and belief, which had its origin in Sicily, first appeared in this poem: the recognition of the mythical connection of Aeneas and his Trojans with the foundation of Rome. The few remaining fragments produce the impression of vivid and rapid narrative, to which the flow of the native Saturnian verse, in contradistinction to the weighty and complex structure of the hexameter, was naturally adapted.

The impression we get of the man is that, whether or not he actually enjoyed the full rights of Roman citizenship, he was a vigorous representative of the bold combative spirit of the ancient Roman commons. He was one of those who made the Latin language into a great organ of literature. The phrases still quoted from him have nothing of an antiquated sound, though they have a genuinely idiomatic ring. As a dramatist he worked more in the spirit of Plautus than of Ennius, Pacuvius, Accius, or Terence; but the great Umbrian humorist is separated from his older contemporary, not only by his breadth of comic power, but by his general attitude of moral and political indifference. The power of Naevius was the more genuine Italian gift, the power of satiric criticism which was employed in making men ridiculous; not, like that of Plautus, in extracting amusement from the humours, follies and eccentricities of life. Although our means of forming a fair estimate of Naevius are scanty, all that we do know of him leads to the conclusion that he was far from being the least among the makers of Roman literature, and that with the loss of his writings there was lost a vein of national feeling and genius which rarely reappears.

==Surviving titles and fragments==
===Editions===
* M. Barchiesi. &quot;Nevio epico; storia, interpretazione, edizione critica dei frammenti del primo epos latino&quot;, Padova, 1962
* Fragments (dramas) in Lucian Müller, &quot;Livi Andronici et Gn. Naevi Fabularum Reliquiae&quot; (1885), and (&quot;Bellum Punicum&quot;) in his edition of Ennius (1884).
* W. Morel, &quot;Fragmenta Poetarum Latinorum Epicorum et Lyricorum praeter Ennium et Lucilium&quot; (Leipzig, 1927)
* E. H. Warmington, &quot;Remains of Old Latin&quot;, vol. II, Livius Andronicus, Naevius, Pacuvius, Accius, 1936.
*&quot;Naeuius Poeta. Introduzione bibliografica. Testo dei frammenti e commento&quot;, éd. E. V. Marmorale, Florence, 2e éd. 1950.
* Alfred Klotz, &quot;Scaenicorum Romanorum fragmenta&quot;, vol. I, Tragicorum fragmenta, München, 1953.

==See also==

* Old Latin
* Saturnian (poetry)
* Theatre of ancient Rome

==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
* Barchiesi, M. (1978). &quot;La Tarentilla revisitata: studi su Nevio comico&quot;, Pisa: Giardini.
* Berchem, M. J. (1861). &quot;De Gn. Naevii poetae vita et scriptis&quot;, Monasterii: Coppenrath.
* Biggs, T. (2020). &quot;Poetics of the First Punic War.&quot; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
* Conte, G. B. (1994). Latin Literature: A History. Translated by Joseph B. Solodow. Revised by Don Fowler and Glenn W. Most. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Crivellari, V. (1889). &quot;Quae praecipue hausit Vergilius ex Naevio et Ennio&quot; . (On Virgil&#x27;s indebtedness to Naevius and Ennius.)
* de Melo, W. (2014). Plautus&#x27;s Dramatic Predecessors and Contemporaries in Rome. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Greek and Roman Comedy&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* de Moor, D. (1877). Cn. Névius, essai sur les commencements de la poésie à Rome&quot;, Tournai: Decallonne-Liagre.
* Faber, R. (2012). The Ekphrasis in Naevius&#x27; &quot;Bellum Punicum&quot; and Hellenistic Literary Aesthetics. &quot;Hermes&quot;, 140(4), 417–426.
* Feeney, D. C. (1991). The Gods in Epic: Poets and Critics of the Classical Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Flintoff, E. (1988). Naevius and Roman Satire. &quot;Latomus&quot;, 47(3), 593–603.
* Jocelyn, H. D. (1969). The Poet Cn. Naevius, P. Cornelius Scipio, and Q. Caecilius Metellus. &quot;Antichthon&quot; 3:32–47.
* Krostenko, B. (2013). The Poetics of Naevius&#x27; &#x27;Epitaph&#x27; and the History of Latin Poetry. &quot;The Journal of Roman Studies&quot;, 103, 46–64.
* Luck, G. (1983). Naevius and Virgil. &quot;Illinois Classical Studies&quot;, 8(2), 267–275. 
* Manuwald, Gesine, ed. (2000). Identität und Alterität in der frührömischen Tragödie. Identitäten und Alteritäten, Bd. 3, Altertumswiss. Reihe, Bd. 1. Würzburg, Germany: Universitats Verlag.
* Mommsen, T. &quot;History of Rome&quot;, bk. iii, ch. 24.
* Rowell, H. (1947). The Original Form of Naevius&#x27; Bellum Punicum. &quot;The American Journal of Philology&quot;, 68(1), 21–46.

==External links==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212667" start="0" end="14" title="Gnaeus Naevius" label="Gnaeus Naevius"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="55" end="59" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="64" end="73" title="dramatist" label="dramatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289" start="81" end="90" title="Old Latin" label="Old Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q781493" start="199" end="207" title="Metelli" label="Metellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="324" end="341" title="tribunician power" label="tribunician power"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="367" end="380" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469987" start="520" end="537" title="Fabula palliata" label="Palliata Comoedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100736" start="562" end="572" title="New Comedy" label="New Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="591" end="601" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q780548" start="663" end="681" title="Praetexta" label="Praetextae Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="775" end="789" title="Toga praetexta" label="Toga praetexta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001949" start="938" end="947" title="Charisius" label="Charisius"/>
<link wikidata="Q247137" start="949" end="963" title="Aelius Donatus" label="Aelius Donatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302723" start="965" end="987" title="Sextus Pompeius Festus" label="Sextus Pompeius Festus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294800" start="989" end="1002" title="Aulus Gellius" label="Aulus Gellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="1004" end="1024" title="Isidorus Hispalensis" label="Isidorus Hispalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313934" start="1026" end="1035" title="Macrobius" label="Macrobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q183420" start="1037" end="1053" title="Nonius Marcellus" label="Nonius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q356433" start="1055" end="1063" title="Priscian" label="Priscian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="1065" end="1087" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Marcus Terentius Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="1362" end="1370" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="1537" end="1545" title="plebeian" label="plebeian"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="1546" end="1550" title="gens" label="gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11924015" start="1551" end="1557" title="Naevia gens" label="Naevia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1561" end="1565" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="1721" end="1736" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q781493" start="2013" end="2020" title="Metelli" label="Metelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q166523" start="2376" end="2381" title="Utica, Tunisia" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571598" start="2599" end="2614" title="Saturnian (poetry)" label="saturnian verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47130" start="2689" end="2695" title="Ennius" label="Ennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193058" start="2838" end="2855" title="Livius Andronicus" label="Livius Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="3483" end="3489" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q780548" start="3660" end="3676" title="Praetexta" label="fabula praetexta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="3733" end="3750" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312306" start="3885" end="3910" title="Marcus Claudius Marcellus" label="Marcus Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3920" end="3925" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="4070" end="4077" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314677" start="4091" end="4099" title="Pacuvius" label="Pacuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q311287" start="4104" end="4110" title="Lucius Accius" label="Accius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="4145" end="4152" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q959633" start="4156" end="4175" title="Volcatius Sedigitus" label="Volcatius Sedigitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q350781" start="4201" end="4210" title="Caecilius Statius" label="Caecilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="4215" end="4222" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172048" start="4433" end="4440" title="Terence" label="Terence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="4822" end="4828" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="5209" end="5225" title="second Punic war" label="second Punic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="5309" end="5315" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="5608" end="5620" title="alliteration" label="alliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="5689" end="5698" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5784" end="5798" title="Bellum Punicum" label="Bellum Punicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="5944" end="5955" title="epic poetry" label="epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="6029" end="6039" title="Philologist" label="grammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="6117" end="6123" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="6127" end="6133" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="6135" end="6143" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="6191" end="6195" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="6200" end="6206" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="6238" end="6243" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="6279" end="6286" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="6291" end="6296" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="6304" end="6310" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="6362" end="6368" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="6651" end="6658" title="Troy" label="Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571598" start="6801" end="6816" title="Saturnian (poetry)" label="Saturnian verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="6883" end="6892" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7158" end="7172" title="Latin language" label="Latin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q172048" start="7415" end="7422" title="Terence" label="Terence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="7438" end="7444" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q71344" start="8358" end="8371" title="Lucian Müller" label="Lucian Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289" start="8995" end="9004" title="Old Latin" label="Old Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571598" start="9007" end="9025" title="Saturnian (poetry)" label="Saturnian (poetry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203607" start="9028" end="9051" title="Theatre of ancient Rome" label="Theatre of ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="10954" end="10961" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Mommsen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382884" wikidata="Q291090" url="?curid=382884" title="China Southern Airlines">
<text>China Southern Airlines (branded as China Southern) is a major airline in China, headquartered in Guangzhou, Guangdong. It is one of the three major airlines in the country, along with Air China and China Eastern Airlines.

Established on 1 July 1988 following the restructuring of CAAC Airlines that acquired and merged several domestic airlines, the airline became the world&#x27;s sixth-largest airline measured by passengers carried and Asia&#x27;s largest airline in fleet size, revenue, and passengers carried. It was the 9th largest airline by brand market in the world in 2024. With its main hubs at Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport and Beijing Daxing International Airport, the airline operates more than 2,000 flights to more than 200 destinations daily and was a member of SkyTeam until 1 January 2019. The airline started a frequent flyer program partnership with American Airlines in March 2019. The logo of the airline consists of a kapok flower (which is also the city flower of Guangzhou) on a blue tail fin. The company slogan is &quot;Fly towards your dreams&quot;.

The parent company of China Southern Airlines Company Limited is China Southern Air Holding Company, a state-owned enterprise that is supervised by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council.

==History and development==
===Founding===

In 1984, the Chinese government disclosed the decision to decentralize the CAAC. Formed in 1949, CAAC was an all-encompassing organization responsible for civil aviation in China as it was tasked with passenger transport, resource development and survey work, air traffic control, aircraft maintenance, and personnel training. Thdecentralizationon decision would result in numerous regional airlines, with four main carriers to be responsible for the majority of international and domestic air traffic: Air China, China Southern Airlines, China Eastern Airlines, and China Southwest Airlines; CAAC itself would be rationalized into a regulatory and administrative organization.

In 1988, CAAC granted its seven regional divisions, among which was the Guangzhou Regional Administration, limited operating autonomy with the status of &quot;associate&quot; airlines. China Southern Airlines began flying under its name and livery in February 1991. At this time, the aircraft operated some 160 flights a day on 100 routes using the Antonov An-24, Boeing 737 and Boeing 757, along with helicopters and agricultural aircraft. In December 1992, the airline placed a US$800-million order for six Boeing 777s and the associated spare parts and training.

The airline completed its decentralization from CAAC when it gained independence on 10 October 1993. As such, the airline could from then on restructure itself into shareholding enterprises, independently arrange external financing, and establish subsidiaries to complement its core enterprise. During the airline&#x27;s early years, the carrier was the dominant domestic carrier. Together with the two major airlines of China – Air China and China Eastern – the airline handled half othe f the passenger traffic carried by all Chinese carriers. Owing to Air China&#x27;s status as the country&#x27;s flag carrier, the airline is entitled to extensive international service rights, with China Eastern and China Southern&#x27;s international networks confined to mainly East Asia and within Asia, respectively. Like other Chinese carriers, China Southern was subjected to CAAC&#x27;s exclusive right to grant operating rights for every prospective route as well as to regulate domestic prices.

===Expansion===
To raise its operating standards and distance itself from mostly unprofitable second and third-tier domestic airlines, the carrier signed agreements with several foreign carriers regarding staff training and aircraft maintenance, with the ultimate aim of being listed on the , possibly as soon as early 1995.

Starting in the mid-1990s, China Southern sought to expand its international reach beyond Asia. In December 1995, the Chinese and United States governments signed an aviation agreement that would allow the commencement of non-stop air services between the two countries. After having been granted the right to establish services to Amsterdam in early 1996, the airline started Guangzhou–Beijing–Amsterdam, its first long-haul route, in November 1996. The following year, the carrier commenced non-stop trans-Pacific services to Los Angeles, as well as services to Brisbane.

The start of European and American services coincided with the arrival of the long-range Boeing 777s, the first of which was delivered in late December 1995, as well as a general expansion and upgrade of the carrier&#x27;s fleet and the associated facilities. Due to engine certification and labor relations issues, the delivery of the first Boeing 777 was more than a month behind schedule. As a result, the carrier considered, but ultimately decided against, leasing the Boeing 747-400, which would have been used to cover anticipated delays as well as to launch trans-Pacific services to the United States. Nevertheless, the airline planned to double its fleet of 67 aircraft. In April 1996, the Chinese government placed an order, on China Southern&#x27;s behalf, for 10 Airbus A320s; the delivery of the first aircraft, and China Southern&#x27;s first Airbus, was made the following year. Guangzhou Aircraft Maintenance Engineering Company, which was jointly established with Lockheed Aircraft Services International and Hutchinson Whampoa, was carrying out expansion of its aircraft maintenance facilities in anticipation of the increase.

To keep pace with fast developments, China Southern raised capital, becoming listed on the Hong Kong and New York Stock Exchanges in July 1997, and raising $600–$700 million. Much of the funds raised were used to facilitate the airline&#x27;s fleet expansion, repayment of debt, and investments in other capital; it followed up with domestic listing in 2003 at the Shanghai Stock Exchange. By 1997, the airline, along with its joint-venture airlines Xiamen Airlines, Shantou Airlines and Guangxi Airlines, was carrying some 15 million passengers per year using about 90 aircraft, operating about 270 routes among 68 destinations and almost 2,450 flights per week. The airline group&#x27;s revenue totaledsome US$1.4 billion with a net income of $90 million.

===Mergers and acquisitions===
The end of the 1990s was a period of consolidation for the Chinese airline industry. Initially, China Southern looked to acquire several smaller non-profitable domestic carriers as it sought to highlight its expansion plans intoaise funds; among the deals was the purchase of 60% shares of Guizhou Airlines. Due to the weakening economy amidst the 1997 Asian financial crisis and intense competition among the some 30 Chinese carriers, in 1998, CAAC considered a comprehensive restructuring of the industry that would see the consolidation of the airlines into three or five carrier groups. At one stage, it was reported that CAAC was contemplating a forced merger of Air China and China Southern. Given the latter&#x27;s dual listing in Hong Kong and New York, it was thought that such a merger would have eased Air China&#x27;s path towardits own share offering. China Southern confirmed that such talks between them were occurring, although they ultimately proved fruitless. Had the merger proceeded, their combined fleets would have numbered some 250 aircraft, which would have made the resultant airline the largest in Asia.

Although there was considerable resistance to CAAC&#x27;s call to rationalise the industry, in July 2000, the administrative body announced that the 10 airlines under its direct management will be merged into three airline groups, revolving around Air China, China Eastern Airlines, and China Southern itself. Within a month, China Southern had started absorbing Zhengzhou-based Zhongyuan Airlines, which at the time operated five Boeing 737s and two Xian Y-7 turboprops. The carrier would later merge with Shenyang-based China Northern Airlines and Urumqi-based Xinjiang Airlines to form China Southern Air Holding Co., a process that took more than two years and would culminate in China Southern&#x27;s acquisition of their US$2 billion&#x27;s worth of assets (as well as $1.8 billion of debt) in November 2004. Consequently, China Southern&#x27;s fleet expanded from some 140 aircraft to over 210. The takeovers meant that the carrier became the main airline atinhenyang and Ürümqi, with passenger numbersjumping from 28.2 million in 2004 to 44.1 million in 2005. As a result, China Southern Airlines became one of the &quot;Big Three&quot; carriers in the country. Since then, it has successively taken over shareholding stocks and joined the equity in numerous Chinese carriers. The airline is the major shareholder of Xiamen Airlines (55%) and Chongqing Airlines (60%); it also invests in Sichuan Airlines (39%).

Amidst the major consolidation of the airline industry, China Southern in April 2000 started dedicated cargo services from Shenzhen using a Boeing 747-200F (which was quickly upgraded to the Boeing 747-400F) wet-leased from Atlas Air. To capitalize on the economic growth of the Pearl River Delta region (which includes Hong Kong), the carrier constructed a dedicated cargo center in Shenzhen. Successful operations prompted an order for two Boeing 747-400Fs the following year. The airline by now had commenced operations to Sydney and Melbourne.

In September 2003, China Southern signed a purchase agreement for four Airbus A330-200s to be delivered in 2005. This was part of the order placed in April by the China Aviation Supplies Imp. &amp; Exp. Group covering 30 aircraft. China Southern became the first mainland Chinese A330 operator with the delivery of the first example in February 2005. China Southern followed up in September 2005 with a further order for eight A330-300s and two A330-200s.

The month of January 2005 proved to be significant for civil aviation in China in general and China Southern in particular. In preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, China Southern, and the Chinese government placed several landmark widebody-aircraft orders from Airbus and Boeing. More specifically, on 28 January 2005, the carrier became the first (and so far the only) Chinese carrier to commit to the Airbus A380 double-deck aircraft, when it signed a general-terms agreement for five examples worth US$1.4 billion at catalog prices. On the same day, China Southern, along with five other domestic carriers, placed a bulk order for 60 Boeing 7E7s (later renamed the Boeing 787 Dreamliner). The aircraft was worth $7.2 billion at list prices, and the first example was expected to be delivered in time for the Olympics; however, the first aircraft did not arrive until June 2013.

Earlier during the month, the CAAC had approved the temporary operations of charter flights between mainland China and Taiwan. On the same day as the widebody orders, a China Southern Airlines Boeing 777–200 took off from Guangzhou and landed in Taipei the following day, becoming the first mainland Chinese aircraft to land in the Republic of China since 1949, when the Kuomintang were involved in Chinese Civil War with the Chinese Communist Party. The flight carried 242 passengers home after the Lunar New Year. Previously, passengers travelling between the mainland and Taiwan had to transit through a third port such as Hong Kong or Macau. Within three years, in July 2008, a China Southern Airlines Airbus A330 carrying 230 tourists again landed in Taipei. The governments of China and Taiwan had both agreed to allow direct flights across the Taiwan Strait in June, ending six decades of limited air travel between the two sides. Following the flight, China Southern Airlines Chairman and pilot of the flight, Liu Shaoyong, said, &quot;From today onward, regular commercial flights will replace the rumbling warplanes over the skies of the Taiwan Strait, and relations between the two sides will become better and better.&quot;

Following two years of negotiations which had started in August 2004, in late June 2006, China Southern signed an agreement with SkyTeam, one of the three global airline alliances, formally pledging itself to the improvement of standards with the aim of its eventual joining. According to the agreement, the airline committed to the upgrade of handling services, facilities ,and training of at least 75% of its staff to SkyTeam&#x27;s standards. On 15 November 2007, China Southern officially joined SkyTeam, becoming the eleventh carrier to join the grouping and the first mainland Chinese carrier to join an airline alliance. The welcoming ceremony was attended by high-ranking Chinese government and SkyTeam corporate officials and was held at the Great Hall of the People. The carrier&#x27;s integration with the alliance continued with its entry into SkyTeam Cargo in November 2010, and its joint-venture carrier Xiamen Airlines&#x27; formal joining in November 2012. With China Eastern&#x27;s ascension in June 2011, SkyTeam furthered its leading presence on the mainland Chinese market; the remaining Big Three carrier, Air China, is a member of Star Alliance.

It followed up with another Airbus order on 7 July 2006, when it confirmed a deal covering the purchase of 50 more A320 narrow bodies for delivery in 2009. The order included 13 A319-100s, 20 A320-200s and 17 A321-200s, reportedly worth $3.3 billion at list prices. In December 2005, China Southern Airlines along with CASGC, announced an order with Boeing for 9 Boeing 737-700s and 11 Boeing 737-800s.

In June 2006, China Southern Airlines confirmed another order of three Boeing 737-700s and seven Boeing 737-800s. The deliveries would continue through 2010. On 18 October 2006, China Southern Airlines placed an order for six Boeing 777 freighters, striding forward a brand new step in its cargo development. The aircraft would be delivered from November 2008 to July 2010.

On 20 August 2007, China Southern Airlines announced its intention for an order of 25 Boeing 737-700s and 30 Boeing 737-800s, which will be delivered from May 2011 to October 2013. It was a mere two months before, on 23 October 2007, China Southern Airlines announced that it had placed an order for 10 additional Airbus A330-200s. The order has a listed price of US$1.677 billion and the aircraft will be delivered from March 2010 to August 2012.

===Recent developments===
During 2009, China Southern Airlines remodeled its strategy from a point-to-point hub to a full hub and spoke carrier, which has been proven successful. Along with that, the airline has rapidly expanded its international market share, particularly in Australia, where passenger numbers in 2011 have been 97% greater than in 2010.

On 21 January 2010, China Southern Airlines announced an order for an additional 20 A320-200s, scheduled for delivery in 2011, due to the falling fuel costs and surging passenger demand. In March 2010, the Chinese carrier issued new shares in Hong Kong and Shanghai 2010 to raise 10.75 billion yuan ($1.57 billion) in a bid to pay off outstanding loans. In December, CNY810 million ($121.5 million) was injected by China Southern Airlines into its subsidiary Xiamen Airlines to fund its fleet expansion. In November 2010, China Southern Airlines signed an agreement with Airbus for the purchase of 6 A330s and 30 A320–200s.

On 11 January 2011, China Southern Airlines announced a lease for 10 Embraer E-190, set to be delivereinom the second half of 2011. On 27 January 2011, China Southern Airlines was awarded a four-star ranking by Skytrax. It is the largest airline to hold this title. On 17 October 2011, China Southern Airlines made its first flight with the Airbus A380. Initially, the airline deployed the A380s on domestic routes, flying between Guangzhou, Beijing, Shanghai, and Hong Kong. At the same time, the carrier conducted negotiations to commence A380 international services. Due to the government-imposed limitation that confined an international route to a single airline, China Southern in August 2012 announced its intention to initiate Beijing-Paris services in cooperation with Air China, pending government approval. Two months later, the A380 was deployed on Guangzhou-Los Angeles services. Early A380 operations were unprofitable and the aircraft, underutilised; services to Sydney were thus launched in October 2013. By May 2013, talks with Air China on Beijing-Paris services had ceased.

While China Southern, like the other two of the big three Chinese carriers, Air China and China Eastern Airlines, had been expanding rapidly since 2000, much of their activities had been focused on the domestic market. With the increase in outflow of Chinese tourists, who in 2012 ,for example ,spent $102 billion internationally, as well as the rapid construction and introduction of high-speed rail in China, the carrier shifted its outlook overseas to sustain growth. Owing to the location of its hub at Guangzhou, which hinders the airline from effectively serving the North American market, the airline concentrated its international expansion on Australasia. In June 2012, with the inauguration of services from Guangzhou to London-Heathrow, the airline started marketing its services connecting Europe and Australia as the &quot;Canton Route&quot;, an alternative to the Kangaroo Route flown by carriers such as Qantas. It hoped to attract the predominantly business traffic that travel between Europe and Australia, and channel such sixth-freedom traffic as well as traffic from mainland China through its Guangzhou hub (thereby transforming the carrier&#x27;s network from one that emphasises point-to-point to a hub-and-spoke system). The carrier by now had added cities such as Auckland, Istanbul, Perth, and Vancouver to its route map.

During May–June 2012, China Southern Airlines has recruited Dutch flight attendants to serve the First and Business class sections for flights from Guangzhou to Amsterdam.

On 7 June 2013, China Southern operated its first Boeing 787 on a route from Guangzhou to Beijing Capital, the first Chinese airline to introduce the 787-8. The 787s were going to be part of China Southern&#x27;s fleet for only a dozen years: in November 2024, the airline announced its intention to sell all 10 aircraft of the type by 2026 due to challenges in recovering long-haul services following the COVID-19 pandemic.

In early 2015, it was announced that the airline would lease 24 Airbus A320neo aircraft from AerCap for delivery between 2016 and 2019.

On 15 November 2018, the airline announced that it would leave SkyTeam by 1 January 2019 and will strengthen its partnership with American Airlines and others. The announcement lead to speculation that it will join Oneworld alongside Hong Kong carrier Cathay Pacific. Various media outlets reported that while analysts predict that its Oneworld move could threaten Cathay Pacific&#x27;s position in the alliance, other analysts states that China Southern joining Oneworld would benefit Cathay more due to different target markets.

In March 2019, the airline announced a frequent flyer partnership with American Airlines. Currently, the airline plans for more flexible tie-ups with other carriers, mostly with Oneworld members such as Qatar Airways while not joining the alliance &#x27;for a few years&#x27; in order to fulfill its dream as &#x27;world&#x27;s largest airline&#x27;. On 26 September 2019, China Southern operates at Beijing Daxing International Airport alongside its former and current partners, and all of its flights to and from Beijing are transferred to Daxing on 25 October 2020.

China Southern operated its last commercial Airbus A380 flight on 5 November 2022, remaining the only Chinese airline ever to operate the A380. The aircraft were retired due to market challenges following the COVID-19 pandemic, the last two being flown to storage at Mojave Air and Space Port in December 2022. One former China Southern A380 was acquired by Global Airlines in 2024 with plans to launch flights between the United Kingdom and the United States using this aircraft in 2025.

In early January 2025, China Southern Airlines suspend its daily service between Beijing Daxing and Moscow Sheremetyevo from 20 January to 30 March 2025. No reason was given by the airline. However, experts commented it may be due to the on-going conflict between Russia and Ukraine. 

==Corporate affairs==

=== Business trends ===
The key trends for the China Southern Airlines Group are (as of the financial year ending December 31):
=== Ownership structure ===
=== Cooperation with American Airlines ===
American Airlines invested $200 million in China Southern Airlines in March 2017, laying a strong foundation for a long-term relationship between two of the world&#x27;s largest airlines. After the investment, American Airlines holds a 2.7% equity stake in China Southern Airlines. American Airlines and China Southern are two of the world&#x27;s largest airlines with complementary networks, offering customers unparalleled destinations in both the business and leisure traveler markets. The two airlines have signed codeshare and interline agreements to provide travelers with flights to more destinations in China, North and South America. The codeshare route partnership includes the ability to earn and redeem AAdvantage miles, check baggage through, and book tickets.

=== Head office ===
China Southern is headquartered in the China Southern Air Building at 68 Qixin Road () in Baiyun District, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province.

It was previously at 278 Jichang (Airport) Road () in Baiyun District.

China Southern had plans to open a new headquarters facility on a site on the outskirts of Guangzhou, about from Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport. Woods Bagot won a competition for the architect firm which would design the facility. The proposed site consists of two parcels of land on opposite sides of a highway leading to Baiyun Airport; both sites are shaped like wings. The site will have a bridge and light rail system that operates above the highway to connect the two parcels, which will each have distinct functions. For instance, the east parcel will house internal functions such as the data center facilities, staff dormitories, and the training center. The airline wants it to be aesthetically pleasing from the air since it sits below a runway approach. The site will have a lot of outdoor space, which Woods Bagot designed along with Hargreaves Associates and Sherwood Design Engineers. Jean Weng, a Woods Bagot Beijing-based principal, said &quot;Most Chinese cities are very dense and very urban, but China Southern wants to create a human-scale campus, that&#x27;s close to nature.&quot; The new headquarters was opened in August 2016.
==Destinations==

===Overview===

China Southern Airlines serves 193 destinations in 35 countries worldwide. It maintains a strong presence in the domestic market with its main hubs at Beijing Daxing International Airport and Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport with secondary hubs at Shanghai Pudong International Airport, Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport, Ürümqi Diwopu International Airport, and Wuhan Tianhe International Airport, along with other focus cities in Changchun, Changsha, Dalian, Shenyang, Shenzhen, Wuhan, and Zhengzhou. The airline plans to continue to develop Chongqing and Ürümqi as hubs as well as to exploit the domestic market potential.

China Southern offers 485 flights a day from its Guangzhou hub and 221 from its Beijing hub. The airline provides services to 65 international destinations. Most of the international flights link Guangzhou with world cities. There are also plenty of international flights operated through Beijing, Shanghai, Ürümqi (notably to Central Asia and Middle-east) and Dalian (to Japan, South Korea, and Russia). China Southern Airlines has developed an extensive network in Southeast Asia and also has become the Chinese airline with the largest presence in Australia. China Southern is also considering expanding into the South American markets, as well as further expansion into the African market.

On 12 December 2024, it was reported that China Southern has resumed the direct routes between Guangzhou and Adelaide, South Australia. The route was initially launched in 2016, but ceased in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

===Alliance===

On 28 August 2004, China Southern Airlines signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the airline alliance SkyTeam. On 15 November 2007, the airline was officially welcomed as the 11th member of SkyTeam, becoming the first mainland Chinese airline to join any global airline alliance, expanding the alliance&#x27;s presence on mainland China.

On 24 December 2018, China Southern Airlines released an official statement saying that it would discontinue its SkyTeam membership on 1 January 2019 and will also terminate its partnership with China Eastern Airlines and Delta Air Lines.

===Codeshare agreements===
China Southern Airlines codeshares with the following airlines:
* Aeroflot
* Aerolíneas Argentinas
* Air Canada 
* Air France 
* Air Serbia
* American Airlines
* Asiana Airlines
* British Airways
* China Airlines
* China Express Airlines
* Emirates
* Etihad Airways
* Finnair
* Garuda Indonesia
* Iberia
* Japan Airlines
* Kenya Airways
* KLM 
* Korean Air
* LATAM Airlines
* Lufthansa
* Malaysia Airlines
* Mandarin Airlines
* Pakistan International Airlines
* Qantas
* Qatar Airways
* Saudia
* Sichuan Airlines
* Vietnam Airlines
* WestJet
* XiamenAir 
==Fleet==
===Current fleet===

, China Southern Airlines operates the following aircraft:

===Cargo===
China Southern Cargo is the cargo subsidiary of China Southern Airlines. The cargo airline provides services between mainland China and North America, Europe, and Australia, where destinations such as Amsterdam, Anchorage, Chicago, Frankfurt, Los Angeles, Vancouver, Toronto, Vienna, and London Stansted are served from its main hub at Shanghai Pudong International Airport, with cargo flights to Amsterdam and Milan from Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport.

The cargo subsidiary joined the SkyTeam Cargo alliance in November 2010 and withdrew on 1 January 2019 following the airline&#x27;s withdrawal from SkyTeam.

===Former fleet===

China Southern Airlines previously operated the following aircraft:
====Airbus A380====

China Southern was the only mainland Chinese airline to operate the Airbus A380. The airline initially operated these aircraft on Beijing–Hong Kong and Beijing–Guangzhou routes. However, these services struggled to be profitable. Due to the demand limitation of the airline&#x27;s home base at Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport, few routes from Guangzhou have the demand to support an A380. In efforts to make its A380s viable, China Southern started operating A380 on its Guangzhou–Los Angeles route and on the Guangzhou–Sydney route. Additionally, China Southern flew A380s to Sydney and Melbourne every summer during its peak travel period. As of 20 June 2015, China Southern began operating the Airbus A380 from Beijing to Amsterdam. The A380 also operated four domestic flights each day between Beijing and Guangzhou. The airline&#x27;s A380s were retired by November 2022.

===Special liveries gallery===
==Services==

China Southern Airlines offers First Class (formerly), Business Class, Premium Economy and Economy Class.

;First Class

China Southern Airlines offered an &quot;Experience Luxurious Skybed&quot; on Boeing 787s. It was equipped with personal privacy, in-built massage, a 17-inch personal TV and fully reclining seat. It also had First Class on Airbus A330s and Boeing 777-300ERs, which featured a seat pitch of and converted into a fully flat bed with a personal TV.

China Southern Airlines offered Premium First Class on select flights, such as on the Beijing-Guangzhou route. This cabin offered more amenities and was more spacious than Regular First Class, such as a variety of lighting options and a private storage cabinet with a password lock.

;Business Class
Business Class also offers a fully flat bed, and an adjustable privacy divider. It includes a USB port and a reading light. It also has a 15-inch TV.

;Economy Class

Economy Class features a seat and a 9-inch personal TV. It also has a multi-adjustable headrest.

China Southern also offers Premium Economy class, which is more spacious than economy class. In most aircraft, the seats are , compared to in Economy. The Boeing 777-300ERs, however, are equipped with fixed-shell premium economy seats similar to those seen on Air France&#x27;s Boeing 777s.

==Sky Pearl Club==

China Southern Airlines&#x27;s frequent-flyer program is called Sky Pearl Club (). The Sky Pearl Club allows its members to earn FFP mileage not only by flying China Southern domestic segments, but also by flying routes of other codeshare member airlines. Additionally, Sky Pearl Club members can earn and use mileage on partnered Sichuan Airlines, China Eastern Airlines, and China Airlines flights. Membership of Sky Pearl Club is divided into four tiers: Sky Pearl Gold Card, Sky Pearl Silver Card, Sky Pearl Member Card and Little Pearl On The Palm Card, the first three tier are available for all adult members, but Little Pearl On The Palm Card is only available for members aged 2–11.

==Incidents and accidents==
* On 31 August 1988, a Hawker Siddeley Trident 2E (B-2218), struck approach lights at Kai Tak Airport and struck a lip, collapsing the right main landing gear; the aircraft then slid off the runway into Kowloon Bay, killing 7 of the 89 on board. The cause was undetermined, but windshear may have been a factor.
* On 2 October 1990, a hijacked Xiamen Airlines Boeing 737 crashed into a China Southern Airlines Boeing 757 and a China Southwest Airlines Boeing 707, killing 128 people in total.
* On 24 November 1992, China Southern Airlines Flight 3943, a Boeing 737-300, crashed into a hill near Guilin, Guangxi, due to an engine thrust malfunction. All 141 people on board were killed.
* On 8 May 1997, China Southern Flight 3456, a Boeing 737-300, crashed on approach to Shenzhen Bao&#x27;an International Airport killing 35 people and injuring 9.

==Controversies==

;Shipping of primates to laboratories
In 2013, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) found the airline had transported more than 1,000 monkeys into the United States through the arrangements of Air Transport International, without federal permission to do so, and had transported the animals in insecure crates. The USDA ordered China Southern Airlines to pay $11,600 in fines for violations of the Animal Welfare Act (AWA) during the airline&#x27;s transport of monkeys to laboratories in the United States. Although the USDA cited Air Transport International for failure to provide food and water to the imported animals, China Southern Airlines was previously also ordered to pay $14,438 for AWA violations during one transport that left more than a dozen monkeys dead after they went without food and water for an extended period of time. Following these most recent violations, where the delivered animals were left neglected after arrival in the US, China Southern announced that it would no longer transport laboratory animals to the US. PETA had protested against the airline for these shipments.

;10 yuan ticketing glitch
In November 2023, the airline inadvertently priced its tickets as low as 10 yuan (around $1.37) on its mobile app and travel websites like Trip.com, due to a technical glitch. The airline later confirmed on Weibo that the tickets sold during the two-hour window would be honored.

==See also==

* Civil aviation in China
* List of airlines of China
* Transport in China
==References==
== External links ==
* —</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q291090" start="0" end="23" title="China Southern Airlines" label="China Southern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291090" start="36" end="50" title="China Southern Airlines" label="China Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="98" end="107" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="109" end="118" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="185" end="194" title="Air China" label="Air China"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="199" end="221" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="282" end="295" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q60600" start="371" end="436" title="Largest airlines in the world" label="world&amp;#x27;s sixth-largest airline measured by passengers carried"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="453" end="482" title="Largest airlines in the world#By fleet size" label="largest airline in fleet size"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="484" end="491" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="608" end="646" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139574" start="651" end="687" title="Beijing Daxing International Airport" label="Beijing Daxing International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="790" end="797" title="SkyTeam" label="SkyTeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="882" end="899" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399160" start="953" end="958" title="Bombax ceiba" label="kapok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629075" start="1243" end="1303" title="State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council" label="State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="1446" end="1450" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150586" start="1526" end="1549" title="civil aviation in China" label="civil aviation in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="1874" end="1883" title="Air China" label="Air China"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="1910" end="1932" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="1938" end="1962" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875618" start="2005" end="2047" title="Civil aviation authority" label="regulatory and administrative organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="2399" end="2412" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="2414" end="2424" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="2429" end="2439" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="2559" end="2569" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="3218" end="3230" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q906438" start="3835" end="3855" title="aircraft maintenance" label="aircraft maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="4269" end="4278" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q357545" start="4353" end="4362" title="Flight length" label="long-haul"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4465" end="4476" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="4501" end="4509" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="4985" end="4999" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111506" start="5406" end="5456" title="GAMECO" label="Guangzhou Aircraft Maintenance Engineering Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233" start="5493" end="5533" title="Lockheed Corporation" label="Lockheed Aircraft Services International"/>
<link wikidata="Q15805" start="5538" end="5556" title="Hutchinson Whampoa" label="Hutchinson Whampoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="5749" end="5758" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="5763" end="5786" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="6023" end="6046" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q147208" start="6108" end="6123" title="Xiamen Airlines" label="Xiamen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="6796" end="6823" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="6893" end="6897" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="7942" end="7951" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q197938" start="7958" end="7976" title="Zhongyuan Airlines" label="Zhongyuan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q120743" start="8030" end="8038" title="Xian Y-7" label="Xian Y-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="8086" end="8094" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138118" start="8101" end="8124" title="China Northern Airlines" label="China Northern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959" start="8129" end="8135" title="Urumqi" label="Urumqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760122" start="8142" end="8159" title="Xinjiang Airlines" label="Xinjiang Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q147208" start="8904" end="8919" title="Xiamen Airlines" label="Xiamen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076141" start="8930" end="8948" title="Chongqing Airlines" label="Chongqing Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291944" start="8975" end="8991" title="Sichuan Airlines" label="Sichuan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="9123" end="9131" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9208" end="9218" title="Aircraft lease#Wet lease" label="wet-leased"/>
<link wikidata="Q757135" start="9224" end="9233" title="Atlas Air" label="Atlas Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="9279" end="9296" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="9526" end="9532" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="9537" end="9546" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="9620" end="9636" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330-200s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150586" start="10061" end="10084" title="civil aviation in China" label="civil aviation in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="10153" end="10173" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="10283" end="10289" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8793" start="10294" end="10300" title="Boeing Commercial Airplanes" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="10425" end="10436" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="10690" end="10711" title="Boeing 787 Dreamliner" label="Boeing 787 Dreamliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="11023" end="11029" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="11150" end="11156" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="11236" end="11253" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="11275" end="11285" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="11303" end="11320" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="11330" end="11353" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="11404" end="11418" title="Chinese New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="11543" end="11548" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="11660" end="11666" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="11755" end="11768" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="12270" end="12277" title="SkyTeam" label="SkyTeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q465909" start="12303" end="12319" title="airline alliance" label="airline alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q72891" start="12892" end="12916" title="Great Hall of the People" label="Great Hall of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367009" start="12997" end="13010" title="SkyTeam Cargo" label="SkyTeam Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="13294" end="13307" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="13673" end="13688" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-700s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="13696" end="13711" title="Boeing 737-800 SFP" label="Boeing 737-800s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="13940" end="13950" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14815" end="14824" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="15138" end="15147" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="15152" end="15160" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q147208" start="15354" end="15369" title="Xiamen Airlines" label="Xiamen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="15589" end="15602" title="Embraer E-190" label="Embraer E-190"/>
<link wikidata="Q735415" start="15731" end="15738" title="Skytrax" label="Skytrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="15839" end="15851" title="first flight" label="first flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="15861" end="15872" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="16263" end="16268" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="16690" end="16699" title="Air China" label="Air China"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="16704" end="16726" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059836" start="16999" end="17023" title="high-speed rail in China" label="high-speed rail in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="17266" end="17277" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="17332" end="17341" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="17345" end="17360" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London-Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319333" start="17492" end="17506" title="Kangaroo Route" label="Kangaroo Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="17903" end="17911" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="17913" end="17921" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="17923" end="17928" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="17934" end="17943" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="18186" end="18196" title="Boeing 787" label="Boeing 787"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="18213" end="18222" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q32190" start="18226" end="18241" title="Beijing Capital International Airport" label="Beijing Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q87625383" start="18484" end="18527" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on commercial air transport" label="challenges in recovering long-haul services"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18542" end="18559" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687934" start="18655" end="18661" title="AerCap" label="AerCap"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="18829" end="18846" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8787" start="18914" end="18922" title="Oneworld" label="Oneworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q32141" start="18951" end="18965" title="Cathay Pacific" label="Cathay Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="19302" end="19319" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139574" start="19631" end="19667" title="Beijing Daxing International Airport" label="Beijing Daxing International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="19845" end="19856" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q390522" start="20068" end="20093" title="Mojave Air and Space Port" label="Mojave Air and Space Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q119474103" start="20159" end="20174" title="Global Airlines" label="Global Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139574" start="20372" end="20386" title="Beijing Daxing International Airport" label="Beijing Daxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192733" start="20391" end="20410" title="Sheremetyevo International Airport" label="Moscow Sheremetyevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="20538" end="20546" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="20555" end="20561" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="20566" end="20573" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="21317" end="21326" title="Codeshare agreement" label="codeshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q80946" start="21684" end="21699" title="Baiyun District, Guangzhou" label="Baiyun District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="21701" end="21710" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="21712" end="21730" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="21918" end="21956" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033251" start="21958" end="21969" title="Woods Bagot" label="Woods Bagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="22738" end="22745" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099915" start="23030" end="23046" title="List of China Southern Airlines destinations" label="193 destinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139574" start="23150" end="23186" title="Beijing Daxing International Airport" label="Beijing Daxing International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="23191" end="23229" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36420" start="23253" end="23290" title="Shanghai Pudong International Airport" label="Shanghai Pudong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q788417" start="23292" end="23332" title="Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport" label="Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q765650" start="23334" end="23369" title="Ürümqi Diwopu International Airport" label="Ürümqi Diwopu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q601091" start="23375" end="23409" title="Wuhan Tianhe International Airport" label="Wuhan Tianhe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="23428" end="23440" title="Focus city" label="focus cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="23444" end="23453" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="23455" end="23463" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="23465" end="23471" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="23473" end="23481" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="23483" end="23491" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="23493" end="23498" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="23504" end="23513" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="23688" end="23697" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139574" start="23719" end="23726" title="Beijing Daxing International Airport" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="23835" end="23844" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="24429" end="24438" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="24443" end="24451" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="24453" end="24468" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24542" end="24559" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="24630" end="24657" title="Memorandum of Understanding" label="Memorandum of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q465909" start="24667" end="24683" title="airline alliance" label="airline alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="24684" end="24691" title="SkyTeam" label="SkyTeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="24800" end="24816" title="Mainland China" label="mainland Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="24904" end="24918" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="25116" end="25138" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="25143" end="25158" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="25212" end="25222" title="Codeshare agreement" label="codeshares"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="25254" end="25262" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q83535" start="25265" end="25286" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="25289" end="25299" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="25303" end="25313" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q460373" start="25317" end="25327" title="Air Serbia" label="Air Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="25330" end="25347" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q211165" start="25350" end="25365" title="Asiana Airlines" label="Asiana Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="25368" end="25383" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="25386" end="25400" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073273" start="25403" end="25425" title="China Express Airlines" label="China Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q180432" start="25428" end="25436" title="Emirates (airline)" label="Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q212304" start="25439" end="25453" title="Etihad Airways" label="Etihad Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q201821" start="25456" end="25463" title="Finnair" label="Finnair"/>
<link wikidata="Q512468" start="25466" end="25482" title="Garuda Indonesia" label="Garuda Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="25485" end="25491" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="25494" end="25508" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q638900" start="25511" end="25524" title="Kenya Airways" label="Kenya Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="25527" end="25530" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="25534" end="25544" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q649178" start="25547" end="25561" title="LATAM Airlines" label="LATAM Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="25564" end="25573" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="25576" end="25593" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150302" start="25596" end="25613" title="Mandarin Airlines" label="Mandarin Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="25616" end="25647" title="Pakistan International Airlines" label="Pakistan International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="25650" end="25656" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208033" start="25659" end="25672" title="Qatar Airways" label="Qatar Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="25675" end="25681" title="Saudia" label="Saudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q291944" start="25684" end="25700" title="Sichuan Airlines" label="Sichuan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174386" start="25703" end="25719" title="Vietnam Airlines" label="Vietnam Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059770" start="25722" end="25729" title="WestJet" label="WestJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q147208" start="25732" end="25741" title="XiamenAir" label="XiamenAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q36420" start="26182" end="26219" title="Shanghai Pudong International Airport" label="Shanghai Pudong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367009" start="26341" end="26354" title="SkyTeam Cargo" label="SkyTeam Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="26457" end="26464" title="SkyTeam" label="SkyTeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44868" start="26870" end="26908" title="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport" label="Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="27064" end="27075" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="27103" end="27109" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="27160" end="27166" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q733738" start="27171" end="27180" title="Melbourne Airport" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="27308" end="27317" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240477" start="28566" end="28587" title="Premium economy" label="Premium Economy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062332" start="28882" end="28904" title="frequent-flyer program" label="frequent-flyer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q291944" start="29182" end="29198" title="Sichuan Airlines" label="Sichuan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="29200" end="29222" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="29228" end="29242" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008496" start="29632" end="29638" title="China Southern Airlines Flight 301" label="struck"/>
<link wikidata="Q673202" start="29658" end="29673" title="Kai Tak Airport" label="Kai Tak Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q837119" start="29775" end="29786" title="Kowloon Bay" label="Kowloon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q147208" start="29916" end="29931" title="Xiamen Airlines" label="Xiamen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="29932" end="29942" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q800043" start="29943" end="29950" title="1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="29982" end="29992" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="29999" end="30023" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="30024" end="30034" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099905" start="30088" end="30123" title="China Southern Airlines Flight 3943" label="China Southern Airlines Flight 3943"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="30127" end="30141" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q189633" start="30168" end="30174" title="Guilin" label="Guilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099909" start="30276" end="30302" title="China Southern Flight 3456" label="China Southern Flight 3456"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="30306" end="30320" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q842297" start="30345" end="30387" title="Shenzhen Bao&amp;#x27;an International Airport" label="Shenzhen Bao&amp;#x27;an International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="30493" end="30532" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q407859" start="30649" end="30676" title="Air Transport International" label="Air Transport International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764919" start="30854" end="30872" title="Animal Welfare Act of 1966" label="Animal Welfare Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="31500" end="31504" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345164" start="31726" end="31734" title="Trip.com" label="Trip.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q92526" start="31794" end="31799" title="Weibo" label="Weibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150586" start="31884" end="31907" title="Civil aviation in China" label="Civil aviation in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q848751" start="31910" end="31935" title="List of airlines of China" label="List of airlines of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377007" start="31938" end="31956" title="Transport in China" label="Transport in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382889" wikidata="Q185722" url="?curid=382889" title="Juan Carlos Ferrero">
<text>Juan Carlos Ferrero Donat (; born 12 February 1980) is a Spanish former professional tennis player and coach. He was ranked as the world No. 1 in men&#x27;s singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP). Ferrero won 16 ATP Tour-level singles titles, including the 2003 French Open and four Masters events. He was also runner-up at the 2002 French Open and 2003 US Open. He was nicknamed &quot;El Mosquito&quot; for his speed and slender physical build. Ferrero retired from the sport in 2012. Since his playing career, he has coached Alexander Zverev and currently coaches Carlos Alcaraz.

==Personal life==
Nicknamed Juanki, JC, and &quot;El Mosquito&quot;, Ferrero began playing tennis at age seven with his father, Eduardo Ferrero Micó (1943–2022), who often traveled with him. He has two sisters, Ana and Laura. He has cited his mother, Rosario, who died of cancer when he was sixteen, as his inspiration throughout his tennis career.

Ferrero married Eva Alonso in Valencia in July 2015. They had their first child, a daughter, in September 2014, and they have had two more children since.

In July 2007, Ferrero bought an old cottage in Bocairent, south of Valencia, and refurbished it into the &quot;Hotel Ferrero&quot;, which features 12 luxury suites. He used to be a joint owner of the Valencia Open tournament along with fellow tennis player David Ferrer. He currently serves as CEO and director of the Ferrero Tennis Academy in Alicante, Villena, where he himself was trained.

==Career==

===Early years===
Born in Ontinyent, Ferrero came to prominence in 1998 when he made the final of the Junior French Open, losing to Fernando González. He finished the year ranked as the No. 17 junior. He then made his professional debut in 1998 by reaching the finals of his first Futures tournament in Italy. He won two Futures events in Spain, and ended the year ranked No. 345.

===1999: ATP debut===
Ferrero made his ATP main draw debut at the Grand Prix Hassan II as a qualifier, where he reached the semi-finals. He followed this up by winning a Challenger event in Naples. He then received a wildcard at the Barcelona Open, where he reached the third round, losing to Carlos Moyá. He reached back–to–back finals at his next two tournaments, after which he debuted in the top 100 at No. 95. He reached his fourth Challenger final of the year at Graz, where he lost to Tomáš Zíb. He then played at the Austrian Open, where he earned his first top 20 win in the second round against No. 15 Tommy Haas, before losing in the quarterfinals. He made his Grand Slam debut at the US Open in August, losing to ninth seeded Greg Rusedski in the first round. The following month, at just his fifth Tour-level event, he won his first career title at the Majorca Open, which propelled him from No. 68 to 47. He ended the year at No. 43 and won the ATP Newcomer of the Year award.

===2000: Top 20 debut===
Ferrero began the year at the Auckland Open, where he made the quarterfinals. He reached the third round in his Australian Open debut, where he was defeated by Younes El Aynaoui in a tight five–setter. In Dubai, he earned his first top 10 win over 9th-ranked Nicolás Lapentti in the second round, before losing to Nicolas Kiefer in the final. He backed this up with a semifinal at the Franklin Templeton Tennis Classic, which he lost to Australian Lleyton Hewitt. He lost his first matches at Indian Wells to Michael Chang and in Miami to George Bastl. He then represented Spain at the Davis Cup for the first time, where he won of both his matches.

During the European clay season, Ferrero made back–to–back quarterfinals at the Estoril Open and the Monte Carlo Open, his first Masters quarterfinal. He lost to Nicolás Lapentti and Gastón Gaudio respectively. He made it to his second final of the year at the Barcelona Open, which he lost to Marat Safin. By doing so, Ferrero entered the top 20 for the first time, ranked No. 18. Ferrero only made the third round of the Italian Open, where he lost to Mariano Puerta, and the second round of the German Open, where he lost to Andrei Pavel. He bounced back by reaching the semifinals of his first French Open after defeating No. 10 Àlex Corretja, before losing to the eventual champion Gustavo Kuerten in five sets. He chose not to compete at Wimbledon.

At the US Open, Ferrero reached the fourth round but lost in straight sets to eventual champion Marat Safin. He represented Spain at the Olympics in Sydney, where he reached the quarterfinals, losing to France&#x27;s Arnaud di Pasquale. He then suffered losses in the first match at his next four events: in Vienna to Richard Krajicek, in Toulouse to Magnus Gustafsson, at the Swiss Indoors to Richard Krajicek, and at the Stuttgart Masters to Younes El Aynaoui. The drought ended when he reached the semifinals of the Paris Masters, where he lost once again to eventual champion Safin. Ferrero lost in the first round of the Stockholm Open to Adrian Voinea. Ferrero then played for Spain in the Davis Cup final against Australia. He won both his matches against Patrick Rafter and Lleyton Hewitt, leading Spain to their first Davis Cup title. Although Ferrero did not win any titles in 2000, his performances in the slam tournaments helped him end the year ranked No. 12.

===2001: Top 10 debut===
Ferrero began the year poorly, suffering three consecutive losses. This streak began with a second round loss at the Australian Open to Australian Andrew Ilie in five sets, followed by losses at the Davis Cup to Dutch Raemon Sluiter, in five sets, and in the first round at Rotterdam to Ivan Ljubičić. Ferrero bounced back with a title win in Dubai, where he upset World No. 5 Magnus Norman in the quarterfinals before defeating Marat Safin in the final. He suffered a first round loss at Indian Wells in three tie–break sets to Nicolás Massú, and a fourth round loss to Gastón Gaudio in Miami.

Ferrero began the European clay season by winning the Estoril Open in an all–Spanish final, defeating Félix Mantilla. With this win he became No. 9 in the world, his first entry into the top ten. Ferrero then suffered an early exit at the second round of the Monte Carlo Masters to Galo Blanco. He recovered by winning two tournaments in a row: the Barcelona Open, where he defeated Carlos Moyá, and the Rome Masters, where he defeated Gustavo Kuerten. This was Ferrero&#x27;s first win over a No. 1-ranked opponent, and his first Masters title. Ferrero made it to a third consecutive final at the Hamburg Masters, which he lost to Albert Portas. He reached the semifinals at the French Open for the second consecutive year after defeating Lleyton Hewitt in straight sets. He then lost to No. 1 seed, defending champion, and eventual champion Kuerten in straight sets. Ferrero then played his first Wimbledon, where he reached the third round before losing to Britain&#x27;s Greg Rusedski in straight sets.

Ferrero reached the finals at Gstaad, where he lost to Jiří Novák. He lost to Nicolás Lapentti in the quarterfinals of the Austrian Open, and to Patrick Rafter in the quarterfinals of the Canada Masters. Ferrero&#x27;s results in the US were disappointing: he lost to Hicham Arazi in the second round of Cincinnati, and was upset by compatriot Tommy Rebredo in a tight five setter in the third round of the US Open. Ferrero then helped his Davis Cup team get back to the World Group stage by defeating Uzbekistan&#x27;s Oleg Ogorodov. He made the quarterfinals of the Salem Open, where he lost to Rainer Schüttler, and of Lyon, where he lost to Younes El Aynaoui. Ferrero then lost in the first round of the Stuttgart Masters, to Thomas Enqvist and the St. Petersburg Open, to Rainer Schüttler. At the final Masters event of the year in Paris, he lost to Arazi in the third round. Ferrero qualified for the Tennis Masters Cup. In the round robin stage, he lost to Yevgeny Kafelnikov, but defeated Gustavo Kuerten and Goran Ivanišević to advance to the semifinals. In the semis, he lost to eventual champion Lleyton Hewitt. He finished the year ranked World No. 5.

===2002: First slam final, injuries===
Ferrero missed the 2002 Australian Open due to bursitis in his right knee. He instead started his year at the Milan Indoor, where he was upset by eventual champion Davide Sanguinetti in the second round. Ferrero represented Spain in its Davis Cup tie against Morocco, where he won against Hicham Arazi but lost to Younes El Aynaoui. He made his first quarterfinal of the year at the Open 13, where he was upset by No. 99 Cédric Pioline. At Rotterdam, Ferrero lost his opening match against eventual champion Nicolas Escudé. As the defending champion in Dubai, he retired in his second-round match 1–2 down against El Aynaoui with a pulled abductor. Ferrero&#x27;s form continued to dip as he suffered more early exits: in the first round of Indian Wells against Greg Rusedski, in the third round of Miami against Adrian Voinea, and in the second round of the Estoril Open against David Nalbandian.

Ferrero bounced back at the Monte Carlo Masters, where he earned his first top-10 wins of the year against Tommy Haas and Sébastien Grosjean, before defeating Carlos Moyá in straight sets to clinch the title. However, Ferrero was unable to keep his form. He lost to Alberto Martín at the third round at Barcelona, to Ivan Ljubičić in the second round of Rome, and to Alberto Costa in the first round of Hamburg. Due to this bad run of results, Ferrero fell out of the top 10 for the first time in a year. At the 2002 French Open, Ferrero reached his first Grand Slam final, after upsetting No. 4 Andre Agassi in four sets and No. 2 Marat Safin in straight sets. Despite being the strong favourite, Ferrero lost to Alberto Costa in four sets. His foot was injured during the tournament, but he played through it with the aid of some cortisone shots.

Ferrero lost early at Wimbledon to 98th-ranked American Jeff Morrison in straight sets. He reached the finals at the Generali Open, where he lost to Àlex Corretja. He made it to the semifinals of the Cincinnati Masters, where he lost to eventual champion Carlos Moyá. At the US Open, Ferrero lost in the third round to Fernando González. He won his second title of the year in Hong Kong, avenging his recent loss to Moyá by beating him in the final. Ferrero then lost in the quarterfinals of the Madrid Masters to Andre Agassi, and the semifinals of the Swiss Indoors to Fernando González. Ferrero again qualified to play the Tennis Masters Cup. In the round robin stage, Ferrero recorded a loss against Roger Federer but wins over Andre Agassi and Jiří Novák to advance to the semifinals. He defeated compatriot Carlos Moyá to advance to the final, which he lost to World No. 1 Lleyton Hewitt. Ferrero ultimately finished the year ranked No. 4.

===2003: World No. 1, Roland-Garros victory===
Ferrero made a strong start to 2003 by reaching the finals of the Sydney International, where he lost to Hyung-Taik Lee. He went on to reach the quarter–finals of the Australian Open, where he lost to Wayne Ferreira. Ferrero once again represented Spain at Davis Cup in a tie against Belgium, where he won both of his matches, defeating Christophe Rochus and Kristof Vliegen. Ferrero then entered the Rotterdam Open, but was forced to retire with a sprained ankle in the quarterfinals against Raemon Sluiter. Ferrero lost in the round-of-32 at the next two Masters events, Indian Wells and Miami, to Brian Vahaly and Marcelo Ríos respectively. At the quarterfinals of the Davis Cup, where Spain was drawn against Croatia, Ferrero won his only match against Mario Ančić.

Ferrero won his first title of the year as defending champion at the Monte Carlo Masters, where he defeated Guillermo Coria. Ferrero reached the semifinals in Barcelona, where he lost to Marat Safin. He also reached the semifinals of the 2003 Rome Masters, but retired against Roger Federer with a shoulder injury. Ferrero won the Valencia Open, without losing a set, defeating Christophe Rochus in the final. Ferrero then won his first and only slam tournament at the 2003 French Open, defeating surprise finalist Martin Verkerk in straight sets.

Ferrero reached the 4th round of Wimbledon, where he lost to Sébastien Grosjean in four sets. He reached back–to–back quarterfinals at the Generali Open, where he lost to Mariano Zabaleta, and at the Idea Prokom Open, where he lost to Luis Horna. He lost early at both Canada and Cincinnati. At the 2003 US Open, Ferrero&#x27;s good form at the majors continued: he eliminated both former world No. 1s and US Open champions Lleyton Hewitt and Andre Agassi in four sets. He then lost to Andy Roddick in straight sets in the final. This result nonetheless saw Ferrero seize the No. 1 ranking from Agassi. Ferrero then represented Spain once again at the Davis Cup, this time against Argentina. He defeated Gastón Gaudio, losing only four games, but lost to Agustín Calleri in straight sets. In Bangkok, Ferrero played for the first time in individual competition as World No. 1 and reached the final, which he lost to Taylor Dent. Ferrero took his next title at the Madrid Masters by defeating Nicolás Massú in straight sets. This was his first hard–court Masters title. Ferrero was presented with the Spanish &quot;National Sportsman of the Year&quot; award by King Juan Carlos.

Soon afterwards, however, Ferrero embarked on a six-match losing streak. He lost in the third round of the Paris Masters to Jiří Novák. At the Tennis Masters Cup, he lost all three of his round robin matches against David Nalbandian, Andre Agassi, and Roger Federer. Representing Spain in the Davis Cup final against Australia, he lost both his matches in five sets, against Lleyton Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis. Ferrero ended the year ranked No. 3, behind Andy Roddick and Roger Federer.

===2004: Injuries, year-end No. 31===

Injuries began to plague Ferrero throughout 2004, and his ranking and form dipped. Despite making the Australian Open semifinals early in the year, where he lost to Roger Federer in straight sets, and the finals of Rotterdam, where he lost to Lleyton Hewitt, chicken pox kept him out for the entire month of March.

Ferrero returned to competition at the Davis Cup in a Spanish tie against the Netherlands. He won both his matches there, defeating Raemon Sluiter and Martin Verkerk. Ferrero then reached the semifinals of the Valencia Open, where he lost to Fernando Verdasco.

After a first–round loss in Monte Carlo to Alex Corretja in April, Ferrero needed another month out for rest and recuperation. On May 8, Ferrero fell during a practice session, where he injured his ribs and his right wrist. He entered the French Open to defend his title under–prepared, and lost in the second round to Igor Andreev in straight sets. At Wimbledon, Ferrero reached the third round before losing to Robby Ginepri in straight sets.

After Wimbledon, Ferrero failed to win back–to–back matches for the rest of the year. He lost in the first round of Gstaad to Stefan Koubek, and in the first round of the Canada Masters, where he retired against Fabrice Santoro. Ferrero suffered second round exits to Tommy Robredo in Cincinnati, to Mardy Fish at the Summer Olympics, to Stefan Koubek at the US Open, to Kevin Kim at the China Open, to David Ferrer at the Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon, and to Luis Horna in Madrid. He ended the year ranked No. 31, his first time finishing outside the top 30 in five years.

===2005: Recovery to year-end top 20===
In 2005, Ferrero hoped to return to the top of the game. However, he began his year with a loss to Jan Hernych at the Auckland Open. At the Australian Open, he met 6th-ranked Guillermo Coria in the round-of-32 and lost 6-3, 6-2, 6-1. After this loss, Ferrero dropped to No. 64 for the first time since September 1999. Ferrero&#x27;s ranking then continued to plummet, eventually hitting No. 98. He recorded a first round loss at the Open 13 to eventual champion Joachim Johansson, and second round losses at the Rotterdam Open to Radek Štěpánek, at the Dubai Tennis Championships to Roger Federer, and at Indian Wells to Carlos Moya. Ferrero made a decent run at the Miami Masters, but lost in the fourth round to David Ferrer.

At the Valencia Open, Ferrero lost in the first round to Rafael Nadal. He bounced back by reaching the semifinals of Monte Carlo, where he lost to Guillermo Coria. He then upset Gastón Gaudio and Nikolay Davydenko on the way to the final of the Barcelona Open, which he lost to Rafael Nadal. These results pushed Ferrero back inside the top 50. He lost in the second round of the Estoril Open to Carlos Moyá. He ended the European clay season by reaching the third round of the Hamburg Masters, which he lost to Nikolay Davydenko, and of the French Open, where he lost to Marat Safin.

During grass season, Ferrero reached the quarterfinals of Halle, where he lost to Tommy Haas, and the fourth round of Wimbledon, where he lost to Roger Federer. He then returned to clay, and made back–to–back quarterfinals at the Swedish Open and the Croatia Open, losing to eventual champions Rafael Nadal and Guillermo Coria. Ferrero did not fare well during the North American swing, losing in the third round of Rogers Cup to Dominik Hrbatý, in the second round of Cincinnati to Andy Roddick, and in the first round of the US Open to Arnaud Clément. He bounced back by reaching the semifinals of the China Open, which he lost to Nadal.

At the Davis Cup play–offs against Italy, Ferrero lost his first match against Andreas Seppi after having been two sets up. However, he then won the decisive rubber against Daniele Bracciali in straight sets to bring Spain back into the World Group. Ferrero then competed at the Palermo Open, but lost in the quarterfinal to Tomas Behrend. He reached his second final of the year at the Vienna Open, defeating David Nalbandian and Radek Štěpánek en route before losing to Ivan Ljubičić. In his last three events of the year, Ferrero lost early: to Max Mirnyi in the first round of Madrid, to José Acasuso in the second round of the Swiss Indoors, and to Tomáš Berdych in the third round of the Paris Masters. Ferrero ended 2005 ranked No. 17.

===2006: First Masters final since 2003===

In 2006, Ferrero once again lost his first match at the Sydney International, to Chris Guccione. At the Australian Open, he lost in the third round to Nicolas Kiefer in four sets. Ferrero reached his first semifinal of the year at the Argentina Open, losing to compatriot Carlos Moyá, but then lost in the first round of the Brasil Open to Flávio Saretta. At the first two masters events of the year, Indian Wells and Miami, Ferrero lost to Paradorn Srichaphan in the third round and Dmitry Tursunov in the second round respectively.

Ferrero began his French Open preparation at the Valencia Open but lost in the first round to unseeded eventual champion Nicolás Almagro. At the Monte Carlo Masters, Ferrero reached the third round, where he lost to friend David Ferrer. He reached his second quarterfinal of the year at the Barcelona Open, losing once again to Almagro. Ferrero lost in the first round of Rome to Paul-Henri Mathieu, and in the third round of Hamburg to Ferrer. At the French Open, he lost in the third round to Gastón Gaudio in straight sets.

Prior to Wimbledon, Ferrero made the quarterfinals of &#x27;s-Hertogenbosch, where he lost to Florent Serra. At Wimbledon, despite leading 2 sets to love against Radek Štěpánek in the third round, he lost the match in a tight fifth set. At the Swedish Open Ferrero reached the quarterfinals, losing to Jarkko Nieminen. He then lost in the first round of Umag to Albert Portas, and in the second round of Canada to Fernando González.

Ferrero reached his lone final of the year at the Cincinnati Masters. He notched his first top 10 win of 2006 with a win over James Blake in the second round, followed by consecutive victories against World No. 2 Rafael Nadal and No. 7 Tommy Robredo. This was the first time Ferrero had recorded a win over Nadal. He moved into a Masters final for the first time since 2003, which he lost to Andy Roddick in straight sets.

Ferrero ended the year on a five-match losing streak, beginning with a loss in the second round of the US Open to Marc Gicquel in straight sets. This was followed by losses in Thailand to Mischa Zverev, at Metz to Julien Benneteau, in Vienna to Jürgen Melzer, and in Madrid to Robin Söderling. He ended the year ranked No. 23.

===2007: Mixed results, Wimbledon quarterfinals===
Ferrero&#x27;s 2007 season began poorly, with a first round loss at the Auckland Open to Nicolás Massú and a second round loss at the Australian Open to Danai Udomchoke. Ferrero bounced back by reaching the final of the Brasil Open, which he lost to Guillermo Cañas. He was eliminated in the round robin stage of Buenos Aires, and the semifinals of the Mexican Open, where he lost to Carlos Moyá. Ferrero reached the fourth round of Indian Wells, where he lost to Rafael Nadal (6-1, 6-1). He lost in the second round of Miami to Cañas, and of the Valencia Open to Alberto Martín. He bounced back temporarily by reaching the semifinals of the Monte Carlo Masters, where he lost to Roger Federer. However, he fell in the second rounds of Barcelona and Rome to Potito Starace and Pablo Andújar respectively, and in the third rounds of Hamburg and Roland-Garros, to Federer and to Mikhail Youzhny.

Despite losing in the first round of &#x27;s-Hertogenbosch to Carlos Berlocq, Ferrero was able to reach the quarterfinals of Wimbledon for the first time, defeating No. 9 James Blake in the third round and earning his first top 10 win of the year. While he then lost to World No. 1 Federer in four sets, this result meant Ferrero had reached the quarterfinals of all four slams. Ferrero backed this result up by reaching the quarterfinal at the Stuttgart Open, which he lost to Feliciano López. He was then upset in the first round of the Austrian Open by Andreas Seppi.

Ferrero&#x27;s North American swing was a disappointment. Despite making it to the third round of Cincinnati, he lost in the first round of Canada to Lleyton Hewitt, and in the first round of the US Open to Feliciano López. He bounced back by reaching the semifinals of the Vienna, losing to Stanislas Wawrinka, and the third round of Madrid, losing to Novak Djokovic. Ferrero&#x27;s final match of the year was a first round loss to Marcos Baghdatis at the Paris Masters. He ended the year ranked No. 24.

===2008: Poor results, injuries, year-end No. 55===
Ferrero made a strong start to 2008, reaching his first and last final of the year at the Auckland Open, where he lost to Philipp Kohlschreiber. He then defeated David Nalbandian to advance to the fourth round of the Australian Open, where he lost to David Ferrer in four sets. Ferrero then suffered three consecutive losses: to Nicolas Mahut at the second round of the Open 13, in Rotterdam to Teymuraz Gabashvili, and in Dubai to Andy Roddick. He made a fourth–round appearance in Indian Wells, where Nalbandian defeated him. In Miami, Ferrero lost to Tomáš Berdych in the third round, and in Valencia to Marat Safin in the first round.

Ferrero reached the third round of the Monte Carlo Masters, where he lost to World No. 2 Rafael Nadal in straight sets (6-4, 6-1). Less than a month later, however, Ferrero stunned Nadal in straight sets (7-5, 6-1) in the second round of the Rome Masters. This was Ferrero&#x27;s second career victory against Nadal in eight meetings, and ended Nadal&#x27;s streak of seventeen successive match wins in Rome. It was widely publicised that Nadal had been injured during this match, despite the fact that Ferrero had also been struggling with a string of injuries. Ferrero lost to Stan Wawrinka in the next round.

Ferrero then played the French Open, where he won the first set of his first round match against Marcos Daniel before retiring due to a leg injury. The next tournament he entered was Wimbledon, where he retired in the second round against Mischa Zverev due to a hamstring injury. Ferrero missed the next three months of competitive play with a shoulder injury. He returned with at the China Open where he made quarterfinals, losing to eventual champion Andy Roddick. His next tournaments were the Vienna Open, where he lost in the second round to Jürgen Melzer, and the Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon, where he lost in the quarterfinals to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. Ferrero ended the year ranked No. 55, his lowest year–end ranking since 1998.

===2009: First title since 2003, return to the top 20===

Ferrero began the year badly, with early losses in the second round of the Auckland Open to Philipp Kohlschreiber, in the first round of the Brisbane International to Florent Serra, and in the first round of the Australian Open to Fabrice Santoro. With this string of losses, Ferrero dropped out of the top 100, for the first time in almost 10 years, falling to No. 101. However, he then reached the quarterfinals of the Brasil Open, where he lost to Thomaz Bellucci, and of Buenos Aires, where he retired against David Nalbandian with a leg injury. In March, Ferrero captured his first singles title since 2003 by defeating fifth–seeded Serra in the final of the Grand Prix Hassan II in Casablanca, Morocco.

Ferrero was unable to sustain this success throughout the rest of the clay court season. He lost in the first round of the Barcelona Open to Igor Kunitsyn and failed to qualify for the Rome Masters. He then suffered second–round losses in Portugal to Nikolay Davydenko, in Madrid to Fernando Verdasco, and at Roland-Garros to Philipp Kohlschreiber.

Ferrero launched a surprising comeback during the grass season. He reached the semifinals of the Queen&#x27;s Club Championships, where he lost to Andy Murray, and the quarterfinals at Wimbledon, equalling his best result there by defeating tenth seed Fernando González and seventh seed Gilles Simon before losing to Andy Murray in straight sets. These performances saw Ferrero climb from No. 90 to No. 37 in the span of a month. He then reached the finals of the Umag Open, where he lost 6-3, 6-0 to Nikolay Davydenko.

At the Washington Open, Ferrero advanced to the third round, beating Tommy Robredo before a loss to Tommy Haas. Ferrero qualified to play the Canada Masters. He defeated Lleyton Hewitt in the first round in straight sets, ending Hewitt&#x27;s three–match winning streak against him. He then defeated 13th seed Gaël Monfils, before losing once again to Andy Murray. Ferrero lost in the first round of the Cincinnati Masters to Marin Čilić. He began his campaign at the US Open by defeating Fabrice Santoro in what would be Santoro&#x27;s last US Open match. In the second round, Ferrero mounted a remarkable comeback from two sets down for the third time in his career to defeat Philipp Petzschner in five sets. Ferrero lost in the fourth round to eventual champion Juan Martín del Potro in straight sets. With this result Ferrero managed to re-enter the top 20, having been ranked No. 115 just five months earlier.

At the China Open, Ferrero lost to Fernando Verdasco in the second round. He then entered the Shanghai Masters, where he missed out on being seeded by one ranking spot. He was crushed in the first round by 13th seed Radek Štěpánek, winning only seven points in the second set. He also lost in the first round of the Stockholm Open, to Marcos Baghdatis. Ferrero then competed in the Valencia Open but was defeated by Pablo Cuevas in the first round in a three–set battle, after serving for the set at 5–3 in the second set. He ended the year ranked No. 23.

===2010: Career resurgence, three titles, highest ranking since 2004===
Ferrero had a bad start to the 2010 season. He began the year once again at the Auckland Open, where he retired against Michael Lammer with an injury trailing 1–3 in the second round. At the Australian Open, Ferrero suffered a shock defeat to Ivan Dodig, having been two-sets-to-love up and seemingly cruising to victory.

As first seed at the Brasil Open, Ferrero rediscovered his form. He crushed Łukasz Kubot in the final in 61 minutes, conceding one of his service games but breaking all of Kubot&#x27;s to win 6-1, 6-0. At Buenos Aires, Ferrero defeated top seed David Ferrer in the final to take his second title in a row and extend his winning streak to ten matches. This victory also raised his ranking to No. 16. At the Mexican Open in Acapulco, Ferrero defeated Diego Junqueira, Igor Andreev, defending champion Nicolás Almagro and Juan Mónaco to reach his third consecutive final. He then lost to David Ferrer in three sets. Both players admitted that Ferrero&#x27;s fatigue played a major role in the final set. Following this tournament, Ferrero became World No. 14, his highest ranking since 11 October 2004.

Ferrero defeated Daniel Köllerer in the second round of Indian Wells to claim his first hard-court victory of the season, losing only eight points on serve. He lost to Juan Mónaco in the third round in a match that lasted over three hours. At the Miami Masters, Ferrero lost in the round of 16 to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. At the Monte Carlo Masters, he defeated Marcel Granollers, Benjamin Becker and Tsonga before losing to Rafael Nadal in straight sets in the quarterfinals. At the Barcelona Open, Ferrero was upset by Thiemo de Bakker in the third round. At the Rome Masters, his form continued to dip as he suffered a shock loss to qualifier Santiago Giraldo in the first round. Ferrero went into the French Open seeded 16th and was tipped by some to make a good run there. However, he was upset in the third round by Robby Ginepri. After coming back from a two-set deficit and being a break of serve up in the decider, he lost in the fifth set.

Ferrero&#x27;s grass season was disappointing. He lost to lucky loser Dominik Meffert in the first round of Halle. His bad form continued at Wimbledon, where he lost to Xavier Malisse in five sets in the first round. He returned to clay at the Stuttgart Open, where he lost to Albert Montañés for the first time in six meetings in the semifinals. He was upset by Florian Mayer in the quarterfinals of Hamburg. Ferrero then won his third title of the year at the Umag Open, beating Pablo Cuevas, Alexandr Dolgopolov, Andreas Seppi, and Potito Starace in the final.

Ferrero missed the Canada and Cincinnati Masters due to a knee injury. He returned to play at the US Open, where he defeated Martin Kližan and Ricardo Mello in straight sets, but lost to Jürgen Melzer in straight sets in the third round. He missed the rest of the season due to knee and wrist injuries for which he received surgery in October. He therefore ended the year ranked No. 28.

===2011: Final ATP title===

In 2011, Ferrero withdrew from the Auckland Open and the Australian Open. As the defending champion, he withdrew from the Brasil Open and Buenos Aires. He also withdrew from Mexico, Indian Wells, Miami, and Monte Carlo, as the recovery from his wrist and knee surgery took longer than expected. Ferrero made his return at the Barcelona Open, where he defeated Xavier Malisse, Mischa Zverev, and Simone Vagnozzi, but lost in the quarterfinals to Nicolás Almagro. At the Madrid Open, he lost in the first round to Thiemo de Bakker, after which he indicated that the end of his tennis career might be near. He missed the Rome Masters, French Open, and Wimbledon due to the same injury, and his ranking dropped to No. 85.

Ferrero returned to competition at the Stuttgart Open. There, he defeated Bastian Knittel, Mikhail Youzhny, Marcel Granollers, Federico Delbonis, and straight-setted Pablo Andújar in the final to capture the title. Ferrero then went to Hamburg, where he lost in the first round to Cedrik-Marcel Stebe. As the defending champion in Umag, he reached the semifinals, where he lost to eventual champion Alexandr Dolgopolov. He lost in Canada to Ernests Gulbis and in Cincinnati to Feliciano López, both in the first round.

Ferrero&#x27;s next tournament was the US Open, where he defeated Pablo Andújar in the first round in five sets. In the second round, he defeated Frenchman Gaël Monfils in an electrifying five-set match. He was drawn against Marcel Granollers in the third round, who retired in the second set of the match. In the fourth round, Ferrero lost to Janko Tipsarević in four sets. At the China Open, Ferrero lost in the quarterfinals to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. He reached the third round at the Shanghai Masters, where he was defeated by David Ferrer after having wasted three match points in the second set. At the Valencia Open, Ferrero lost in the quarterfinals to Juan Mónaco. His final tournament of the year was the Paris Masters, where he lost in the first round to Nicolas Mahut. He ended the year ranked No. 50.

=== 2012: Final season, retirement ===

Ferrero began his 2012 season with a loss to Benoît Paire in Sydney. He entered the Australian Open, where he lost in the first round to Viktor Troicki in five sets, after failing to convert a match point in the fourth. After the match, Ferrero was fined $1,500 for &quot;audible obscenities&quot; on court.

Ferrero represented Spain in the Davis Cup for the last time in a tie against Kazakhstan, where he defeated Mikhail Kukushkin in five sets. He then played a disappointing Golden Swing, losing in the first round at all three tournaments. At the Brasil Open he lost to Leonardo Mayer, in Buenos Aires to Kei Nishikori, and at the Mexican Open to Stan Wawrinka. Ferrero then missed three months of competition due to a wrist injury.

Ferrero returned at the Madrid Masters, where he lost in the first round to qualifier Igor Andreev. At the Rome Masters, Ferrero beat Kevin Anderson and Gaël Monfils, his second and third wins of the year. However, in the third round, he lost to Roger Federer in three sets. Ferrero then entered the Nice French Riviera Open. He beat Robin Haase after saving a match point, but lost to Brazilian qualifier Thomaz Bellucci in the second round in straight sets. At the last French Open of his career, Ferrero won his first round match against French wild card Jonathan Dasnières de Veigy, before a second round loss to Marin Čilić in straight sets.

Ferrero did not play a warm-up tournament before Wimbledon, where he lost in the first round in straight sets to defending champion and No. 1-ranked Novak Djokovic. He then lost in the first round of Umag. On September 12, Ferrero announced that he would officially retire from professional tennis after the Valencia Open in October. He stated that &quot;The Valencia Open 500 will be my last tournament, in the best possible scenario. This season injuries have prevented me from playing regularly and it was a tough year as I realised on the court that I did not have the same ambition after 14 years at the top level.&quot; Ferrero played his final singles match in the first round of the Valencia Open, where he lost to fellow Spaniard Nicolás Almagro in straight sets. His retirement ceremony took place at the tournament.

===2017===
In 2017 it was announced that Ferrero would return to the ATP Tour to play in the Barcelona doubles draw alongside Pablo Carreño Busta. However, this would be his only tournament, and they lost in the first round.
==Davis Cup==
Ferrero was a key player in Spain&#x27;s Davis Cup team throughout his career. He made his Davis Cup debut for Spain in a quarterfinals match-up against Russia in 2000, where he won both his matches, against Yevgeny Kafelnikov and Marat Safin, in straight sets. In the semifinals, Ferrero defeated the American Vince Spadea in three sets, 4–6, 6–1, 6–4. His impressive Davis Cup form continued when he defeated Australians Patrick Rafter and Lleyton Hewitt in Barcelona, leading Spain to capture the Davis Cup for the first time. Ferrero would cite this years later as the victory he was most proud of in his career.

In 2001, Ferrero lost his first match against Raemon Sluiter, losing two tiebreaks and winning one, and Spain lost its tie against the Netherlands. Ferrero made up for this loss, however, when Spain competed in the qualifying rounds for the Davis Cup World Group, where he defeated Oleg Ogorodov of Uzbekistan in straight sets. Ferrero played the Davis Cup again in 2002, where Spain lost to the United States in the quarterfinals. In 2003, Ferrero played for Spain in a tie against Belgium, where he won both of his matches against Christophe Rochus and Kristof Vliegen; in a quarterfinal against Croatia, where he won his only match against Mario Ančić; and in a semifinal against Argentina, where he defeated Gastón Gaudio, losing only four games, but lost to Agustín Calleri in straight sets. In the final against Australia, Ferrero lost both his matches, against Lleyton Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis, in five sets.

In 2004, Ferrero won both of his singles matches in Spain&#x27;s quarterfinal against the Netherlands, defeating Sluiter in straight sets and Martin Verkerk in five. In the semifinal against Argentina, he won his only match against Fabrice Santoro in four sets. However, Ferrero was unceremoniously dropped from Spain&#x27;s line-up the day before the finals against the United States began, in favour of Rafael Nadal. Ferrero told media, &quot;It was certainly a surprise not to be picked. Physically I am at 100 percent and I have had three days of good training. Obviously I am not jumping up and down with happiness, but you have to take things as they come.&quot; Ferrero was then drafted at the last minute to play doubles alongside Tommy Robrero; they lost to American doubles specialists Bob Bryan and Mike Bryan 6-0, 6-3, 6-2. Spain still managed to secure the Davis Cup for the second time, due to singles wins from Carlos Moya and Nadal. After the tournament, Nadal denied rampant media speculation that there was bad blood between him and Ferrero: &quot;You have to understand Juan Carlos&#x27; situation. He was the number one in world tennis and it was hard for him to accept this situation, but he understood it perfectly and everything is going very well between us.&quot;

Spain lost 4-1 against Slovakia in the first round of the 2005 Davis Cup. Ferrero, who did not play the tie, was publicly critical of the team&#x27;s leadership. He rejoined the team for qualification play-offs that September, where he lost his first match against Andreas Seppi, but won his second match against Daniele Bracciali in straight sets to save Spain&#x27;s place in the World Group for 2006.

Ferrero did not represent Spain at the Davis Cup again until 2009, when Nadal&#x27;s injury sidelined him from playing. In the quarterfinal tie against Germany, Ferrero played and won a decisive fifth rubber against Andreas Beck in straight sets. In the semifinal against Israel, Ferrero won the second rubber against Dudi Sela, 6–4, 6–2, 6–0. This put Spain on track to win the Davis Cup for the second consecutive year, becoming the first nation to do so since Sweden in 1998. Nadal returned in time to play in the final, meaning that Ferrero was not selected to do so. He attended all the live rubbers to support his teammates during the first two days of the Davis Cup final as a reserve player.

Ferrero returned to the Davis Cup in his capacity as Carlos Alcaraz&#x27;s coach in 2022 and 2024, the second occasion marking the occasion of Rafael Nadal&#x27;s retirement.

==Coaching career==

In July 2017, Ferrero started working as a tennis coach of then-world No. 11 Alexander Zverev. Their work ended in February 2018 due to rumoured differences between them.

In 2019, Ferrero began coaching sixteen-year-old Carlos Alcaraz, a fellow Spaniard. Their partnership has to date produced seventeen tournament wins on the ATP Tour, including four Grand Slam titles - the 2022 US Open, Wimbledon in 2023 and 2024, and the 2024 French Open. Under Ferrero, Alcaraz has won five Masters 1000 titles: Miami and Madrid in 2022, Indian Wells and Madrid in 2023, and Indian Wells in 2024. Alcaraz also became the youngest ATP World No. 1 in Open Era history under Ferrero&#x27;s coaching. Their training base is the Ferrero Tennis Academy in Alicante, Villena, where Ferrero was once trained by Cascales.

==Playing style, team, and equipment==
Ferrero was an all-court player who was recognised particularly for his powerful forehand. He was also noted for his agility and high peak foot speed on court. This speed, together with his slender physical build, earned him the nickname &quot;the Mosquito&quot;. While Ferrero was best known as a clay court player during his prime, he achieved strong results on all surfaces.

Ferrero was coached by Antonio Martínez Cascales (from 1989) and Salvador Navarro (from May 2008). His fitness trainer was Miguel Maeso. He was trained by Cascales at the academy in Alicante, Villena which would eventually be renamed for, and taken over by, Ferrero.

Ferrero was sponsored by Nike, Sergio Tacchini, Asics, and Lotto Sport Italia. In 2010, he signed an endorsement deal with Joma. In 2012, he signed with Lacoste to supply his clothing. He used Prince Sports for racquets, playing with a Prince EXO3 Tour 100 Mid+ (16x18) model, before later switching to Head.

In 2024, Ferrero announced new endorsement deals for himself and his academy with Nike and Babolat.

==Career statistics==
===Grand Slam tournament performance timeline===

===Grand Slam tournament finals: 3 (1 title, 2 runners-up)===
==See also==

* List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players
* List of Grand Slam men&#x27;s singles champions

==Notes==
==References==

Ferrero loses the last game of his career

==External links==

* Official site 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185722" start="0" end="25" title="Juan Carlos Ferrero" label="Juan Carlos Ferrero Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="85" end="91" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="131" end="142" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="172" end="207" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="230" end="238" title="ATP Tour" label="ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048978" start="275" end="291" title="2003 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2003 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="301" end="308" title="ATP Masters 1000 tournaments" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q922917" start="346" end="362" title="2002 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2002 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q965872" start="367" end="379" title="2003 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2003 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="545" end="561" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q85518537" start="584" end="598" title="Carlos Alcaraz" label="Carlos Alcaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q574105" start="1154" end="1163" title="Bocairent" label="Bocairent"/>
<link wikidata="Q299914" start="1307" end="1320" title="Valencia Open" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="1364" end="1376" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115798877" start="1425" end="1447" title="Ferrero Tennis Academy" label="Ferrero Tennis Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="1451" end="1459" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q502249" start="1461" end="1468" title="Villena" label="Villena"/>
<link wikidata="Q973641" start="1539" end="1548" title="Ontinyent" label="Ontinyent"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="1645" end="1662" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775120" start="1961" end="1981" title="1999 Grand Prix Hassan II" label="Grand Prix Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q299163" start="2128" end="2142" title="Open Seat Godó" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="2188" end="2199" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q922313" start="2387" end="2396" title="Tomáš Zíb" label="Tomáš Zíb"/>
<link wikidata="Q299496" start="2420" end="2433" title="Generali Open" label="Austrian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="2507" end="2517" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q856521" start="2591" end="2598" title="1999 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q335209" start="2633" end="2646" title="Greg Rusedski" label="Greg Rusedski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843611" start="2761" end="2773" title="1999 Majorca Open" label="Majorca Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="2854" end="2878" title="ATP Newcomer of the Year" label="ATP Newcomer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596024" start="2942" end="2955" title="2000 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q782192" start="3024" end="3039" title="2000 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q361676" start="3072" end="3089" title="Younes El Aynaoui" label="Younes El Aynaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q299409" start="3117" end="3122" title="Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q346630" start="3171" end="3187" title="Nicolás Lapentti" label="Nicolás Lapentti"/>
<link wikidata="Q76778" start="3226" end="3240" title="Nicolas Kiefer" label="Nicolas Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445282" start="3297" end="3330" title="2000 Franklin Templeton Tennis Classic" label="Franklin Templeton Tennis Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="3360" end="3374" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117023" start="3405" end="3417" title="2000 Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="3421" end="3434" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q672314" start="3442" end="3447" title="2000 Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q644821" start="3451" end="3463" title="George Bastl" label="George Bastl"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="3498" end="3507" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370483" start="3643" end="3655" title="2000 Estoril Open" label="Estoril Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q950281" start="3664" end="3680" title="2000 Monte Carlo Open" label="Monte Carlo Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q346630" start="3725" end="3741" title="Nicolás Lapentti" label="Nicolás Lapentti"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="3746" end="3759" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815696" start="3824" end="3838" title="2000 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="3857" end="3868" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q950271" start="3986" end="3998" title="2000 Italian Open" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q283642" start="4017" end="4031" title="Mariano Puerta" label="Mariano Puerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q826593" start="4061" end="4072" title="2000 German Open" label="German Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q179364" start="4091" end="4103" title="Andrei Pavel" label="Andrei Pavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q846695" start="4161" end="4172" title="2000 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="4196" end="4209" title="Àlex Corretja" label="Àlex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q190723" start="4250" end="4265" title="Gustavo Kuerten" label="Gustavo Kuerten"/>
<link wikidata="Q912491" start="4307" end="4316" title="2000 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q643498" start="4326" end="4333" title="2000 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="4415" end="4426" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q661494" start="4456" end="4464" title="Tennis at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q552507" start="4536" end="4554" title="Arnaud di Pasquale" label="Arnaud di Pasquale"/>
<link wikidata="Q699033" start="4627" end="4633" title="2000 CA-TennisTrophy" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q309859" start="4637" end="4653" title="Richard Krajicek" label="Richard Krajicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q299821" start="4658" end="4666" title="Grand Prix de Tennis de Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q737996" start="4670" end="4687" title="Magnus Gustafsson" label="Magnus Gustafsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177607" start="4696" end="4709" title="2000 Davidoff Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q309859" start="4713" end="4729" title="Richard Krajicek" label="Richard Krajicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q826909" start="4742" end="4759" title="2000 Stuttgart Masters" label="Stuttgart Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q361676" start="4763" end="4780" title="Younes El Aynaoui" label="Younes El Aynaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q641781" start="4838" end="4851" title="2000 Paris Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q299745" start="4945" end="4959" title="Stockholm Open" label="Stockholm Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q241624" start="4963" end="4976" title="Adrian Voinea" label="Adrian Voinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="5082" end="5096" title="Patrick Rafter" label="Patrick Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="5101" end="5115" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q782245" start="5435" end="5450" title="2001 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q505283" start="5465" end="5476" title="Andrew Ilie" label="Andrew Ilie"/>
<link wikidata="Q593630" start="5517" end="5526" title="2001 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q457484" start="5536" end="5550" title="Raemon Sluiter" label="Raemon Sluiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290859" start="5592" end="5601" title="2001 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="5605" end="5618" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715681" start="5661" end="5666" title="2001 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q355323" start="5695" end="5708" title="Magnus Norman" label="Magnus Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="5747" end="5758" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402008" start="5807" end="5819" title="2001 Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q295858" start="5847" end="5860" title="Nicolás Massú" label="Nicolás Massú"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="5889" end="5902" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q744197" start="5906" end="5911" title="2001 Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733530" start="5968" end="5980" title="2001 Estoril Open" label="Estoril Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q449730" start="6016" end="6030" title="Félix Mantilla Botella" label="Félix Mantilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630968" start="6173" end="6192" title="2001 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356375" start="6196" end="6207" title="Galo Blanco" label="Galo Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815704" start="6263" end="6277" title="2001 Open SEAT Godó" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="6297" end="6308" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633796" start="6318" end="6330" title="2001 Rome Masters" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q190723" start="6350" end="6365" title="Gustavo Kuerten" label="Gustavo Kuerten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782824" start="6512" end="6527" title="2001 Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q715151" start="6546" end="6559" title="Albert Portas" label="Albert Portas"/>
<link wikidata="Q785601" start="6594" end="6605" title="2001 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="6654" end="6668" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q912527" start="6813" end="6822" title="2001 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335209" start="6889" end="6902" title="Greg Rusedski" label="Greg Rusedski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978947" start="6952" end="6958" title="2001 UBS Open" label="Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q356768" start="6977" end="6987" title="Jiří Novák" label="Jiří Novák"/>
<link wikidata="Q346630" start="7000" end="7016" title="Nicolás Lapentti" label="Nicolás Lapentti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630370" start="7045" end="7058" title="2001 Generali Open" label="Austrian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="7067" end="7081" title="Patrick Rafter" label="Patrick Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298048" start="7110" end="7124" title="2001 Canada Masters" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q383612" start="7190" end="7202" title="Hicham Arazi" label="Hicham Arazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632888" start="7226" end="7236" title="2001 Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q213199" start="7266" end="7279" title="Tommy Robredo" label="Tommy Rebredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q856527" start="7329" end="7336" title="2001 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q593630" start="7362" end="7371" title="2001 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342493" start="7442" end="7455" title="Oleg Ogorodov" label="Oleg Ogorodov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786654" start="7490" end="7500" title="2001 Salem Open" label="Salem Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q76760" start="7519" end="7535" title="Rainer Schüttler" label="Rainer Schüttler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775347" start="7544" end="7548" title="2001 Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361676" start="7567" end="7584" title="Younes El Aynaoui" label="Younes El Aynaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976395" start="7630" end="7647" title="2001 Stuttgart Masters" label="Stuttgart Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q335222" start="7652" end="7666" title="Thomas Enqvist" label="Thomas Enqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123225" start="7675" end="7694" title="2001 St. Petersburg Open" label="St. Petersburg Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q76760" start="7699" end="7715" title="Rainer Schüttler" label="Rainer Schüttler"/>
<link wikidata="Q603665" start="7759" end="7764" title="2001 Paris Masters" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q614089" start="7829" end="7847" title="2001 Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207705" start="7886" end="7904" title="Yevgeny Kafelnikov" label="Yevgeny Kafelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q190723" start="7919" end="7934" title="Gustavo Kuerten" label="Gustavo Kuerten"/>
<link wikidata="Q204279" start="7939" end="7955" title="Goran Ivanišević" label="Goran Ivanišević"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="8029" end="8043" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150533" start="8236" end="8248" title="2002 Milan Indoor" label="Milan Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q555641" start="8290" end="8308" title="Davide Sanguinetti" label="Davide Sanguinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178097" start="8363" end="8372" title="2002 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q383612" start="8415" end="8427" title="Hicham Arazi" label="Hicham Arazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361676" start="8440" end="8457" title="Younes El Aynaoui" label="Younes El Aynaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646415" start="8509" end="8516" title="2002 Open 13" label="Open 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q162487" start="8547" end="8561" title="Cédric Pioline" label="Cédric Pioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215494" start="8566" end="8575" title="2002 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q470879" start="8634" end="8648" title="Nicolas Escudé" label="Nicolas Escudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715689" start="8679" end="8684" title="2002 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393188" start="8867" end="8879" title="2002 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q335209" start="8888" end="8901" title="Greg Rusedski" label="Greg Rusedski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065495" start="8925" end="8930" title="2002 NASDAQ-100 Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q241624" start="8939" end="8952" title="Adrian Voinea" label="Adrian Voinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733534" start="8985" end="8997" title="2002 Estoril Open" label="Estoril Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="9006" end="9022" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633923" start="9053" end="9072" title="2002 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="9132" end="9142" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45666" start="9147" end="9165" title="Sébastien Grosjean" label="Sébastien Grosjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="9184" end="9195" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q457047" start="9291" end="9305" title="Alberto Martín" label="Alberto Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815701" start="9328" end="9337" title="2002 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="9342" end="9355" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401994" start="9379" end="9383" title="2002 Rome Masters" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q317828" start="9392" end="9405" title="Albert Costa" label="Alberto Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297919" start="9428" end="9435" title="2002 Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q737905" start="9537" end="9553" title="2002 French Open" label="2002 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="9621" end="9633" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="9657" end="9668" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q840901" start="9897" end="9906" title="2002 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085100" start="9931" end="9944" title="Jeff Morrison" label="Jeff Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630374" start="9992" end="10005" title="2002 Generali Open" label="Generali Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="10024" end="10037" title="Àlex Corretja" label="Àlex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630978" start="10075" end="10093" title="2002 Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="10130" end="10141" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q856524" start="10150" end="10157" title="2002 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="10194" end="10211" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297925" start="10371" end="10385" title="2002 Madrid Masters" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="10389" end="10401" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q678316" start="10429" end="10442" title="2002 Davidoff Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="10446" end="10463" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094318" start="10501" end="10519" title="2002 Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="10579" end="10592" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="10607" end="10619" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q356768" start="10624" end="10634" title="Jiří Novák" label="Jiří Novák"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="10688" end="10699" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="10754" end="10768" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605320" start="10935" end="10955" title="2003 Adidas International" label="Sydney International"/>
<link wikidata="Q437281" start="10974" end="10988" title="Hyung-Taik Lee" label="Hyung-Taik Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q750792" start="11036" end="11051" title="2003 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q369228" start="11070" end="11084" title="Wayne Ferreira" label="Wayne Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q428935" start="11126" end="11135" title="2003 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q441059" start="11206" end="11223" title="Christophe Rochus" label="Christophe Rochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374874" start="11228" end="11243" title="Kristof Vliegen" label="Kristof Vliegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034535" start="11270" end="11284" title="2003 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q457484" start="11362" end="11376" title="Raemon Sluiter" label="Raemon Sluiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095505" start="11442" end="11454" title="2003 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065106" start="11459" end="11464" title="2003 NASDAQ-100 Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965531" start="11469" end="11481" title="Brian Vahaly" label="Brian Vahaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q272532" start="11486" end="11498" title="Marcelo Ríos" label="Marcelo Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q295811" start="11626" end="11637" title="Mario Ančić" label="Mario Ančić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393019" start="11709" end="11728" title="2003 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="11748" end="11763" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994368" start="11799" end="11808" title="2003 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="11827" end="11838" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393034" start="11878" end="11895" title="2003 Rome Masters" label="2003 Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="11917" end="11930" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q588385" start="11971" end="11984" title="2003 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q441059" start="12018" end="12035" title="Christophe Rochus" label="Christophe Rochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q832157" start="12109" end="12125" title="2003 French Open" label="2003 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q335263" start="12155" end="12169" title="Martin Verkerk" label="Martin Verkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45666" start="12250" end="12268" title="Sébastien Grosjean" label="Sébastien Grosjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630377" start="12328" end="12341" title="2003 Generali Open" label="Generali Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q448278" start="12360" end="12376" title="Mariano Zabaleta" label="Mariano Zabaleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353770" start="12389" end="12405" title="2003 Idea Prokom Open" label="Idea Prokom Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q350266" start="12424" end="12434" title="Luis Horna" label="Luis Horna"/>
<link wikidata="Q744782" start="12458" end="12464" title="2003 Canada Masters" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297909" start="12469" end="12479" title="2003 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q221649" start="12488" end="12500" title="2003 US Open (tennis)" label="2003 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="12613" end="12627" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="12632" end="12644" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="12675" end="12687" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="12893" end="12906" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q280765" start="12944" end="12959" title="Agustín Calleri" label="Agustín Calleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q53407" start="13105" end="13116" title="Taylor Dent" label="Taylor Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q261267" start="13153" end="13167" title="2003 Madrid Masters" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q295858" start="13181" end="13194" title="Nicolás Massú" label="Nicolás Massú"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="13349" end="13365" title="King Juan Carlos" label="King Juan Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q603699" start="13475" end="13488" title="2003 BNP Paribas Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q356768" start="13492" end="13502" title="Jiří Novák" label="Jiří Novák"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031910" start="13511" end="13529" title="2003 Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="13584" end="13600" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="13602" end="13614" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="13620" end="13633" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="13743" end="13757" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q310949" start="13762" end="13780" title="Mark Philippoussis" label="Mark Philippoussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="13826" end="13838" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="13843" end="13856" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q518011" start="14000" end="14015" title="2004 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="14063" end="14076" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510816" start="14113" end="14122" title="2004 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="14141" end="14155" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="14157" end="14168" title="chicken pox" label="chicken pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q457484" start="14346" end="14360" title="Raemon Sluiter" label="Raemon Sluiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q335263" start="14365" end="14379" title="Martin Verkerk" label="Martin Verkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883601" start="14424" end="14437" title="2004 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="14456" end="14473" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q26335" start="14504" end="14515" title="2004 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="14519" end="14532" title="Alex Corretja" label="Alex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q843749" start="14715" end="14726" title="2004 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q296183" start="14795" end="14807" title="Igor Andreev" label="Igor Andreev"/>
<link wikidata="Q268871" start="14829" end="14838" title="2004 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53551" start="14889" end="14902" title="Robby Ginepri" label="Robby Ginepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353536" start="15038" end="15044" title="2004 Allianz Suisse Open Gstaad" label="Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q373711" start="15048" end="15061" title="Stefan Koubek" label="Stefan Koubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q326375" start="15093" end="15107" title="2004 Canada Masters" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312726" start="15134" end="15149" title="Fabrice Santoro" label="Fabrice Santoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q213199" start="15190" end="15203" title="Tommy Robredo" label="Tommy Robredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633938" start="15207" end="15217" title="2004 Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q53422" start="15222" end="15232" title="Mardy Fish" label="Mardy Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q733387" start="15240" end="15255" title="Tennis at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q373711" start="15260" end="15273" title="Stefan Koubek" label="Stefan Koubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q840907" start="15281" end="15288" title="2004 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q512831" start="15293" end="15302" title="Kevin Kim" label="Kevin Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083447" start="15310" end="15320" title="2004 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="15325" end="15337" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775354" start="15345" end="15373" title="2004 Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon" label="Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q350266" start="15382" end="15392" title="Luis Horna" label="Luis Horna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297926" start="15396" end="15402" title="2004 Madrid Masters" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q358656" start="15636" end="15647" title="Jan Hernych" label="Jan Hernych"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784362" start="15655" end="15668" title="2005 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q610343" start="15677" end="15692" title="2005 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="15712" end="15727" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644926" start="15970" end="15977" title="2005 Open 13" label="Open 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q353293" start="15999" end="16016" title="Joachim Johansson" label="Joachim Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087631" start="16049" end="16063" title="2005 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q309395" start="16067" end="16081" title="Radek Štěpánek" label="Radek Štěpánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225429" start="16090" end="16116" title="2005 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="16120" end="16133" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100113" start="16142" end="16154" title="2005 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="16158" end="16169" title="Carlos Moya" label="Carlos Moya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869389" start="16204" end="16217" title="2005 NASDAQ-100 Open" label="Miami Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="16251" end="16263" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q925107" start="16273" end="16286" title="2005 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="16323" end="16335" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922061" start="16383" end="16394" title="2005 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="16413" end="16428" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="16444" end="16457" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="16462" end="16479" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392191" start="16511" end="16525" title="2005 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="16544" end="16556" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353316" start="16646" end="16658" title="2005 Estoril Open" label="Estoril Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="16662" end="16673" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297930" start="16744" end="16759" title="2005 Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="16778" end="16795" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q832497" start="16808" end="16819" title="2005 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644873" start="16910" end="16915" title="2005 Gerry Weber Open" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="16934" end="16944" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q746693" start="16970" end="16979" title="2005 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="16998" end="17011" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353811" start="17082" end="17094" title="2005 Swedish Open" label="Swedish Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q265586" start="17103" end="17115" title="ATP Vegeta Croatia Open" label="Croatia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="17146" end="17158" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="17163" end="17178" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q326212" start="17268" end="17278" title="2005 Rogers Cup" label="Rogers Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q314767" start="17282" end="17296" title="Dominik Hrbatý" label="Dominik Hrbatý"/>
<link wikidata="Q348934" start="17321" end="17331" title="2005 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="17335" end="17347" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q589969" start="17379" end="17386" title="2005 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299944" start="17390" end="17404" title="Arnaud Clément" label="Arnaud Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009614" start="17456" end="17466" title="2005 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q55161" start="17500" end="17509" title="2005 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q319572" start="17572" end="17585" title="Andreas Seppi" label="Andreas Seppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q464373" start="17666" end="17683" title="Daniele Bracciali" label="Daniele Bracciali"/>
<link wikidata="Q299651" start="17772" end="17784" title="Campionati Internazionali di Sicilia" label="Palermo Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q62120" start="17818" end="17831" title="Tomas Behrend" label="Tomas Behrend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634289" start="17880" end="17891" title="2005 BA-CA-TennisTrophy" label="Vienna Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="17903" end="17919" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309395" start="17924" end="17938" title="Radek Štěpánek" label="Radek Štěpánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="17965" end="17978" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q221359" start="18041" end="18051" title="Max Mirnyi" label="Max Mirnyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297929" start="18074" end="18080" title="2005 Mutua Madrileña Masters Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q299930" start="18085" end="18097" title="José Acasuso" label="José Acasuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177623" start="18125" end="18138" title="2005 Davidoff Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="18147" end="18160" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q391864" start="18187" end="18200" title="2005 BNP Paribas Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811865" start="18337" end="18357" title="2006 Medibank International" label="Sydney International"/>
<link wikidata="Q356041" start="18362" end="18376" title="Chris Guccione (tennis)" label="Chris Guccione"/>
<link wikidata="Q598746" start="18385" end="18400" title="2006 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q76778" start="18432" end="18446" title="Nicolas Kiefer" label="Nicolas Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643479" start="18516" end="18530" title="2006 ATP Buenos Aires" label="Argentina Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="18553" end="18564" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644643" start="18606" end="18617" title="2006 Brasil Open" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q969314" start="18621" end="18635" title="Flávio Saretta" label="Flávio Saretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603731" start="18682" end="18694" title="2006 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065557" start="18699" end="18704" title="2006 NASDAQ-100 Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q140253" start="18722" end="18741" title="Paradorn Srichaphan" label="Paradorn Srichaphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310376" start="18765" end="18780" title="Dmitry Tursunov" label="Dmitry Tursunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q282753" start="18865" end="18878" title="2006 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="18937" end="18952" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191867" start="18961" end="18980" title="2006 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="19039" end="19051" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333779" start="19107" end="19121" title="2006 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734918" start="19188" end="19192" title="2006 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q310349" start="19196" end="19214" title="Paul-Henri Mathieu" label="Paul-Henri Mathieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363077" start="19242" end="19249" title="2006 Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q826215" start="19268" end="19279" title="2006 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="19311" end="19324" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749180" start="19398" end="19419" title="2006 Ordina Open" label="&amp;#x27;s-Hertogenbosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q315961" start="19438" end="19451" title="Florent Serra" label="Florent Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q241184" start="19456" end="19465" title="2006 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q309395" start="19506" end="19520" title="Radek Štěpánek" label="Radek Štěpánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956712" start="19588" end="19600" title="2006 Swedish Open" label="Swedish Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270" start="19646" end="19661" title="Jarkko Nieminen" label="Jarkko Nieminen"/>
<link wikidata="Q736877" start="19698" end="19702" title="2006 Croatia Open Umag" label="Umag"/>
<link wikidata="Q715151" start="19706" end="19719" title="Albert Portas" label="Albert Portas"/>
<link wikidata="Q326205" start="19748" end="19754" title="2006 Rogers Cup" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="19758" end="19775" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094776" start="19828" end="19846" title="2006 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="19904" end="19915" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="19991" end="20003" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213199" start="20014" end="20027" title="Tommy Robredo" label="Tommy Robredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="20170" end="20182" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q266346" start="20305" end="20312" title="2006 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q369248" start="20316" end="20328" title="Marc Gicquel" label="Marc Gicquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282218" start="20378" end="20386" title="2006 Thailand Open (tennis)" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289" start="20390" end="20403" title="Mischa Zverev" label="Mischa Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q299582" start="20408" end="20412" title="Open de Moselle" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313402" start="20416" end="20432" title="Julien Benneteau" label="Julien Benneteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q774030" start="20437" end="20443" title="2006 BA-CA-TennisTrophy" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q223549" start="20447" end="20460" title="Jürgen Melzer" label="Jürgen Melzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835289" start="20469" end="20475" title="2006 Mutua Madrileña Masters Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192801" start="20479" end="20494" title="Robin Söderling" label="Robin Söderling"/>
<link wikidata="Q940895" start="20653" end="20666" title="2007 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q295858" start="20670" end="20683" title="Nicolás Massú" label="Nicolás Massú"/>
<link wikidata="Q751802" start="20715" end="20730" title="2007 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q175210" start="20734" end="20749" title="Danai Udomchoke" label="Danai Udomchoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q899101" start="20801" end="20812" title="2007 Brasil Open" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q310384" start="20831" end="20846" title="Guillermo Cañas" label="Guillermo Cañas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505126" start="20894" end="20906" title="2007 ATP Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507391" start="20934" end="20946" title="2007 Abierto Mexicano Telcel" label="Mexican Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="20965" end="20976" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067364" start="21014" end="21026" title="2007 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="21045" end="21057" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723213" start="21101" end="21106" title="2007 Sony Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761880" start="21128" end="21141" title="2007 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q457047" start="21145" end="21159" title="Alberto Martín" label="Alberto Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568466" start="21223" end="21242" title="2007 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="21261" end="21274" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025763" start="21317" end="21326" title="2007 Torneo Godó" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q649019" start="21331" end="21335" title="2007 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q317964" start="21339" end="21353" title="Potito Starace" label="Potito Starace"/>
<link wikidata="Q373571" start="21358" end="21371" title="Pablo Andújar" label="Pablo Andújar"/>
<link wikidata="Q554968" start="21413" end="21420" title="2007 Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q746701" start="21425" end="21438" title="2007 French Open" label="Roland-Garros"/>
<link wikidata="Q219970" start="21458" end="21473" title="Mikhail Youzhny" label="Mikhail Youzhny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360179" start="21513" end="21534" title="2007 Ordina Open" label="&amp;#x27;s-Hertogenbosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q440468" start="21538" end="21552" title="Carlos Berlocq" label="Carlos Berlocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q746669" start="21601" end="21610" title="2007 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="21647" end="21658" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111431" start="21921" end="21935" title="2007 Mercedes Cup" label="Stuttgart Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q223695" start="21954" end="21969" title="Feliciano López" label="Feliciano López"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287673" start="22015" end="22028" title="2007 Austrian Open (tennis)" label="Austrian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q319572" start="22032" end="22045" title="Andreas Seppi" label="Andreas Seppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268897" start="22146" end="22156" title="2007 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q784169" start="22188" end="22194" title="2007 Rogers Cup" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="22198" end="22212" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q756439" start="22244" end="22251" title="2007 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q223695" start="22255" end="22270" title="Feliciano López" label="Feliciano López"/>
<link wikidata="Q689170" start="22322" end="22328" title="2007 BA-CA-TennisTrophy" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="22340" end="22358" title="Stanislas Wawrinka" label="Stanislas Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132374" start="22383" end="22389" title="2007 Madrid Masters" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="22401" end="22415" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="22482" end="22498" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608075" start="22506" end="22519" title="2007 BNP Paribas Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628656" start="22697" end="22710" title="2008 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q77149" start="22729" end="22750" title="Philipp Kohlschreiber" label="Philipp Kohlschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="22769" end="22785" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577107" start="22824" end="22839" title="2008 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="22858" end="22870" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q317974" start="22936" end="22949" title="Nicolas Mahut" label="Nicolas Mahut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601615" start="22977" end="22984" title="2008 Open 13" label="Open 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502397" start="22989" end="22998" title="2008 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q337763" start="23002" end="23021" title="Teymuraz Gabashvili" label="Teymuraz Gabashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q637255" start="23030" end="23035" title="2008 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="23039" end="23051" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317387" start="23090" end="23102" title="2008 Pacific Life Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q613376" start="23138" end="23143" title="2008 Sony Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="23161" end="23174" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404460" start="23202" end="23210" title="2008 Open de Tenis Comunidad Valenciana" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="23214" end="23225" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914734" start="23286" end="23305" title="2008 Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="23336" end="23348" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965966" start="23489" end="23501" title="2008 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="23826" end="23839" title="Stanislas Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q277655" start="23884" end="23895" title="2008 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q462445" start="23957" end="23970" title="Marcos Daniel" label="Marcos Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q388312" start="24043" end="24052" title="2008 Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289" start="24099" end="24112" title="Mischa Zverev" label="Mischa Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q510017" start="24245" end="24255" title="2008 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="24313" end="24325" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q694859" start="24357" end="24368" title="2008 Bank Austria-Tennis Trophy" label="Vienna Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q223549" start="24407" end="24420" title="Jürgen Melzer" label="Jürgen Melzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660462" start="24430" end="24458" title="2008 Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon" label="Grand Prix de Tennis de Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="24498" end="24516" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574857" start="24730" end="24743" title="2009 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q77149" start="24747" end="24768" title="Philipp Kohlschreiber" label="Philipp Kohlschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827588" start="24796" end="24818" title="2009 Brisbane International" label="Brisbane International"/>
<link wikidata="Q315961" start="24822" end="24835" title="Florent Serra" label="Florent Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q330022" start="24867" end="24882" title="2009 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312726" start="24886" end="24901" title="Fabrice Santoro" label="Fabrice Santoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q899099" start="25076" end="25087" title="2009 Brasil Open" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312345" start="25106" end="25121" title="Thomaz Bellucci" label="Thomaz Bellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130467" start="25130" end="25142" title="2009 Copa Telmex" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="25169" end="25185" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q784510" start="25319" end="25339" title="2009 Grand Prix Hassan II" label="Grand Prix Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="25343" end="25362" title="Casablanca, Morocco" label="Casablanca, Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277039" start="25488" end="25502" title="2009 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q365191" start="25506" end="25519" title="Igor Kunitsyn" label="Igor Kunitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460380" start="25550" end="25562" title="2009 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370514" start="25604" end="25612" title="2009 Estoril Open" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="25616" end="25633" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010016" start="25638" end="25644" title="2009 Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="25648" end="25665" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q381118" start="25674" end="25687" title="2009 French Open" label="Roland-Garros"/>
<link wikidata="Q77149" start="25691" end="25712" title="Philipp Kohlschreiber" label="Philipp Kohlschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910482" start="25812" end="25843" title="2009 AEGON Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="25862" end="25873" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="25900" end="25909" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="25967" end="25984" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q212833" start="26002" end="26014" title="Gilles Simon" label="Gilles Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="26032" end="26043" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697900" start="26179" end="26188" title="2009 ATP Studena Croatia Open Umag" label="Umag Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="26216" end="26233" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q674157" start="26243" end="26258" title="2009 Legg Mason Tennis Classic" label="Washington Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q213199" start="26305" end="26318" title="Tommy Robredo" label="Tommy Robredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="26336" end="26346" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q326348" start="26378" end="26392" title="2009 Rogers Cup" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="26406" end="26420" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186429" start="26546" end="26558" title="Gaël Monfils" label="Gaël Monfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508386" start="26640" end="26658" title="2009 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="26662" end="26673" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q380557" start="26704" end="26711" title="2009 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q77180" start="26914" end="26932" title="Philipp Petzschner" label="Philipp Petzschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180535" start="27001" end="27022" title="Juan Martín del Potro" label="Juan Martín del Potro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073415" start="27159" end="27169" title="2009 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="27187" end="27204" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940613" start="27246" end="27262" title="2009 Shanghai ATP Masters 1000" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q309395" start="27368" end="27382" title="Radek Štěpánek" label="Radek Štěpánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657030" start="27468" end="27482" title="2009 If Stockholm Open" label="Stockholm Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="27487" end="27503" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779869" start="27534" end="27547" title="2009 Valencia Open 500" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q358651" start="27568" end="27580" title="Pablo Cuevas" label="Pablo Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507711" start="27861" end="27874" title="2010 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q662627" start="27901" end="27915" title="Michael Lammer" label="Michael Lammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q476646" start="27972" end="27987" title="2010 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q324515" start="28024" end="28034" title="Ivan Dodig" label="Ivan Dodig"/>
<link wikidata="Q783994" start="28125" end="28136" title="2010 Brasil Open" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q345626" start="28180" end="28192" title="Łukasz Kubot" label="Łukasz Kubot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130471" start="28309" end="28321" title="2010 Copa Telmex" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="28349" end="28361" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957372" start="28510" end="28522" title="2010 Abierto Mexicano Telcel" label="Mexican Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q717463" start="28553" end="28568" title="Diego Junqueira" label="Diego Junqueira"/>
<link wikidata="Q296183" start="28570" end="28582" title="Igor Andreev" label="Igor Andreev"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="28603" end="28618" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q294888" start="28623" end="28634" title="Juan Mónaco" label="Juan Mónaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="28689" end="28701" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q460410" start="28922" end="28937" title="Daniel Köllerer" label="Daniel Köllerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782959" start="28961" end="28973" title="2010 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q294888" start="29073" end="29084" title="Juan Mónaco" label="Juan Mónaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q541770" start="29152" end="29165" title="2010 Sony Ericsson Open" label="Miami Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="29202" end="29220" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945675" start="29229" end="29248" title="2010 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q314348" start="29262" end="29279" title="Marcel Granollers" label="Marcel Granollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77176" start="29281" end="29296" title="Benjamin Becker" label="Benjamin Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="29325" end="29337" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664969" start="29384" end="29398" title="2010 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q512712" start="29421" end="29437" title="Thiemo de Bakker" label="Thiemo de Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459009" start="29465" end="29477" title="2010 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q357335" start="29546" end="29562" title="Santiago Giraldo" label="Santiago Giraldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q248438" start="29605" end="29616" title="2010 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53551" start="29722" end="29735" title="Robby Ginepri" label="Robby Ginepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q84816" start="29921" end="29936" title="Dominik Meffert" label="Dominik Meffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q700780" start="29959" end="29964" title="2010 Gerry Weber Open" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q476638" start="29992" end="30001" title="Wimbledon 2010" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312620" start="30020" end="30034" title="Xavier Malisse" label="Xavier Malisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921376" start="30095" end="30109" title="2010 MercedesCup" label="Stuttgart Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299374" start="30128" end="30143" title="Albert Montañés" label="Albert Montañés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514027" start="30252" end="30259" title="2010 International German Open" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q299748" start="30313" end="30322" title="2010 ATP Studena Croatia Open Umag" label="Umag Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q358651" start="30332" end="30344" title="Pablo Cuevas" label="Pablo Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q311906" start="30346" end="30365" title="Alexandr Dolgopolov" label="Alexandr Dolgopolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q319572" start="30367" end="30380" title="Andreas Seppi" label="Andreas Seppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q317964" start="30386" end="30400" title="Potito Starace" label="Potito Starace"/>
<link wikidata="Q326410" start="30435" end="30441" title="2010 Rogers Cup" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576962" start="30446" end="30464" title="2010 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q568472" start="30514" end="30521" title="2010 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19399" start="30541" end="30554" title="Martin Kližan" label="Martin Kližan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45010" start="30559" end="30572" title="Ricardo Mello" label="Ricardo Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q223549" start="30603" end="30616" title="Jürgen Melzer" label="Jürgen Melzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575776" start="30868" end="30881" title="2011 Heineken Open" label="Auckland Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q381132" start="30890" end="30905" title="2011 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q899125" start="30955" end="30966" title="2011 Brasil Open" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130045" start="30971" end="30983" title="2011 Copa Claro" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q320949" start="31007" end="31013" title="2011 Abierto Mexicano Telcel" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q796844" start="31015" end="31027" title="2011 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460570" start="31029" end="31034" title="2011 Sony Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q388372" start="31040" end="31051" title="2011 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175037" start="31159" end="31173" title="2011 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell" label="Barcelona Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312620" start="31193" end="31207" title="Xavier Malisse" label="Xavier Malisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289" start="31209" end="31222" title="Mischa Zverev" label="Mischa Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637195" start="31228" end="31243" title="Simone Vagnozzi" label="Simone Vagnozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="31278" end="31293" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458275" start="31302" end="31313" title="2011 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q512712" start="31345" end="31361" title="Thiemo de Bakker" label="Thiemo de Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507652" start="31451" end="31463" title="2011 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q244427" start="31465" end="31476" title="2011 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q245073" start="31482" end="31491" title="2011 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q701043" start="31591" end="31605" title="2011 MercedesCup" label="Stuttgart Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q107961" start="31626" end="31641" title="Bastian Knittel" label="Bastian Knittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219970" start="31643" end="31658" title="Mikhail Youzhny" label="Mikhail Youzhny"/>
<link wikidata="Q314348" start="31660" end="31677" title="Marcel Granollers" label="Marcel Granollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q367654" start="31679" end="31696" title="Federico Delbonis" label="Federico Delbonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373571" start="31718" end="31731" title="Pablo Andújar" label="Pablo Andújar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22829012" start="31788" end="31795" title="German Open Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q77169" start="31833" end="31852" title="Cedrik-Marcel Stebe" label="Cedrik-Marcel Stebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q299760" start="31883" end="31887" title="2011 ATP Studena Croatia Open" label="Umag"/>
<link wikidata="Q311906" start="31951" end="31970" title="Alexandr Dolgopolov" label="Alexandr Dolgopolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q326333" start="31983" end="31989" title="2011 Rogers Cup" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q295866" start="31993" end="32007" title="Ernests Gulbis" label="Ernests Gulbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577387" start="32015" end="32025" title="2011 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q223695" start="32029" end="32044" title="Feliciano López" label="Feliciano López"/>
<link wikidata="Q734138" start="32111" end="32118" title="2011 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q373571" start="32138" end="32151" title="Pablo Andújar" label="Pablo Andújar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186429" start="32228" end="32240" title="Gaël Monfils" label="Gaël Monfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q210012" start="32416" end="32432" title="Janko Tipsarević" label="Janko Tipsarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073443" start="32454" end="32464" title="2011 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="32503" end="32521" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109068" start="32557" end="32573" title="2011 Shanghai Rolex Masters" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="32600" end="32612" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q299914" start="32678" end="32691" title="Valencia Open" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q294888" start="32730" end="32741" title="Juan Mónaco" label="Juan Mónaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230166" start="32784" end="32797" title="Paris Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q317974" start="32835" end="32848" title="Nicolas Mahut" label="Nicolas Mahut"/>
<link wikidata="Q246542" start="32969" end="32981" title="Benoît Paire" label="Benoît Paire"/>
<link wikidata="Q248952" start="32985" end="32991" title="Sydney International" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q782695" start="33008" end="33023" title="2012 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q148225" start="33061" end="33075" title="Viktor Troicki" label="Viktor Troicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153" start="33266" end="33275" title="2012 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q459166" start="33341" end="33358" title="Mikhail Kukushkin" label="Mikhail Kukushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579848" start="33404" end="33416" title="Golden Swing" label="Golden Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643843" start="33477" end="33488" title="2012 Brasil Open – Singles" label="Brasil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q33249" start="33500" end="33514" title="Leonardo Mayer" label="Leonardo Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3690211" start="33519" end="33531" title="2012 Copa Claro – Singles" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q311222" start="33535" end="33548" title="Kei Nishikori" label="Kei Nishikori"/>
<link wikidata="Q320970" start="33561" end="33573" title="2012 Abierto Mexicano Telcel" label="Mexican Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="33577" end="33590" title="Stanislas Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q594674" start="33688" end="33702" title="2012 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q296183" start="33750" end="33762" title="Igor Andreev" label="Igor Andreev"/>
<link wikidata="Q776216" start="33771" end="33783" title="2012 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q299956" start="33798" end="33812" title="Kevin Anderson (tennis)" label="Kevin Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186429" start="33817" end="33829" title="Gaël Monfils" label="Gaël Monfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="33910" end="33923" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q735878" start="33964" end="33988" title="2012 Open de Nice Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Nice French Riviera Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q441037" start="33998" end="34009" title="Robin Haase" label="Robin Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q312345" start="34070" end="34085" title="Thomaz Bellucci" label="Thomaz Bellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q552048" start="34222" end="34249" title="Jonathan Dasnières de Veigy" label="Jonathan Dasnières de Veigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="34281" end="34292" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q753300" start="34361" end="34370" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="34461" end="34475" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q279592" start="34512" end="34516" title="2012 ATP Vegeta Croatia Open Umag" label="Umag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420334" start="34620" end="34633" title="2012 Valencia Open 500" label="Valencia Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="35051" end="35066" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121592" start="35266" end="35285" title="Pablo Carreño Busta" label="Pablo Carreño Busta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207705" start="35587" end="35605" title="Yevgeny Kafelnikov" label="Yevgeny Kafelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="35610" end="35621" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54661" start="35690" end="35702" title="Vince Spadea" label="Vince Spadea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="35802" end="35816" title="Patrick Rafter" label="Patrick Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="35821" end="35835" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q457484" start="36043" end="36057" title="Raemon Sluiter" label="Raemon Sluiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342493" start="36279" end="36292" title="Oleg Ogorodov" label="Oleg Ogorodov"/>
<link wikidata="Q441059" start="36530" end="36547" title="Christophe Rochus" label="Christophe Rochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374874" start="36552" end="36567" title="Kristof Vliegen" label="Kristof Vliegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q295811" start="36640" end="36651" title="Mario Ančić" label="Mario Ančić"/>
<link wikidata="Q299960" start="36709" end="36722" title="Gastón Gaudio" label="Gastón Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q280765" start="36760" end="36775" title="Agustín Calleri" label="Agustín Calleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="36865" end="36879" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q310949" start="36884" end="36902" title="Mark Philippoussis" label="Mark Philippoussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335263" start="37061" end="37075" title="Martin Verkerk" label="Martin Verkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="37324" end="37336" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213199" start="37658" end="37671" title="Tommy Robredo" label="Tommy Robrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q53340" start="37715" end="37724" title="Bob Bryan" label="Bob Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53342" start="37729" end="37739" title="Mike Bryan" label="Mike Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="37845" end="37856" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moya"/>
<link wikidata="Q319572" start="38474" end="38487" title="Andreas Seppi" label="Andreas Seppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q464373" start="38522" end="38539" title="Daniele Bracciali" label="Daniele Bracciali"/>
<link wikidata="Q60704" start="38830" end="38842" title="Andreas Beck (tennis)" label="Andreas Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q311014" start="38932" end="38941" title="Dudi Sela" label="Dudi Sela"/>
<link wikidata="Q85518537" start="39368" end="39382" title="Carlos Alcaraz" label="Carlos Alcaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q111179606" start="39399" end="39403" title="2022 Davis Cup Finals" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q125332068" start="39408" end="39412" title="2024 Davis Cup Finals" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="39589" end="39605" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q85518537" start="39733" end="39747" title="Carlos Alcaraz" label="Carlos Alcaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="39840" end="39848" title="ATP Tour" label="ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39865" end="39875" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q108454403" start="39889" end="39901" title="2022 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2022 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q113129382" start="39916" end="39920" title="2023 Wimbledon Championships" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q121046430" start="39925" end="39929" title="2024 Wimbledon Championships" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q117470515" start="39939" end="39955" title="2024 French Open" label="2024 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="39993" end="40005" title="ATP Tour Masters 1000" label="Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="40014" end="40019" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="40024" end="40030" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="40040" end="40052" title="Indian Wells Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q115798877" start="40226" end="40248" title="Ferrero Tennis Academy" label="Ferrero Tennis Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="40252" end="40260" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q756328" start="40370" end="40386" title="all-court player" label="all-court player"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406437" start="40799" end="40815" title="Salvador Navarro" label="Salvador Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="40916" end="40924" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q502249" start="40926" end="40933" title="Villena" label="Villena"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="41027" end="41031" title="Nike Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282473" start="41033" end="41048" title="Sergio Tacchini" label="Sergio Tacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q327247" start="41050" end="41055" title="ASICS" label="Asics"/>
<link wikidata="Q850307" start="41061" end="41079" title="Lotto Sport Italia" label="Lotto Sport Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051799" start="41125" end="41129" title="Joma" label="Joma"/>
<link wikidata="Q309031" start="41155" end="41162" title="Lacoste" label="Lacoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550716" start="41195" end="41208" title="Prince Sports" label="Prince Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q631894" start="41305" end="41309" title="Head (company)" label="Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q797750" start="41403" end="41410" title="Babolat" label="Babolat"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="41563" end="41606" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players" label="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="41609" end="41656" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382890" wikidata="Q608189" url="?curid=382890" title="Coccolith">
<text>Coccoliths are individual plates or scales of calcium carbonate formed by coccolithophores (single-celled phytoplankton such as &quot;Emiliania huxleyi&quot;) and cover the cell surface arranged in the form of a spherical shell, called a &quot;coccosphere&quot;.

==Overview==
Coccolithophores are spherical cells about 5–100 micrometres across, enclosed by calcareous plates called coccoliths, which are about 2–25 micrometres across.
Coccolithophores are an important group of about 200 marine phytoplankton species which cover themselves with a calcium carbonate shell called a &quot;coccosphere&quot;. They are ecologically and biogeochemically important but the reason why they calcify remains elusive. One key function may be that the coccosphere offers protection against microzooplankton predation, which is one of the main causes of phytoplankton death in the ocean.

Coccolithophores have been an integral part of marine plankton communities since the Jurassic. Today, coccolithophores contribute ~1–10% to primary production in the surface ocean and ~50% to pelagic CaCO3 sediments. Their calcareous shell increases the sinking velocity of photosynthetically fixed into the deep ocean by ballasting organic matter. At the same time, the biogenic precipitation of calcium carbonate during coccolith formation reduces the total alkalinity of seawater and releases . Thus, coccolithophores play an important role in the marine carbon cycle by influencing the efficiency of the biological carbon pump and the oceanic uptake of atmospheric .

As of 2021, it is not known why coccolithophores calcify and how their ability to produce coccoliths is associated with their ecological success. The most plausible benefit of having a coccosphere seems to be a protection against predators or viruses. Viral infection is an important cause of phytoplankton death in the oceans, and it has recently been shown that calcification can influence the interaction between a coccolithophore and its virus. The major predators of marine phytoplankton are microzooplankton like ciliates and dinoflagellates. These are estimated to consume about two-thirds of the primary production in the ocean and microzooplankton can exert a strong grazing pressure on coccolithophore populations. Although calcification does not prevent predation, it has been argued that the coccosphere reduces the grazing efficiency by making it more difficult for the predator to utilise the organic content of coccolithophores. Heterotrophic protists are able to selectively choose prey on the basis of its size or shape and through chemical signals and may thus favor other prey that is available and not protected by coccoliths.

== Formation and composition ==
Coccoliths are formed within the cell in vesicles derived from the golgi body. When the coccolith is complete these vesicles fuse with the cell wall and the coccolith is exocytosed and incorporated in the coccosphere. The coccoliths are either dispersed following death and breakup of the coccosphere, or are shed continually by some species. They sink through the water column to form an important part of the deep-sea sediments (depending on the water depth). Thomas Huxley was the first person to observe these forms in modern marine sediments and he gave them the name &#x27;coccoliths&#x27; in a report published in 1858.
Coccoliths are composed of calcium carbonate as the mineral calcite and are the main constituent of chalk deposits such as the white cliffs of Dover (deposited in Cretaceous times), in which they were first described by Henry Clifton Sorby in 1861.


== Types ==
There are two main types of coccoliths, heterococcoliths and holococcoliths. Heterococcoliths are formed of a radial array of elaborately shaped crystal units. Holococcoliths are formed of minute (~0.1 micrometre) calcite rhombohedra, arranged in continuous arrays. The two coccolith types were originally thought to be produced by different families of coccolithophores. Now, however, it is known through a mix of observations on field samples and laboratory cultures, that the two coccolith types are produced by the same species but at different life cycle phases. Heterococcoliths are produced in the diploid life-cycle phase and holococcoliths in the haploid phase. Both in field samples and laboratory cultures, there is the possibility of observing a cell covered by a combination of heterococcoliths and holococcoliths. This indicates the transition from the diploid to the haploid phase of the species. Such combination of coccoliths has been observed in field samples, with many of them coming from the Mediterranean.

===Shape===
Coccoliths are also classified depending on shape. Common shapes include:

* Calyptrolith – basket-shaped with openings near the base
* Caneolith – disc- or bowl-shaped
* Ceratolith – horseshoe or wishbone shaped
* Cribrilith – disc-shaped, with numerous perforations in the central area
* Cyrtolith – convex disc shaped, may with a projecting central process
* Discolith – ellipsoidal with a raised rim, in some cases the high rim forms a vase or cup-like structure
* Helicolith – a placolith with a spiral margin
* Lopadolith – basket or cup-shaped with a high rim, opening distally
* Pentalith – pentagonal shape composed of five four-sided crystals
* Placolith – rim composed of two plates stacked on top of one another
* Prismatolith – polygonal, may have perforations
* Rhabdolith – a single plate with a club-shaped central process
* Scapholith – rhombohedral, with parallel lines in center



== Function ==
Although coccoliths are remarkably elaborate structures whose formation is a complex product of cellular processes, their function is unclear. Hypotheses include defence against grazing by zooplankton or infection by bacteria or viruses; maintenance of buoyancy; release of carbon dioxide for photosynthesis; to filter out harmful UV light; or in deep-dwelling species, to concentrate light for photosynthesis.

== Fossil record ==
Because coccoliths are formed of low-Mg calcite, the most stable form of calcium carbonate, they are readily fossilised. They are found in sediments together with similar microfossils of uncertain affinities (nanoliths) from the Upper Triassic to recent. They are widely used as biostratigraphic markers and as paleoclimatic proxies. Stable oxygen and carbon isotope data from coccoliths is used to reconstruct estimates of oceanic CO2 concentrations in the geologic past. Coccoliths and related fossils are referred to as &quot;calcareous nanofossils&quot; or &quot;calcareous nannoplankton (nanoplankton)&quot;.
==References==
== External links ==

*The EHUX website - site dedicated to &quot;Emiliania huxleyi&quot;, containing essays on blooms, coccolith function, etc.
*International Nannoplankton Association site - includes an illustrated guide to coccolith terminology and several image galleries.
*Nannotax - illustrated guide to the taxonomy of coccolithophores and other nannofossils.
* Cocco Express - Coccolithophorids Expressed Sequence Tags (EST) &amp; Microarray Database
*Possible functions of Coccoliths</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q608189" start="0" end="10" title="Coccolith" label="Coccoliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="46" end="63" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="74" end="89" title="coccolithophore" label="coccolithophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="106" end="119" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q126697989" start="134" end="151" title="Emiliania huxleyi" label="Emiliania huxleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="244" end="255" title="coccosphere" label="coccosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q608189" start="383" end="393" title="coccoliths" label="coccoliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="548" end="565" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326600" start="683" end="690" title="calcify" label="calcify"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="779" end="795" title="microzooplankton" label="microzooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="924" end="939" title="marine plankton" label="marine plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="962" end="970" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783890" start="1017" end="1035" title="Marine primary production" label="primary production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180251" start="1199" end="1209" title="Ballast minerals" label="ballasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q289472" start="1248" end="1256" title="biogenic" label="biogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995776" start="1428" end="1447" title="marine carbon cycle" label="marine carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180251" start="1485" end="1507" title="biological carbon pump" label="biological carbon pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="2046" end="2062" title="microzooplankton" label="microzooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q106345" start="2068" end="2075" title="ciliate" label="ciliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="2081" end="2095" title="dinoflagellate" label="dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="2493" end="2506" title="Heterotrophic" label="Heterotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="2507" end="2514" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="2770" end="2777" title="Vesicle (biology and chemistry)" label="vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="2796" end="2806" title="golgi body" label="golgi body"/>
<link wikidata="Q323426" start="2899" end="2909" title="exocytosis" label="exocytosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="3149" end="3157" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="3191" end="3204" title="Thomas Huxley" label="Thomas Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="3416" end="3423" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="3456" end="3461" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="3483" end="3504" title="white cliffs of Dover" label="white cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="3519" end="3529" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346007" start="3576" end="3595" title="Henry Clifton Sorby" label="Henry Clifton Sorby"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="3841" end="3852" title="Rhombohedral crystal system" label="rhombohedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="5765" end="5776" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5793" end="5801" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="5805" end="5812" title="viruses" label="viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="5829" end="5837" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="5850" end="5864" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="5869" end="5883" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5907" end="5909" title="UV" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q917293" start="6237" end="6251" title="Upper Triassic" label="Upper Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964635" start="6537" end="6559" title="calcareous nanofossils" label="calcareous nanofossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="6586" end="6614" title="nanoplankton" label="nannoplankton (nanoplankton)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382894" wikidata="Q21493848" url="?curid=382894" title="Ferrero (surname)">
<text>Ferrero (Italian: , Spanish: ) is a surname of Italian (from Piedmont) and Spanish origin that means &#x27;smith&#x27;, a person who works with iron, in parallel with surnames like Ferraro, Ferrari and Smith.

Notable people with the surname Ferrero include:
*Alexis Ferrero (born 1979), Argentine footballer;
*Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora (1804–1878), Italian general and statesman;
*Benita Ferrero-Waldner (born 1948), Austrian diplomat and politician;
*Carlos Ferrero (1941–2025), Peruvian politician;
*Daniela Ferrero, Uruguayan and American mathematician;
*Edward Ferrero (1831–1899), Union general famous for his role in the Battle of the Crater;
*Enzo Ferrero (born 1953), Argentine footballer;
*Facundo Ferrero (born 1995), Argentine footballer;
*Francis Ferrero (born 1972), Argentine footballer;
*Giovanni Ferrero (born 1964), managing director of Ferrero SpA, son of Michele Ferrero;
*Guglielmo Ferrero (1871–1942), Italian historian, journalist, and novelist;
*Juan Ferrero (1918–1958), Spanish bodybuilder;
*Juan Carlos Ferrero (born 1980), Spanish tennis player;
*Lorenzo Ferrero (born 1951), Italian composer;
*Martin Ferrero (born 1947), American actor;
*Michele Ferrero (1925–2015), Italian chocolate magnate;
*Michele Ferrero (priest) (born 1967), Italian Roman Catholic priest and author;
*Pietro Ferrero (1898–1949), founder of Ferrero SpA, father of Michele Ferrero;
*Pietro Ferrero Jr. (1963–2011), managing director of Ferrero SpA until his death, son of Michele Ferrero;
*Ricardo Ferrero (1955–2015), Argentine footballer.

==See also==

*Ferrara (surname)
*Ferraro
*Ferrera</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21493848" start="0" end="7" title="Ferrero (surname)" label="Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="9" end="16" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="20" end="27" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="36" end="43" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="47" end="54" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="61" end="69" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="75" end="82" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493844" start="181" end="188" title="Ferraro (surname)" label="Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407594" start="190" end="197" title="Ferrari (surname)" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158446" start="202" end="207" title="Smith (surname)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375001" start="260" end="274" title="Alexis Ferrero" label="Alexis Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q471272" start="311" end="337" title="Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora" label="Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q78575" start="383" end="405" title="Benita Ferrero-Waldner" label="Benita Ferrero-Waldner"/>
<link wikidata="Q960426" start="454" end="468" title="Carlos Ferrero" label="Carlos Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q60389554" start="504" end="519" title="Daniela Ferrero" label="Daniela Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719956" start="560" end="574" title="Edward Ferrero" label="Edward Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381504" start="652" end="664" title="Enzo Ferrero" label="Enzo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q30111798" start="701" end="716" title="Facundo Ferrero" label="Facundo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480917" start="753" end="768" title="Francis Ferrero" label="Francis Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767222" start="805" end="821" title="Giovanni Ferrero" label="Giovanni Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q689713" start="894" end="911" title="Guglielmo Ferrero" label="Guglielmo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113919" start="971" end="983" title="Juan Ferrero" label="Juan Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q185722" start="1019" end="1038" title="Juan Carlos Ferrero" label="Juan Carlos Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680710" start="1076" end="1091" title="Lorenzo Ferrero" label="Lorenzo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q718338" start="1124" end="1138" title="Martin Ferrero" label="Martin Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q251751" start="1169" end="1184" title="Michele Ferrero" label="Michele Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836746" start="1226" end="1250" title="Michele Ferrero (priest)" label="Michele Ferrero (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296559" start="1307" end="1321" title="Pietro Ferrero" label="Pietro Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q515349" start="1387" end="1405" title="Pietro Ferrero Jr." label="Pietro Ferrero Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6108171" start="1494" end="1509" title="Ricardo Ferrero" label="Ricardo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869929" start="1561" end="1578" title="Ferrara (surname)" label="Ferrara (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493844" start="1580" end="1587" title="Ferraro" label="Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q70463" start="1589" end="1596" title="Ferrera" label="Ferrera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382895" wikidata="Q2506651" url="?curid=382895" title="Leader of the Official Opposition (Canada)">
<text>The leader of the Official Opposition (), sometimes known as the leader of His Majesty&#x27;s Loyal Opposition (), is the politician who leads the Official Opposition in Canada, typically the leader of the party possessing the most seats in the House of Commons that is not the governing party or part of the governing coalition.

Pierre Poilievre has been the leader of the Opposition since September 10, 2022, when he was elected leader of the Conservative Party of Canada, following the 2022 leadership election. He succeeded Candice Bergen, who had served as the party&#x27;s interim leader from February 2, 2022. She had succeeded former permanent leader Erin O&#x27;Toole when the party declared non-confidence in his leadership.

Though the leader of the Opposition must be a member of the House of Commons, the office should not be confused with Opposition House leader, who is a frontbencher charged with managing the business of the Opposition in the House of Commons, and is formally titled &quot;Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons&quot;. There is also a leader of the Opposition in the Senate, who is usually of the same party as the leader of the Opposition in the house.

The leader of the Opposition is entitled to the same levels of pay and protection as a Cabinet minister and is often made a member of the King&#x27;s Privy Council, generally the only non-government member of the House of Commons afforded that privilege. The leader of the Opposition is entitled to reside at the official residence of Stornoway and ranks fourteenth on the Order of Precedence, after Cabinet ministers and before lieutenant governors of the provinces. In the House of Commons seating plan, the leader of the Opposition sits directly across from the prime minister.

The term &quot;leader of the opposition&quot; is used in the Parliament of Canada Act and the &quot;Standing Orders of the House of Commons&quot;, as is the term &quot;official opposition&quot;. The terms &quot;leader of the loyal opposition&quot;, &quot;his majesty&#x27;s opposition&quot;, and &quot;loyal opposition&quot; are sometimes used, but, are not in either the act or the standing orders. The word &quot;loyal&quot; is used to communicate the party&#x27;s loyalty to monarch of Canada—as the nonpartisan personification of the nation and the state&#x27;s authority—even as its members oppose the governing party.

Two leaders of the Opposition have died in office: Wilfrid Laurier in 1919 and Jack Layton in 2011.

==Leaders of the Official Opposition==


 
===Timeline===
== Deputy leaders of the Opposition ==


== Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet ==
The Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet in Canada is composed of members of the main opposition party and is responsible for holding the Government to account and for developing and disseminating the party&#x27;s policy positions. Members of the Official Opposition are generally referred to as opposition critics, but the term Shadow Minister (which is generally used in other Westminster systems) is also used.

== See also ==

* Opposition House Leader
* Leader of the Opposition in the Senate (Canada)

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Leaders of the Official Opposition - Library of Parliament 
* Leader of the Opposition - The Canadian Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2506651" start="4" end="37" title="Leader of the Official Opposition (Canada)" label="leader of the Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506651" start="65" end="110" title="Leader of the Official Opposition (Canada)" label="leader of His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Loyal Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="147" end="166" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="245" end="261" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386636" start="331" end="347" title="Pierre Poilievre" label="Pierre Poilievre"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="446" end="474" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q111443658" start="490" end="514" title="2022 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="2022 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936261" start="529" end="543" title="Candice Bergen (politician)" label="Candice Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046657" start="580" end="594" title="interim leader (Canada)" label="interim leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="660" end="677" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508576" start="854" end="877" title="Opposition House Leader" label="Opposition House leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066077" start="1080" end="1118" title="Leader of the Opposition in the Senate (Canada)" label="leader of the Opposition in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="1287" end="1294" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631137" start="1338" end="1363" title="Canadian Privy Council" label="King&amp;#x27;s Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499879" start="1535" end="1544" title="Stornoway (residence)" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111069" start="1573" end="1592" title="Canadian order of precedence" label="Order of Precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="1629" end="1666" title="Lieutenant Governor (Canada)" label="lieutenant governors of the provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="1765" end="1779" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="2260" end="2277" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="monarch of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2297" end="2326" title="Monarchy of Canada#Personification of the Canadian state" label="personification of the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128664" start="2458" end="2473" title="Wilfrid Laurier" label="Wilfrid Laurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q317842" start="2486" end="2497" title="Jack Layton" label="Jack Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351828" start="2652" end="2686" title="Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet (Canada)" label="Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508576" start="3079" end="3102" title="Opposition House Leader" label="Opposition House Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066077" start="3105" end="3152" title="Leader of the Opposition in the Senate (Canada)" label="Leader of the Opposition in the Senate (Canada)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382905" wikidata="Q1545552" url="?curid=382905" title="Stimorol">
<text>Stimorol is a brand of chewing gum originally produced by the Danish company Dandy and since 2023 owned by the Italian-Dutch company Perfetti Van Melle.

== History ==
The privately owned company was founded by Holger Sørensen in 1915 in Vejle, Denmark as &quot;Vejle Caramel- og Tabletfabrik&quot;, later renamed &quot;Dansk Tyggegummifabrik A/S&quot;. It is one of the world&#x27;s largest producers of chewing gum.

&quot;Stimorol&quot; is its primary brand of gum, which came onto the market in 1956. It was initially sold only in Scandinavia, but later became available in other countries throughout Europe, beginning with the Netherlands in 1959. In 1978, the company introduced a sugar-free gum, and by the 1990s it had various fruit and mint flavors.

In 2002, most of the company, including the well-known brands DANDY, STIMOROL, DIROL, and V6, were acquired by Cadbury-Schweppes, who rebranded it Trident. The remainder of the company was renamed Gumlink. Gumlink is owned by the Bagger-Sørensen family, who are the descendants of Holger Sørensen.

Stimorol is from 2023 owned by Italian-Dutch company Perfetti van Melle, headquartered in Italy and The Netherlands.

==See also==
*Trident (gum)

==References==
==External links==
*Stimorol – Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1545552" start="0" end="8" title="Stimorol" label="Stimorol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="23" end="34" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q612524" start="133" end="151" title="Perfetti Van Melle" label="Perfetti Van Melle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27116" start="238" end="243" title="Vejle" label="Vejle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="535" end="546" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="871" end="888" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury-Schweppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841375" start="907" end="914" title="Trident (gum)" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="957" end="964" title="Gumlink" label="Gumlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q612524" start="1112" end="1130" title="Perfetti van Melle" label="Perfetti van Melle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1159" end="1174" title="The Netherlands" label="The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841375" start="1191" end="1204" title="Trident (gum)" label="Trident (gum)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382907" wikidata="Q705919" url="?curid=382907" title="Rutilius Claudius Namatianus">
<text>Rutilius Claudius Namatianus (fl. 5th century) was a Roman Imperial poet, best known for his Latin poem, &quot;De reditu suo&quot;, in elegiac metre, describing a coastal voyage from Rome to Gaul in 417. The poem was in two books; the exordium of the first and the greater part of the second have been lost. What remains consists of about seven hundred lines.

Whether Rutilius had converted to Christianity (the state church of the Roman Empire during his time) has been a matter of scholarly debate, but in the early 21st century, editors of his work concluded that he had not. Alan Cameron, a leading scholar of Late Antiquity, agrees that he &quot;probably&quot; remained unconverted from Rome&#x27;s traditional religious practices, but that his hostility was not to Christianity as it was practiced by the vast majority of citizens of the Empire, but rather against the total renunciation of public life advocated by the ascetics.

== Life ==
=== Origins ===
Rutilius was a native of southern Gaul (Toulouse or perhaps Poitiers), and belonged, like Sidonius Apollinaris, to one of the great governing families of the Gallic provinces. His father, whom he calls Lachanius, had held high offices in Italy and at the imperial court, had been governor of Tuscia (Etruria and Umbria), vicar of Britain, then imperial treasurer (&quot;comes sacrarum largitionum&quot;), imperial recorder (&quot;quaestor&quot;), and governor of Rome (&quot;praefectus urbi&quot;) in 414. The voyage recorded in &quot;De reditu suo&quot; has been variously dated to 415, 416, or 417, but the publication in 1973 of a fragment of the missing portion of the poem, which contains a reference to the second consulship of Constantius III, confirms the date of 417, which had already been argued independently on other grounds by earlier scholars. 

=== Career ===
Rutilius boasts his career to have been no less distinguished than his father&#x27;s, and particularly indicates that he had been secretary of state (&quot;magister officiorum&quot;) and governor of the capital (&quot;praefectus urbi&quot;). His poem was written the tempestuous period between the death of Theodosius I (395), and the fall of the usurper Priscus Attalus. During this period he was witness to the career of Stilicho as &quot;de facto&quot; emperor of the West; the hosts of Radagaisus rolled back from Italy, only to sweep over Gaul and Spain; the defeats and triumphs of Alaric I; the three sieges and final sack of Rome; the dissipation of Heraclianus&#x27;s vast armament; and the fall of seven pretenders to the Western throne.

=== Religious issues ===
It is clear that the sympathies of Rutilius were with those who, during this period, dissented from, and when they could, opposed the general tendencies of imperial policy. He himself indicates that he was intimately acquainted with the circle of the great orator Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, who scouted Stilicho&#x27;s compact with the Goths, and who led the Roman senate to support the pretenders Eugenius and Attalus, in the hope of reinstating the gods whom Emperor Julian had failed to save.

While making few direct assertions about historical characters or events, Rutilius&#x27; poem compels some important conclusions about the politics and religion of the time. The attitude of the writer towards Paganism is remarkable: the whole poem is intensely Pagan, and is penetrated by the feeling that the world of literature and culture is, and must remain, pagan; that outside of Paganism lies a realm of barbarism. The poet wears an air of exalted superiority over the religious innovators of his day, and entertains a buoyant confidence that the future of the ancient gods of Rome will not belie their glorious past. He scorns invective and apology, and does not hesitate to reveal, with Claudian, a suppressed grief at the indignities put upon the old religion by the new. As a statesman, he is at pains to avoid offending those politic Christian senators over whom pride in their country had at least as great a power as attachment to their new religion. Only once or twice does Rutilius speak directly of Christianity, and then only to attack the monks, whom the secular authorities had hardly as yet recognized, and whom, indeed, only a short time before, a Christian emperor had conscripted by the thousands into the ranks of his army. Judaism could be assailed by Rutilius without wounding either pagans or Christians, but he clearly intimates that he hates it chiefly as the evil root from which the rank plant of Christianity had sprung. However the first Christian missionary in Ireland was a relative and personal friend of Rutilius, Palladius (bishop of Ireland).

Edward Gibbon writes that Honorius rigorously excluded all dissenters to the Catholic Church from holding any office in the state. But Rutilius paints a different picture of political life. His poem portrays a senate at Rome composed of past office-holders (the majority of whom were certainly still pagans), a Christian party whose Christianity was more political than religious, and a prevalent spirit of traditional Roman religious toleration. The atmosphere of the capital, perhaps even of all Italy, was still charged with paganism. The court was far in advance of the people, and the persecuting laws were in large part incapable of execution. Some ecclesiastical historians have fondly imagined that after the sack of Rome the bishop Innocent returned to a position of predominance, but no one who accepts Rutilius&#x27; observations can entertain this idea. 

Perhaps the most interesting lines in the whole poem are those where Rutilius assails the memory of &quot;dire Stilicho&quot;, as he names him. In Rutilius&#x27; view, Stilicho, fearing to suffer all that had caused himself to be feared, removed the defences of the Alps and Apennines that the provident gods had interposed between the barbarians and the Eternal City, and planted the cruel Goths, his skinclad minions, in the very sanctuary of the empire: &quot;he plunged an armed foe in the naked vitals of the land, his craft being freer from risk than that of openly inflicted disaster ... May Nero rest from all the torments of the damned, that they may seize on Stilicho; for Nero smote his own mother, but Stilicho the mother of the world!&quot;

This appears to be a uniquely authentic expression of the feelings of perhaps a majority of the Roman senate against Stilicho. He had merely imitated the policy of Theodosius with regard to the barbarians; but even that powerful emperor had met with a passive opposition from the old Roman families. Those who had seen Stilicho surrounded by his Goth bodyguards naturally looked on the Goths who assailed Rome as Stilicho&#x27;s avengers. Historians of the later empire such as Paulus Orosius believed that Stilicho called in the Goths to increase his sway and was plotting to make his son emperor. Rutilius&#x27; poem, however, holds that it was merely to save himself from impending ruin. Although some Christian historians even asserted that Stilicho (a staunch Arian) intended to restore paganism, Rutilius depicts him as its most uncompromising foe, as evidenced by his destruction of the Sibylline books. This alone is sufficient, in the eyes of Rutilius, to account for the disasters that afterwards befell the city, just as Flavius Merobaudes, a generation or two later, traced the miseries of his own day to the overthrow of the ancient rites of Vesta. (For a sharply different view of Stilicho, see Claudian.)

== Style ==

Rutilius handles the elegiac couplet with great metrical purity and freedom, and betrays many signs of long study in the elegiac poetry of the Augustan era. His poem&#x27;s Latin is unusually clean for the times, and is generally classical, both in vocabulary and construction. Although lacking Claudian&#x27;s genius, Rutilius also lacks his tendency toward gaudiness and exaggeration; the old-fashioned directness of Rutilius contrasts favorably with the labored complexity of Ausonius. More traditional, Rutilius might have better claim to be called &quot;the last of the Roman poets&quot; rather than Claudian or Merobaudes.

Rutilius begins his poem with an almost dithyrambic address to the goddess Roma, &quot;whose glory has ever shone the brighter for disaster, and who will rise once more in her might and confound her barbarian foes&quot;. Next, he refers to the destruction of roads and property wrought by the Goths, to the state of the havens at the mouths of the Tiber, and the general decay of nearly all the old commercial ports on the coast. Rutilius even exaggerates the desolation of the once important city of Cosa in Etruria, whose walls have scarcely changed since his time. The port that served Pisa, almost alone of all those visited by Rutilius, is depicted as having retained its prosperity, with villagers celebrating the festival of Osiris.

== History of &quot;De reditu suo&quot; and its editions ==
The majority of the existing manuscripts of Rutilius are descendants of a damaged and incomplete ancient manuscript found at the monastery of Bobbio by Giorgio Galbiato, the secretary of Georgius Merula, in 1493. This manuscript has not been seen since comte Claude Alexandre de Bonneval, a general in
the service of the Austrian commander, Prince Eugene of Savoy, removed it from the monastery in 1706. The three best witnesses to the lost manuscript are a copy in Vienna (identified by the siglum V) made in 1501 by Jacopo Sannazaro, Filippo Bononi, and a third unknown copyist; a second copy in Rome (identified by the siglum R) made around 1530 by Ioannes Andreas Crucianus; and the &quot;editio princeps&quot; of the poem printed by Giovanni Battista Pio in Bologna in 1520). In 1970 Mirella Ferrari announced the discovery of a small fragment of the Bobbio manuscript, reused in the binding of a manuscript of Virgil now in the Royal Library in Copenhagen. The fragment, which had apparently been reused before the discovery of the damaged manuscript by Galbiato in 1493, was written in the 7th or 8th century; it preserves the ends of 39 lines from an otherwise lost portion of book 2.

The principal editions since have been those by Kaspar von Barth (1623), Pieter Burman (1731, in his edition of the minor Latin poets, where the poem also appears under the title &quot;Iter&quot;), Ernst Friedrich Wernsdorf (1778, part of a similar collection), August Wilhelm Zumpt (1840), and the critical edition by Lucian Müller (Leipzig, Teubner, 1870), and another by Jules Vessereau (1904); also an annotated edition by Charles Haines Keene, containing a translation by George Francis Savage-Armstrong (1906).

There is some variation of Namatianus&#x27; name in the manuscripts. Rutilius Claudius Namatianus comes from R, while V has Rutilius Claudius Numantianus. According to Keene Namatianus is used in &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot; as the name &quot;of a &quot;magister officiorum&quot; in 412 AD&quot;, probably to be identified with the author and therefore has the weight of evidence. Other variants date from a later time and have no authority: Numantinus, Munatianus. Müller and most editors write the poet&#x27;s name as &quot;Claudius Rutilius Namatianus&quot;, instead of Rutilius Claudius Namatianus; but if the identification of the poet&#x27;s father with the Claudius mentioned in the &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot; is correct, they are probably wrong.

The latest and fullest edition of Namatianus is by E. Doblhofer. Harold Isbell includes a translation in his anthology, &quot;The Last Poets of Imperial Rome&quot;.

==Film==
The Italian film &quot;The Voyage Home&quot; is based on Namatianus&#x27;s work and premiered in 2004.

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==

*. Text with apparatus, English translation, introduction to Rutilius and the manuscripts, from the 1935 Loeb Classical Library edition.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q705919" start="0" end="28" title="Rutilius Claudius Namatianus" label="Rutilius Claudius Namatianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="53" end="67" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="68" end="72" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="93" end="103" title="Latin literature" label="Latin poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358685" start="135" end="142" title="elegiac" label="elegiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="183" end="187" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="191" end="195" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322847" start="235" end="243" title="exordium (rhetoric)" label="exordium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="413" end="445" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="state church of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623113" start="580" end="592" title="Alan Cameron (classical scholar)" label="Alan Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="615" end="629" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="693" end="736" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Rome&amp;#x27;s traditional religious practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="999" end="1003" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="1005" end="1013" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="1025" end="1033" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q302936" start="1055" end="1075" title="Sidonius Apollinaris" label="Sidonius Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q695728" start="1257" end="1263" title="Tuscia" label="Tuscia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="1265" end="1272" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="1277" end="1283" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181495" start="1335" end="1361" title="comes sacrarum largitionum" label="comes sacrarum largitionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="1395" end="1403" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="1440" end="1455" title="praefectus urbi" label="praefectus urbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201905" start="1699" end="1714" title="Constantius III" label="Constantius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="1997" end="2016" title="magister officiorum" label="magister officiorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="2059" end="2074" title="praefectus urbi" label="praefectus urbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="2148" end="2160" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316286" start="2196" end="2211" title="Priscus Attalus" label="Priscus Attalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="2264" end="2272" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q452209" start="2331" end="2341" title="Radagaisus" label="Radagaisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="2429" end="2437" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463845" start="2466" end="2478" title="Sack of Rome (410)" label="sack of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q878568" start="2499" end="2510" title="Heraclianus" label="Heraclianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q355720" start="2879" end="2905" title="Quintus Aurelius Symmachus" label="Quintus Aurelius Symmachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="2975" end="2987" title="Roman senate" label="Roman senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313058" start="3014" end="3022" title="Eugenius" label="Eugenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="3085" end="3091" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="3322" end="3330" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="3809" end="3817" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="3959" end="3968" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4129" end="4141" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="4171" end="4175" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="4362" end="4369" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q715209" start="4665" end="4694" title="Palladius (bishop of Ireland)" label="Palladius (bishop of Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="4697" end="4710" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5422" end="5426" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q134694" start="5438" end="5446" title="Pope Innocent I" label="Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="5831" end="5835" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="5840" end="5849" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="5956" end="5961" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="6164" end="6168" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="6798" end="6812" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Paulus Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="7085" end="7090" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q664251" start="7214" end="7229" title="Sibylline books" label="Sibylline books"/>
<link wikidata="Q930459" start="7352" end="7370" title="Merobaudes (poet)" label="Flavius Merobaudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="7475" end="7480" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="7529" end="7537" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082412" start="7575" end="7590" title="elegiac couplet" label="elegiac couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821017" start="7675" end="7709" title="Augustan poetry" label="elegiac poetry of the Augustan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="8033" end="8041" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q930459" start="8171" end="8181" title="Merobaudes (poet)" label="Merobaudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="8224" end="8233" title="dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q953033" start="8259" end="8263" title="Roma (god)" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="8532" end="8537" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q546547" start="8685" end="8689" title="Cosa" label="Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="8773" end="8777" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="8916" end="8922" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="9014" end="9024" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q11498" start="9127" end="9133" title="Bobbio" label="Bobbio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9137" end="9153" title="Giorgio Galbiato" label="Giorgio Galbiato"/>
<link wikidata="Q604460" start="9172" end="9187" title="Georgius Merula" label="Georgius Merula"/>
<link wikidata="Q701714" start="9244" end="9272" title="Claude Alexandre de Bonneval" label="Claude Alexandre de Bonneval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4537333" start="9477" end="9483" title="siglum" label="siglum"/>
<link wikidata="Q510621" start="9503" end="9519" title="Jacopo Sannazaro" label="Jacopo Sannazaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9521" end="9535" title="Filippo Bononi" label="Filippo Bononi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9637" end="9662" title="Ioannes Andreas Crucianus" label="Ioannes Andreas Crucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="9678" end="9693" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9723" end="9744" title="Giovanni Battista Pio" label="Giovanni Battista Pio"/>
<link wikidata="Q76182" start="10227" end="10243" title="Kaspar von Barth" label="Kaspar von Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730541" start="10252" end="10265" title="Pieter Burman the Elder" label="Pieter Burman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10377" end="10402" title="Ernst Friedrich Wernsdorf" label="Ernst Friedrich Wernsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q68848" start="10441" end="10461" title="August Wilhelm Zumpt" label="August Wilhelm Zumpt"/>
<link wikidata="Q71344" start="10498" end="10511" title="Lucian Müller" label="Lucian Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q771323" start="10522" end="10529" title="Teubner" label="Teubner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10553" end="10568" title="Jules Vessereau" label="Jules Vessereau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10606" end="10626" title="Charles Haines Keene" label="Charles Haines Keene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10656" end="10687" title="George Francis Savage-Armstrong" label="George Francis Savage-Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300" start="10899" end="10917" title="Codex Theodosianus" label="Codex Theodosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="10953" end="10972" title="magister officiorum" label="magister officiorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704159" start="11656" end="11671" title="The Voyage Home (2004 film)" label="The Voyage Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="11888" end="11910" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382923" wikidata="Q5112851" url="?curid=382923" title="Christopher McKee">
<text>Christopher Fulton McKee (born 1942) is an astrophysicist.

McKee attended Phillips Academy and Harvard University, and obtained a Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) in 1970 under advisor George B. Field. In 1974, he was appointed professor of physics and astronomy, University of California at Berkeley. He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and has been chair of the UCB Physics Department. He is a former member (1990) and chairman (2000) of the NASA Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee (the &quot;decadal review&quot;) and former director of the Space Sciences Laboratory (SSL) at UCB. 

McKee performed the first simulations of relativistic counter-streaming plasmas as part of his Ph.D. thesis at Berkeley (1970). He began his study of the interstellar medium by pointing out the existence of reverse shocks in young supernova remnants, and he then analyzed the interaction of a supernova blast wave with interstellar clouds. Since joining the Physics and Astronomy Departments in Berkeley in 1974, he has devoted much of his research to studying processes in the interstellar medium, including evaporation of clouds, the structure of shock waves in atomic and molecular gas, and the dynamics of blast waves in both homogeneous and inhomogeneous media. In collaboration with Jeremiah Ostriker (Columbia University), he developed the three-phase model of the interstellar medium, which has been widely used to organize and interpret observational data.

His research on quasars has included development of the relativistic blast wave model for variability, introduction of reverberation mapping to analyze variable emission line profiles, the two-phase model for quasar emission line regions, and the development of the theory of coronae and winds from accretion disks. 

He has developed a self-regulated model for the structure and evolution of molecular clouds, and for the rate of star formation within these clouds.

He established the Berkeley Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics Group with Richard Klein to develop the technique of adaptive mesh refinement for numerical simulations of astrophysical fluid dynamics.

In his three decades as a professor at UCB, he has advised many graduate students and postdoctoral research fellows.

He was elected a Legacy Fellow of the American Astronomical Society in 2020. 

==References==
==External links==
*Berkeley: Christopher F. McKee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5112851" start="0" end="24" title="Christopher McKee" label="Christopher Fulton McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="43" end="57" title="astrophysicist" label="astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="75" end="91" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="96" end="114" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="146" end="180" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q325584" start="209" end="224" title="George B. Field" label="George B. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="252" end="261" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="265" end="272" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="277" end="286" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="348" end="376" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="483" end="487" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811679" start="488" end="521" title="Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey" label="Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="788" end="807" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="865" end="882" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="927" end="936" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201510" start="937" end="947" title="blast wave" label="blast wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="1183" end="1193" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351917" start="1323" end="1340" title="Jeremiah P. Ostriker" label="Jeremiah Ostriker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1381" end="1398" title="Interstellar medium#The three-phase model" label="three-phase model"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="1517" end="1524" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780420" start="1620" end="1641" title="reverberation mapping" label="reverberation mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="1717" end="1730" title="emission line" label="emission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="1777" end="1784" title="Stellar corona" label="coronae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="1800" end="1814" title="accretion disk" label="accretion disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="1894" end="1909" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="1932" end="1946" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327104" start="2037" end="2050" title="Richard Klein (astronomer)" label="Richard Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680751" start="2079" end="2103" title="adaptive mesh refinement" label="adaptive mesh refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="2108" end="2128" title="numerical simulation" label="numerical simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="2147" end="2161" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q463435" start="2320" end="2349" title="American Astronomical Society" label="American Astronomical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="382926" wikidata="Q4933751" url="?curid=382926" title="Rosie Nix Adams">
<text>Rosie Nix Adams (born Rozanna Lea Nix; July 13, 1958 – October 24, 2003) was an American singer, in the genres of country, folk, and gospel. 

She was the daughter of June Carter Cash and her second husband, Edwin &quot;Rip&quot; Nix. After her mother married country music singer/songwriter Johnny Cash in 1968, Nix became one of his stepdaughters.

== Early life ==
Born Rozanna Nix in Madison, Tennessee, she was called Rosie or Rosey, daughter of June Carter Cash and her second husband Edwin &quot;Rip&quot; Nix. She had an older half-sister from her mother&#x27;s first marriage. Later she became a stepdaughter of Johnny Cash when her mother married him in 1968. 

Her first name was spelled as both &quot;Rosie&quot; and &quot;Rosey&quot;, according to stepsister Rosanne Cash. Nix grew up with six siblings, including half and step-siblings.

== Career ==
Nix started her singing career performing as a backup singer for her stepfather&#x27;s &quot;The Johnny Cash Show&quot;. She also performed with David Grey, and singer Slim Whitman. 

She was a semi-regular performing member of the Carter Family. She performed a duet with Cash on his 1974 single &quot;Father and Daughter&quot; (a remake of the Cat Stevens song &quot;Father and Son&quot;) from the album &quot;The Junkie and the Juicehead Minus Me&quot;. 

After her marriage, Adams was a background vocalist in her mother&#x27;s album &quot;Press On&quot; (1999). She sang in genres of country, folk, and gospel.

== Personal life and death ==
Nix married Philip Adams. She used the name Rosie Nix Adams as a performer. 

On October 24, 2003 she and Jimmy Campbell, a bluegrass musician who played the fiddle, were found dead on a bus in Montgomery County, Tennessee. Law enforcement officials initially called the deaths &quot;suspicious&quot;. The deaths were subsequently ruled to be accidental. They died from carbon monoxide poisoning, produced from propane space heaters in the bus that were used without ventilation. 

Nix Adams was 45 years old. She was buried near her mother and stepfather, both of whom had also died earlier in the year, in the Hendersonville Memory Gardens in Hendersonville, Tennessee.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4933751" start="0" end="15" title="Rosie Nix Adams" label="Rosie Nix Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933751" start="22" end="37" title="Rosie Nix Adams" label="Rozanna Lea Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q233253" start="167" end="183" title="June Carter Cash" label="June Carter Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="292" end="303" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727835" start="388" end="406" title="Madison, Tennessee" label="Madison, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q462289" start="772" end="784" title="Rosanne Cash" label="Rosanne Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928449" start="1033" end="1045" title="Slim Whitman" label="Slim Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="1097" end="1110" title="Carter Family" label="Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="1211" end="1222" title="Cat Stevens" label="Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398035" start="1234" end="1248" title="Father and Son (song)" label="Father and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510211" start="1277" end="1314" title="The Junkie and the Juicehead Minus Me" label="The Junkie and the Juicehead Minus Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="1636" end="1645" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q502345" start="1706" end="1734" title="Montgomery County, Tennessee" label="Montgomery County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="1882" end="1897" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="1923" end="1930" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069731" start="1931" end="1943" title="space heater" label="space heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742510" start="2124" end="2153" title="Hendersonville Memory Gardens" label="Hendersonville Memory Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q335955" start="2157" end="2182" title="Hendersonville, Tennessee" label="Hendersonville, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
