<doc id="772201" wikidata="Q734785" url="?curid=772201" title="Lechia Gdańsk">
<text>Lechia Gdańsk () is a Polish football club based in Gdańsk. They compete in Ekstraklasa in the 2024–25 season after winning the 2023–24 I liga.

The club was founded in 1945 by people expelled from Lwów, who were supporters of Poland&#x27;s oldest football team Lechia Lwów, founded in 1903. The club&#x27;s name comes from Lechia, a poetic name for Poland, and is a continuation of the name used by the club based in Lwów. In their early years, Lechia enjoyed some success, most notably finishing third in the Polish top division, before spending decades in the second and third tiers. In the early 1980s, Lechia won the Polish Cup, the Polish Super Cup, and played in a European competition for the first time. After having two mergers with other teams in the 1990s the club had to restart from the sixth tier in 2001. In May 2008 the club was promoted again to the Ekstraklasa, with the club&#x27;s most recent success coming in 2019, finishing third in the league and again winning both the Polish Cup and the Super Cup, before suffering relegation to I liga in 2023.

== History ==

=== Early years (1945–1948) ===

The club was founded on 7 August 1945 in Gdańsk and was originally named &quot;BOP Baltia Gdańsk&quot;. The club was first established by the &quot;Port Reconstruction Office&quot; (). The BOP&#x27;s purpose was to help rebuild Polish sea ports which were destroyed during World War II, and saw it best to create a sports club for the BOP workers. BOP Baltia&#x27;s first game came on 2 September 1945, in which they lost the game 6–4 against Milicyjny Klub Sportowy z Wrzeszcza (Militia Sports Club from Wrzeszcz) in a friendly. BOP Baltia&#x27;s first league game was a week later and played against WKS 16 Dywizji (Military Sports Club of the 16th Division). Due to the disruption of football in Poland due to the war the first season back was focused on regional qualifying for leagues to reformat the Polish football leagues. In the Gdańsk regional qualifying Lechia won all 6 games including both games in their first Gdańsk Derby games against Gedania Gdańsk, winning the group and being promoted to the A Klasa (A Class, the second division in Poland at the time).

Towards the end of February 1946, BOP officials had a meeting, in which it was decided that the name of the club should be changed. The team became known as &quot;Sports Club for the Port Reconstruction Office Lechia Gdańsk&quot; (), &#x27;Lechia&#x27; coming from Lechia Lwów, as a majority of the workers at BOP and those who studied at the Gdańsk University of Technology had been expelled from Lwów at the end of WW2.

Lechia fared well in its early years in the lower divisions finishing top of their district championships in both the 1946–47 and 1947–48 seasons. For Lechia to be promoted to the top division they needed to win additional qualifying rounds against the other district champions, playing a series of games in playoff games, before a final playoff league with four teams of five being promoted. In the playoffs for the 1946–47 season Lechia finished bottom of the playoff league, being the only team not to advance to the top division. Lechia&#x27;s fortunes changed the following season however and achieved promotion at the end of the 1947–48 season when they finished top of the promotion playoffs league.

=== First years of top flight football (1949–1954) ===

In 1949 Lechia played in the top flight for the first time (at this time the top division was called the &quot;I liga&quot;). While it was a historic year for the club, and showed the competitiveness of the team in their early years to play in the top division, it was not a season to be enjoyed by Lechia in terms of on field performances, winning only 4 games all season and losing an incredible 15 times out of 22 games, finishing bottom of the league as a result. Due to suffering relegation in their first Ekstraklasa season the club found themselves back in the second tier of Polish football in 1950. Their first year in the II liga was a year of transition and the team initially struggled finishing 6th out of 10 teams, and finding themselves way off the pace for an immediate return to the top division. The league format of the II liga was changed for the 1951 season, where in the previous season the division was split into two groups with both winners being promoted, the 1951 season saw the II liga being split into four groups with the group winners playing each other in a mini playoff league with the top two being promoted to the Ekstraklasa. Lechia won their group which was the most diverse group at the time, playing against teams in Poznań and Wrocław who were both across the country from Gdańsk. The team advanced to the playoff league and came up against OWKS Kraków, Górnik Wałbrzych and Gwardia Warsaw, winning the playoffs group on goal difference and being promoted back to the I liga with OWKS Kraków.

The 1952 season was an unusual one due to the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki. The start of the league was delayed due to the preparation of forming a team to go to the Olympics. As a result of this the Young Leaders Rally Cup was organised, and was the first League Cup in Polish football. The organising of the cup was to give the players an opportunity to show off their skills, and with a more relaxed competition compared to the league would provide the Polish team with the best possible preparation to perform well at the Olympics. The cup ran from April – July and initially saw two groups where each team played each other twice, with the top three teams in each group going through to the playoffs to decide the winner and the final standings. Lechia finished 3rd in their group and thus played against Lech Poznań who also finished 3rd in their group to play in the 5th placed playoff. Lech won the game 2–1, meaning Lechia finished in 6th place overall in the Young Leaders Rally Cup. After the Olympics, in which Poland were knocked out in the first round, the league officially started, around five months later than it usually would. The league took a similar format to the cup, with the teams being split into two groups, with the two winners playing each other to decide on that years champions. Lechia finished the disruptive season in 7th place, ensuing they remained in the league for the following season. The 1953 season returned to normality with one league and each team playing each other twice. The season saw Lechia struggle and finish bottom of the league, and were again relegated from the top division finding the increased level of competitiveness difficult to deal with over the course of a full season.

Being back in the II liga Lechia once again found themselves to be competitive. While the club struggled more so than the teams around them in terms of scoring goals, Lechia were the best team defensively in the league, shown by their ability to keep clean sheets, having 12 clean sheets in their 20 games. The team finished the season on 28 points, the same as Stal Sosnowiec who ended up winning the league, but found themselves finish in second place due in part to Stal scoring 10 more goals than Lechia and having a much better goal difference. The immediate promotion and return to the I liga showed that at the time the club were in a position where they were competitive, but too good for the second division, yet struggled against the much better organised clubs in the first division.

===Early &quot;Golden Years&quot; and top division stay (1955–1963)===

Upon Lechias return to the Ekstraklasa, the players involved during these years and the initial success of the team upon their return to the I liga, were therefore seen as being the club&#x27;s &quot;golden years&quot; of their early history. Players such as Bogdan Adamczyk, Henryk Gronowski, Robert Gronowski, Roman Korynt, Hubert Kusz, Czesław Lenc, Czesław Nowicki, and Roman Rogocz, all of whom had long playing careers with Lechia, were all important in making the club competitive upon their return to the league. Their first season back, 1955, was at the time the club&#x27;s most successful season in their history. On their way to a 5th-place finish in the league, their highest at that point, they beat strong teams at the time such as ŁKS Łódź, Lech Poznań, Zagłębie Sosnowiec, and the 1955 Polish champions Legia Warsaw. The season also provided the chance for the club&#x27;s first piece of silverware by reaching the Polish Cup final for the first time. Lechia&#x27;s route in the Polish Cup () to the final saw them beating Sandecja Nowy Sącz, Wisła Kraków, Odra Opole and Gwardia Warsaw. The final saw Lechia play Legia Warsaw at the Polish Army Stadium, Legia&#x27;s home stadium. Lechia lost the game 5–0 after a hat-trick from Kempny, and a goal each from Pohl and Słaboszowski seeing them finish as runners-up in the cup, and only the second team formed after the Second World War to feature in the Polish Cup final.

In the league, the 1956 season was more successful than the year prior, seeing Lechia finish on the podium for the first time, with the club also becoming the first formed after the war to finish in the top three. Despite only scoring 25 goals in 22 games, Lechia finished the season in 3rd place. The club relied heavily on their defence that season keeping 10 clean sheets and conceding only 21, the second lowest in the league that season, while their highest goal scorer was Rogocz who scored only 7 for the club that season in the league. The achievement of 3rd place happened under the guidance of Tadeusz Foryś, arguably Lechia&#x27;s greatest manager in their earlier years, seeing them promoted from the second tier, taking them to a cup final, and achieving their highest finish of 3rd place.

The following season saw Lechia remaining competitive, but with the defensive side of the team not performing as well for the team as they went on to finish in 5th place. Once again the team only scored 25 goals in 22 games, the joint second lowest in the league, and the only team to not score more than 25 goals to not be relegated. Despite only scoring 25 goals that season in the league the team did see a player scoring the club&#x27;s first hat-trick in the top division, with Bronisław Szlagowski scoring 3 in a 5–0 win over Zagłębie Sosnowiec. While defensively the team was not as strong as in 1956, the 29 goals they conceded, which was still among the better sides in the division, ensured the team finished in the top half of the league for a third successive season. At the end of the season, Tadeusz Foryś, who saw Lechia&#x27;s rise from the II liga to being a challenger for the top places in the I liga, left Lechia to manage Arka Gdynia.

Following the departure of Foryś who made Lechia defensively strong, the team&#x27;s fortunes declined from the season with one notable difference from the previous season being the number of goals the team conceded. The side fell to 8th place, just surviving relegation by a single point. This was a trend which was to continue for Lechia. While the team improved to finish 6th in the 1959 season, the team only managed to score 19 goals in their 22 games, with only one team scoring fewer, Stal Sosnowiec, who finished bottom of the league. The next three seasons saw the team flirting with relegation, finishing 9th in 1960, scoring the joint fewest in the league and surviving relegation by a point, 8th in 1961, scoring the joint second least in the league but surviving more comfortably by 5 points, and finishing 9th again in 1962. The 1962 saw a change in the league format, with the season changing from a summer league (playing from spring-autumn) to it becoming a winter league (playing autumn-spring). The league for that season was therefore shorter, with teams playing a total of 13 games, 12 in a mini league, and once in a playoff game to formalise the final standings.

Over these years where Lechia struggled, some of the players who were important in the club&#x27;s rise during the early and mid 1950s started to move away or retire. Henryk Gronowski initially left in 1961, but later returned over the summer in 1963, his brother, and one of Lechia&#x27;s most important forwards for Lechia during this era, Robert Gronowski, left in 1960, the ever present defenders Hubert Kusz and Czesław Lenc left in 1960 and 1962, and Roman Rogocz, who scored more than 100 goals for Lechia during his 15-year career at the club, retired in 1962. Each of these players made more than 100 appearances in the I liga for Lechia, leaving Lechia without the quality and experience these players provided. This loss of quality was evident during the 1962-63 season which ended up being a difficult one for Lechia. In the 26 games that season, they only managed to win 6, drawing 3, with the side losing 17, scoring only 20 goals, and conceding 48. This caused the team to finish second from bottom, being 4 points from safety, and were relegated from the Ekstraklasa with Lech Poznań, ending their 9 season long spell of continuous top division football.

=== Decline and fall to the third division (1963–1971) ===

While some of Lechia&#x27;s important players remained at the club after their relegation, including long serving players such as; Bogdan Adamczyk, Jerzy Apolewicz, Janusz Charczuk, Roman Korynt, Czesław Nowicki, Zbigniew Żemojtel, and the return of Henryk Gronowski after the club&#x27;s relegation, the squad struggled to adapt to falling down a division. That season Lechia lost more games than they managed to win, and were only able to secure a 10th-placed finish out of 16 teams. Lechia did adapt to the new division better than Lech Poznań however who suffered back to back relegations, showing the rise in competitiveness since the last time Lechia were in the II liga.

From their second season Lechia had adapted to the league and increased their competitiveness, finding themselves in 7th for the 1964–65 season. This season saw Lechia playing Arka Gdynia for the first time, with the two clubs quickly becoming fierce rivals and leading to the Tricity Derby. Lechia won the first ever meeting between the two clubs with the game finishing 2–1. The club also saw in improvement the following year by finishing in 6th for the 1965–66 season. While these seasons were an improvement on their first season back in the second tier, Lechia never found themselves more than 4 points clear from relegation, the equivalent of 2 wins during that period. This shows that while Lechia were finishing in the mid-table, they were only one bad season, or one bad run of games from finishing in the relegation zone.

This possibility of a bad run of games leading to Lechia being relegated became a reality in the 1966–67 season, which saw a winless run of 8 games, including a run of 5 straight defeats without scoring a goal in this run. Lechia were relegated by a single point at the end of the season, and were to be playing in the third tier for the first time in their history.

Lechia will have expected to be competitive following their fall to the III liga, and the team proved that they could be. Their first season saw them finishing in 2nd, however they were clear behind Arkonia Szczecin, and although they did finish in 2nd place, only the league winners from the four groups of the third division were promoted. The 1967–68 season also saw Lechia&#x27;s first Gdańsk Derby with Stoczniowiec Gdańsk, despite both teams being formed in 1945 it took 22 years before they met in a competitive setting. Stoczniowiec won the first derby between the two clubs 2–1, in a derby that would go on to be played often over the next two decades. At the end of the season, the long serving forward who had three spells with Lechia, Bogdan Adamczyk, retired from playing football. Adamczyk was the last remaining player who had featured for the club during their &quot;Golden Years&quot; the decade before. Although one club legend retired, the following season saw the introduction of Zdzisław Puszkarz, a youngster from the Lechia academy, who would one day become a club legend himself. The season did not go as planned for Lechia, with the team finishing in 5th, and seeing their rivals Arka top the league.

Over the next three years however Lechia maintained a consistent challenge on fighting for the league title. The 1968–69 season saw Lechia finishing in 3rd place, conceding only 18 in 30 league games, and keeping an impressive 18 clean sheets. Lechia were still off the pace needed to mount a challenge for a title, but the club had seen improvements since the previous season. The next season Lechia had improved to a 2nd-placed finish, losing only 3 games all season, including losing to eventual champions Lech Poznań, and finishing only 1 point behind Lech, meaning the loss to Lech in the penultimate game of the season may have cost Lechia&#x27;s chance of winning the league themselves. Lechia did not have to wait long however to win the league for themselves and make a return to the II liga. In the 1971–72 season Lechia won 22 of their 30 games, clearly winning the league with having a 9-point gap to Stoczniowiec in 2nd place, having the second best attack in the league, and by far the best defence in the league conceding only 13 goals and keeping 21 clean sheets, this despite the fact that of the 4 league defeats that season, 3 of them came in Lechia&#x27;s first 4 league games.

===A decade in the second division (1972–1982)===

After finding themselves in the second division Lechia performed well and comfortably finished above the relegation zone in 7th place, winning and losing 9 games each over the season, and drawing 12, of which 8 were 0–0 draws. This followed the trend of Lechia not scoring many, but being set up well defensively, with the high number of extra points picked up from draws helping them to finish clear of the bottom 4. The 1973–74 season saw a change of format in the II liga, which was originally just a single league of 16 teams. From this season the division was split into two leagues of 16 teams each and 32 teams in total, a Northern group and a Southern group, with Lechia being placed in the Northern group. This change made it harder for teams to gain promotion from the division as they now had to win the league, where as before finishing as runners-up was good enough for promotion to the I liga. Lechia finished 4th in the league, in what was generally an average season for the team, but due to the top 3 teams taking so many points from the lower placed teams in the league Lechia recorded a high finish, with players such as Tomasz Korynt and Andrzej Głownia having standout seasons.

The 1974–75 season saw a vast improvement from the team, winning 16 of their 30 games, and losing only 6. The club also improved in goals scored, while also being the joint best team defensively. Tomasz Korynt, Leonard Radowski, and Zdzisław Puszkarz each managed 8 goals in the league that season as Lechia went on to finish in 2nd place, only 2 points of the league winners Widzew Łódź. This season also saw Zdzisław Puszkarz called up to the Poland national team to play against East Germany, despite Lechia playing in the second division. The following season was a good season for the Tricity region with the 4 teams in the league from the region all finishing in the top 5 places. Once again Lechia had a strong season, this time only losing 4 games, but again finished in 2nd place, this time 3 points behind rivals Arka Gdynia. 1976–77 was a little blip in Lechia&#x27;s run of high finishing seasons, managing 5th in the league, and their lowest finish since the league split into two groups. Lechia resumed their title fight from the following season, being the clear best team in the league along with Gwardia Warsaw, with both teams recording over 20 wins and losing only 2 games all season, and finishing nearly 20 points clear of Bałtyk Gdynia in 3rd place. Krzysztof Matuszewski also recorded 15 goals over the season, among the highest in the league. While Lechia were close to winning the league, it was once again not enough, with the club being a single point from winning the league.

From the 1978–79 season the leagues were changed from a Northern and Southern group to Eastern and Western groups. The change did not initially impact the club, with Lechia finishing in 3rd place, missing out on promotion by a single point for the second successive season. Lechia also went on a cup run, playing Gryf Słupsk, Wielim Szczecinek, Widzew Łódź, and Unia Tarnów on their way to reaching the quarterfinals. Lechia lost in the quarterfinals to eventual runners-up Wisła Kraków. Lechia&#x27;s fortunes in the II liga did start to change, and after narrowly missing out on promotion in four of the last five seasons, the club found themselves slipping down into mid-table finishes the next two seasons. 6th and 7th-placed finishes in seasons where Lechia nearly won, drew and lost the same number of games each time saw the club looking far less competitive and saw the departure of talismanic midfielder Zdzisław Puszkarz in 1981. It was evident in 1981–82 that Puszkarz, a lifelong Lechia fan and a player who had been seen as too good for the second tier for many years, hugely contributed to the club&#x27;s fortunes and was irreplaceable for the team on the pitch. Lechia fell to 14th after winning only 6 of their 30 games, scored only 19 goals, and ended up 7 points from safety. Lechia were relegated to the third tier, this time without any star players or big names to help the club out.

=== &#x27;Rebirth&#x27;, cup wins, and Ekstraklasa football (1982–1988) ===

Although Lechia found themselves in the third tier for the 1982–83 season, it turned out to be a historic year for the club, and was seen as the club&#x27;s &#x27;rebirth&#x27;. The team finished top of their division, going on to concede only 9 goals in their 26 games. Due to Lechia being in the third tier they joined the Polish Cup in the second round. The first game of the competition saw them play Start Radziejow, who they narrowly beat 3–2 on penalties. The cup saw them playing 4 Ekstraklasa teams on their route to the final. They beat Widzew Łódź 5–4 on penalties, after drawing 1–1, Śląsk Wrocław 3–0 in the round of 16, Zagłębie Sosnowiec 1–0 in the quarter-finals, and Ruch Chorzów in the semi-finals 4–3 on penalties. The final saw them playing Piast Gliwice who were in the second tier. They won the final 2–1 with goals from Krzysztof Górski and Marek Kowalczyk to win their first-ever piece of silverware.

In 1983–84 Lechia were again in the second tier (west group), and qualified for the Polish Super Cup () due to winning the Polish Cup the season before. It was the first-ever season of the Super Cup, and saw the cup winning team play the Ekstraklasa champions, resulting in Lechia playing Lech Poznań. Despite Lech being heavy favourites Lechia won the Super Cup with a late goal from Jerzy Kruszczyński. This resulted in 1983 being the most successful season in the club&#x27;s history up to that point, with the team winning both cup competitions it participated in despite not being in the top division. Lechia&#x27;s stay out of the Ekstraklasa was not to last long, however, with the team winning the 1983–84 II Liga season, and as a result were promoted back to the Ekstraklasa. A division they had narrowly missed out of playing in many seasons before, and was their first time back in the top tier for 21 seasons. That season Lechia also qualified for the UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup due to winning the Polish Cup the season before. In the first round, Lechia was drawn to Italian footballing giants, Juventus. The first game was played in Turin, Italy, with Juventus easily winning 7–0. With the team knowing they were all but knocked out already the team put on an inspiring performance scoring 2 goals against the European giants in the home leg of the competition. The Lechia home game against Juventus was not only a sporting spectacle, but proved to be a place of mass demonstration for the &quot;Solidarity&quot; movement, which many fans were part of. In the 40,000 crowd was Lech Wałęsa, with the crowds chants of &quot;Solidarność! Solidarność! Solidarność!&quot; causing the second half to be delayed by 6 minutes and with broadcasters resulting to mute the whole second half of the TVs broadcast. The Lechia manager, Jerzy Jastrzębowski, said of the event; &quot;We were in the dressing room during half-time when we heard it and it sent shivers down our spines, the whole ground singing &#x27;Solidarnosc&#x27;.&quot;

For the 1984–85 Ekstraklasa season, a season in which all teams struggled for goals (an average of 1 goal a game), Lechia finished 12th having scored 23 goals, and with only 2 of their wins that season coming from scoring 2 more goals than their opponents. The season after Lechia finished just above the relegation zone by a single point, and seeing local rivals Bałtyk Gdynia getting relegated a place below. Lechia was lucky that season, with the team finishing 3rd from bottom, with four teams normally getting relegated. However, a change to the division below saw only 2 teams going down that season. 1986–87 saw the team once again fighting relegation. For the 3rd season in a row, Lechia only managed 23 goals in their league 30 games, however, the team once again stayed up finishing in 11th. The team were once more fighting a relegation battle during the 1987-88 season. Lechia legend Puszkarz rejoined the team after having left 5 seasons prior. It had always been his dream to play for Lechia in the top flight, and this was the season where he achieved this accomplishment however it did not go according to plan. Despite the team finishing in 12th, which would normally be one position above the relegation zone, for that season though there was a relegation playoff, with 14th playing 11th, and 13th playing 12th. Lechia played Olimpia Poznań in the relegation playoff and lost over both legs 3–2 on aggregate. This saw Lechia being relegated with Zagłębie Lubin, the other team who would otherwise have normally been safe also suffered relegation after they lost both legs 4–3 to Górnik Wałbrzych on aggregate. The following season the relegation playoffs in the Ekstraklasa were scrapped.

=== Lower leagues and mergers (1988–2001) ===

After relegation from the Ekstraklasa, Lechia found themselves back in the II liga. During the 1988–89 season Lechia struggled to adapt to the new league, finishing 10th out of 16. Things failed to improve for Lechia during the next two seasons, finishing both 11th and 12th. The situation slightly improved for Lechia during the 1991–92 and the 1993–94 seasons finishing in 8th before their highest finish of 6th since being relegated. During this period there was a greater rivalry with the three major Tricity clubs, Lechia representing Gdańsk, with Arka and Bałtyk from Gdynia. The 1993–94 season was an important season for the Tricity teams. Bałtyk Gdynia finished highest in the league for the 3rd season in a row, while both Lechia and Arka faced each other for the first time in history in the 1993–94 Polish Cup, with Arka winning the match 1–0. The season was another difficult one for Lechia, in which they finished 14th, 1 place above the relegation zone. The struggles for Lechia reached a devastating end by the end of the 1994–95 season, with the team, ultimately being relegated to the 3rd Division, along with fellow rivals Arka Gdynia.

The 1995–96 season saw Lechia merge with Olimpia Poznań, becoming Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk. Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk played in the top division, while the continuation of the Lechia Gdańsk team played in the 3rd division, with the Lechia Gdańsk side being used as the team&#x27;s official second team. By the end of the 1995–96 Ekstraklasa season Lechia-Olimpia Gdańsk finished 16th, and were ultimately relegated. The second team (Lechia Gdańsk) also narrowly miss relegation, finishing just above the relegation places. At the end of the 1995–96 season Lechia–Olympia Gdańsk was renamed as Lechia Gdańsk, promoting the team from the 3rd division to the 2nd. The new Lechia team failed to capitalize on the return to the second division by being relegated to the 3rd division straight away. The 1997–98 season was a better season for Lechia with the team finishing in 3rd place in the III liga.

Before the 1998–99 season Lechia had their 2nd merger within 3 years, this time merging with Polonia Gdańsk to create Lechia-Polonia Gdańsk taking Polonia&#x27;s place in the 2nd division. This merger lasted 3 years, with the team&#x27;s fortunes slowly deteriorating, finishing 7th in 1998–99, 14th in 1999–2000, and 19th in the 2000–01 season, and thus suffering another relegation to the 3rd division. In the 2001–02 season Lechia–Polonia competed in the 3rd division, while a newly formed Lechia Gdańsk team was formed in the 6th division. After the 2001–02 season Lechia–Polonia dissolved, resulting newly formed Lechia becoming the continuation of the original club, while Polonia Gdańsk having already reformed in the sixth tier in 1999.

=== Re-formation and re-start from the sixth tier (2001–2008) ===

The newly formed independent Lechia Gdańsk team had a lot of initial success, winning the league in its first year in the 6th tier in 2001–02 season. This form continued finishing first in the 2002–03 season in the 5th tier, as well as winning the 2003–04 season in the 4th tier, and also finishing first the season after in the 2004–05 3rd tier. After 4 seasons of being an independent club after failed mergers with Olimpia and Polonia, Lechia found itself back in the second tier of Polish football.

Back in the II liga Lechia finished the 2005–06 in 10th, comfortably above the automatic relegation zone, and clear of the relegation playoffs. With Lechia making more improvements during the 2006–07 season finishing in 5th.

The 2007–08 season was the team&#x27;s 20th season outside of the top flight, having to come from two failed mergers, and working their way back into the 2nd division. During the season the MOSiR Stadium became a fortress, with Lechia winning 14 of the 17 games at home, losing only once at home, against Odra Opole. Lechia struggled more away from home, winning 6 of their 17 away games. Lechia was helped during the season with goal-scoring contributions from Maciej Rogalski, Paweł Buzała, and Piotr Cetnarowicz, with all three players scoring more than 10 goals over the course of the season. Despite the club&#x27;s decent away form, it proved by the end of the season that their home form had massively helped Lechia in the league, with Lechia finishing the 2007–08 season as champions, and as a result, secured promotion back to the Ekstraklasa.

=== Return to the Ekstraklasa (2008–2018) ===

For the 2008–09 season Lechia returned to the Ekstraklasa for the first time since being relegated after the 1987–88 Ekstraklasa season. Lechia struggled in their first season of being back in the top flight of Polish football with the team losing 16 of the 30 games that season. They ended the season three points above the relegation zone, and stayed in the league mostly due to their home form (having 7 of their 9 wins that season from their home games). Lechia fared better during the 2009–10 season finishing in eighth, while also enjoying a cup run that took the team to the semi-finals of the 2009–10 Polish Cup losing in the semi-final to eventual cup winners Jagiellonia. In January 2009 the members of Lechia Gdańsk (OSP) signed a document forming Lechia Gdansk S.A. (Spółka Akcyjna = Stock Corporation). It was during this season that Gdansk was chosen to be one of the host cities of the UEFA Euro 2012 championships in Poland and Ukraine, meaning the team would be moving from their current MOSiR Stadium to a new 43,000 capacity stadium in 2011.

In Lechia&#x27;s 3rd season back in the top flight, it was another season of consolidating their Ekstraklasa status. In the 2010–11 season the team once again finished in 8th place. It was, however, a more positive season that showed progression for the team as a whole. It was the first time since their promotion back to the top league that Lechia had won more games than they had lost, finished with a positive goal difference, and Lechia player Abdou Traoré finished joint runner up for most goals that season. And for the second season in a row Lechia reached the semi-finals of the 2010–11 Polish Cup, before losing 5–0 to Legia over the two legs. This was the last season in which Lechia played at the MOSiR Stadium, the stadium in which Lechia had played all of their home games since their formation in 1945. The last game to be played at the stadium was the final game of the season against Zagłębie Lubin, a game in which Lechia lost 2–1.

The 2011–12 season saw Lechia move into their new stadium, the first game to be played there saw Lechia playing against Cracovia, a game which finished 1–1. Lechia struggled during their first season inside the new and much larger stadium, winning only three of their home games that season. Lechia slumped to a 13th-place finish, in a season where they scored 21 goals in 30 games.
In 2012–13 there were more positives for Lechia, again finishing in a mid-table 8th. The team once again struggled at home, winning only three games. With the relegation of Polonia Warsaw (who finished the season in sixth) due to financial issues, Lechia effectively finished seventh, and secured their highest finish since their return to the top flight.

There were major changes made for the 2013–14 Ekstraklasa season with the introduction of a Championship Round (teams who finish 1st–8th) and a Relegation Round (teams who finish 9th–16th). This took the overall games played in a season from 30 to 37. As ever Lechia finished eighth after the 30-game season qualifying for the Championship Round. Lechia finished the first-ever Championship Round in fourth place and just missing out on qualification for the qualifying rounds of the 2014–15 UEFA Europa League due to Zawisza Bydgoszcz winning the 2013–14 Polish Cup. The 4th-place finish meant that Lechia had achieved their highest finish since the 1956 season, in which Lechia finished third.
2014–15 saw Lechia struggling towards the lower end of the table by the time the winter break took place. During the mid-season transfer window Sebastian Mila rejoined the club where he had started his professional career 14 years earlier. The Polish international became Lechia&#x27;s captain for the remainder of the season, and helped the club to an eighth-placed finish for the regular season. During the Championship Round, Lechia managed to finish in fifth, once again just missing out on qualifying for the Europa League.

2015–16 saw an intent for progression for Lechia. Joining Mila and Łukasik, the Poland internationals who were already at the club, saw the arrivals of Ariel Borysiuk, Sławomir Peszko, Jakub Wawrzyniak, Grzegorz Wojtkowiak, as well as former Serbian international Miloš Krasić. Despite the new players Lechia struggled at the start of the season and hovered above the relegation zone until the winter break. The team managed to reach seventh place by the end of the regular season. During the Championship Round Lechia once again finished fifth, and narrowly missed out on qualification for the Europa League Qualifiers. Grzegorz Kuświk who joined Lechia from Ruch during the summer finished the season with 11 goals, and was one of the top goal scorers that season.

2016–17 saw the improvements that fans had been anticipating. With players such as Haraslín as well as the internationally experienced players who joined the season before had now settled into the club. New arrivals such as twins Marco Paixão and Flávio Paixão, as well as Rafał Wolski arriving from Fiorentina and Dušan Kuciak from Hull City. The regular season saw Lechia winning all but three of their home games, and were top of the table at the end of 10 of the game weeks. Lechia ended the regular season in fourth. In the last home game of the season against Pogoń Lechia celebrated the careers of Piotr Wiśniewski and Mateusz Bąk. Both players had played over 10 years for Lechia, while Lechia was the only professional club Wiśniewski played for. Both players came on as substitutes in the 4–0 win over Pogon, with Wiśniewski scoring the final goal of the game, and Bąk made an important save to keep a clean sheet for the team. Going into the final game of the season Lechia was in fourth place, two points behind Legia who were top, Lechia knew that with a win away to Legia they had a great chance of winning their first-ever Ekstraklasa title. The game finished 0–0, and due to Lech and Jagiellonia drawing with each other, Lechia did not gain any positions and finished fourth with the same points as Lech and Jaga who finished in second and third. For the third season in a row Lechia once again missed out on qualification for the Europa League by a single position, this time due to their main rivals Arka Gdynia getting the place from winning the 2016–17 Polish Cup. Marco Paixão finished the season as the top scorer in the league with 18 goals, an award which was jointly shared with Marcin Robak.

There was much anticipation for the 2017–18 season after having the chance to win the title up until the final game the season before. However, any optimism of a repeat was short-lived. Lechia spent most of the season in the bottom half of the table and finished the regular season in 14th, one place and one point above the relegation zone. This was the first season Lechia had featured in the Relegation Round. Wins against Termalica Nieciecza, Arka Gdynia and Piast Gliwice ensured that Lechia finished the Relegation Round in 13th place, two places and three points above the relegation zone. Marco and Flávio had a huge contribution to Lechia staying up, with 16 goals from Marco and 10 for Flávio. At the end of the season Sebastian Mila retired from football, after having had two spells with Lechia.

=== Stokowiec and new success (2018–2022) ===

Piotr Stokowiec was in place for the final few games of the disappointing 2017–18 season and was in place ready for the 2018–19 Ekstraklasa season. The first game of the 2018-19 season saw Lechia beating Jagiellonia Białystok, with Sławomir Peszko receiving a straight red. After the game Peszko received a three-month ban for a dangerous kick at Arvydas Novikovas. The season started well, with Lechia winning five of their first seven games, while also holding Legia to draw in Warsaw. Lechia&#x27;s first defeat of the season came away to Wisła Kraków after the international break, before losing a 3–0 lead and drawing 3–3 with Zagłębie Lubin in the game after. After a difficult September, Lechia went on a 13-game unbeaten run, including wins over rivals Arka Gdynia and beating Lech Poznań away in Poznań for the first time in 52 years. The unbeaten run lead to Lechia leading the Ekstraklasa when the league broke up for the winter break. During this time Lechia also went on a cup run beating Wisła Kraków, Resovia Rzeszow and Bruk-Bet Termalica Nieciecza to reach the quarterfinals. After the break Lechia continued their good form losing only 2 of the 11 games after the restart. After losing the final game of the regular season to Cracovia 4–2, they found themselves in the first place due to goal difference, having +3 goals more than Legia Warsaw. Lechia&#x27;s good fortunes in the cup also continued after the restart, beating Górnik Zabrze in the quarterfinals, Raków Częstochowa in the semifinal, meeting Jagiellonia Białystok in the final. The final was played on 2 May 2019 at the National Stadium in Warsaw. After a close game Flávio Paixão scored for Lechia in the 85th minute, before it was disallowed by the VAR. Artur Sobiech scored the winning goal in the fifth minute of stoppage time, winning the Polish Cup for Lechia, the second time in their history they won the competition. After the cup triumph, the championship group was a disappointment in comparison. After losing only four games in the previous 30, Lechia lost four of the seven championship games. Despite the disappointing end, it was a historic campaign for Lechia after winning the Polish Cup for the second time, and finishing third in the league, their joint highest finish in the league which was last achieved in 1956.

Lechia started the season with the 2019 Polish Super Cup playing against Polish Champions Piast Gliwice. Two goals from Lukáš Haraslín and one from Jarosław Kubicki meant that Lechia were 3-0 up in the final before a late consolation for Piast from Patryk Sokołowski. Lechia won the Polish Super Cup for the second time in their history by winning 3–1. Another challenge for Lechia to face early in the season was playing in a European competition for only the second time in their history. Lechia were to play in the 2019–20 UEFA Europa League, with the team being drawn against Brøndby IF. The first game went well, with Lechia winning 2–1 at home, with goals from Flávio Paixão and Patryk Lipski. The second leg however went Brøndby&#x27;s way. After finishing the away leg 2–1, with Lechia&#x27;s goal coming from Flávio Paixão, the game went to extra time. Brøndby scored early in extra time, and with Lechia pushing for an equalizer, scored again late on meaning Lechia lost the tie 5–3 on aggregate. The start of the 2019–20 season proved to be difficult for Lechia, with new signing Žarko Udovičić receiving a four match ban after being sent off in the team&#x27;s first game of the season against ŁKS Łódź. Lechia went on to only win one of their first six games, which was against Wisła Płock. After the difficult start Lechia then went on a five match winning run which put them top of the league after beating Legia Warsaw away 2–1. After their winning run was ended by Zagłębie Lubin, the team had the Tricity Derby the following game. After goals from Artur Sobiech and Flávio Paixão (this being Paixão&#x27;s seventh goal against Arka, making him the outright highest scorer in the fixture) Lechia lost a 2–0 lead and finished the game 2–2, with Udovičić again being sent off, this time receiving a two-month ban. After the game against Arka, Lechia failed to win any of the next three games, losing two, placing the team in 9th place at the mid-way point of the regular season. For the start of the second round of fixtures Lechia beat ŁKS Łódź 3–1, with Flávio Paixão scoring two goals. These two goals put Paixão on 68 goals in the Ekstraklasa, overtaking Miroslav Radović as the highest scoring foreigner in the top league of Poland. Lechia went on to win the next two games while managing to keep clean sheets in both games. The 3 match winning run was ended after a 3–0 defeat against Jagiellonia Białystok. It was announced a few days after the game, on 17 December, that the players and staff had not been played by the club since September and had failed to pay the players their bonuses for winning the Polish Cup in May. Due to the players having not been paid for months they would have been legally be able to apply for a termination of their contract, and leading to the possibility of many important players leaving during the next transfer window. After the finances had been resolved, Lechia lost the final game of the autumn round 3-0 going into the winter break in 7th. To help with the club&#x27;s future financial situation key players on high wagers were told they could leave during the winter break. Key players that left included; Lukáš Haraslín, Artur Sobiech, Daniel Łukasik, Rafał Wolski and Sławomir Peszko with Błażej Augustyn training with the Lechia II team until arrangements could be made. Although key players were missing and there being a greater emphasis on playing the youth players in the first game back after the winter break, the team started the second half of the season drawing 2–2 with a Championship chasing Śląsk Wrocław team. During the game it was clear to see the club&#x27;s current situation with their finances with the entire bench being made up of teenagers from the U23&#x27;s team. Lechia won the following game 1–0 against Piast with Kacper Urbański starting the game, becoming the youngest ever Lechia player to start a competitive game, and the youngest ever player to start a game in the Ekstraklasa. On 10 March it was announced that all games would be played behind closed doors due to the coronavirus pandemic. After the announcement Polish football would be played without fans present, Lechia went on to beat Piast Gliwice 2–1 in an empty stadium in the Polish Cup to reach the semi-finals, leaving only 2 wins to retain the cup. Announcements were made over the following days and weeks, with the Ekstraklasa, I liga and Polish Cup fixtures all being suspended until 26 April at the earliest. At the time of the league&#x27;s suspension Lechia were in 7th place with 4 games left to play in the regular season. After a difficult restart to the season Lechia went on a run to climb the table, including a 4–3 win over rivals Arka Gdynia. This run coincided with the meeting of Lech Poznań in the Polish Cup semi-final, against whom Lechia beat 4–3 in penalties after the game finished 1–1. This led Lechia into their second Polish Cup final in successive years. Lechia finished the season in 4th place and played Cracovia in the Polish Cup final, losing the final 3–2 after the game went into extra-time.

Lechia went into the 2020–21 season celebrating their 75th anniversary, but with the fans and team knowing they had lost some key players from previous seasons. Filip Mladenović joined rivals Legia Warsaw while Lukáš Haraslín made the permanent move to U.S. Sassuolo. Lechia struggled at the start of the season, losing two of their first three games, before finding some form and moving to a high of 4th place. The effects of the coronavirus were again felt by the team, with the match against Wisła Kraków being postponed due to an outbreak in the Wisła team. Lechia eventually struggled with a Covid outbreak of their own, with Jaroslav Mihalík being the first confirmed case in the club on 10 October, getting the virus while on international duty. In early November the club had an outbreak affecting 13 players and 7 members of the coaching staff. After a month with no games due to the team&#x27;s outbreak the Lechia team returned to play Śląsk Wrocław, winning the game 3–2. After this initial success after the team&#x27;s isolation, Lechia lost the following four games without scoring a goal. Going into the final game before the winter break the team found themselves in the bottom half of the table, but a 3–0 win over Cracovia helped them to rise up to 8th. After the winter break Lechia&#x27;s poor form returned with defeats to Jagiellonia in the league and Puszcza Niepołomice in the Polish Cup, with some fans questioning the role of Stokowiec as the team&#x27;s manager. After a poor run of results which saw 6 defeats in 7 games, Lechia picked up form and gained some momentum in the league, winning 5 of the next 8 games, losing only one, and mounting a threat to the top three places in the league. After this run Lechia&#x27;s form once again dropped, winning only 6 points from the final 7 games of the season. The team went into the final game of the season knowing that a win would be enough to secure European football for the following season, but a defeat to Jagiellonia on the final day of the season saw the side slump to a disappointing 7th-place finish.

The 2021–22 season saw changes in the league structure, increasing the teams from 16 to 18 and scrapping the championship and relegation leagues at the end of the season, seeing all teams playing 34 league games a season instead of the previous 37. The 2021–22 season started relatively well for Lechia losing only one of their first six games and securing 9 points in the process. Lechia dropped points against Radomiak Radom in their sixth game of the season after having been 2–0 up to draw the game 2–2. While the season looked more promising, and they play from the squad looked better than the previous season, this kind of collapse in Lechia games was becoming too common under Stokowiec&#x27;s reign. Shortly after the game with Radomiak it was announced that Piotr Stokowiec had officially left the club, Stokowiec being Lechia&#x27;s second longest serving manager in the club&#x27;s history. On 1 September 2021 it was announced that the Pogoń Szczecin assistant manager Tomasz Kaczmarek was to become the new Lechia manager. Lechia under Kaczmarek initially performed well in the league, going on a nine-game unbeaten run in the league under the manager, a run of 10 games in total with Stokowiec&#x27;s last game in charge being included. During this unbeaten run of games, Lechia convincingly beat teams such as their wins against Górnik Łęczna and the current Polish champions, Legia Warsaw. This good form saw Lechia closing in on the leaders Lech, and going on to fight for a few weeks with Raków for the second and third places. The impressive run came to a disappointing end with a 5–1 defeat to Pomeranian rivals Pogoń which saw Lechia&#x27;s run of form drastically change, going on to lose 3 of the next 4 games, and being in 5th place in the league as the Ekstraklasa stopped for the winter break. After the break Lechia&#x27;s inconsistent form continued, seeing a convincing win against Śląsk, before being convincingly beaten against Cracovia. Lechia&#x27;s third game of the league&#x27;s return was against the league leaders Lech Poznań, with the club needing a positive result to keep up the pace with the teams in the top 3 places. Despite Lech being the dominant team for much of the game, a late goal from 17 year old Filip Koperski secured a 1–0 win against their league rivals, and keeping themselves in touching distance of a top 3 finish. The win against Lech proved to be a blip, with the club failing to win any of the next three games including losing against Radomiak Radom who were also trying to reach the top 3, and only drawing with relegation candidates Wisła Kraków. Financial struggles around the club were once again raised, and could be seen as a reason for the club&#x27;s poor performance, however these concerns were soon quashed and the situation was not as bad as first feared. Despite these concerns, Lechias form improved, with the club going on to win 5 of the next 7 games, and with Raków Częstochowa winning the Polish Cup, 4th place would be good enough for Lechia to secure European football. One game of note in this run was against Warta Poznań, with Flávio Paixão scoring both goals in a 2–0 win, and in the process scoring Lechia&#x27;s 1000th Ekstraklasa goal, and becoming the first foreign player to score 100 goals in the Ekstraklasa. The penultimate game of the season saw them face off against Pogoń Szczecin knowing that a draw would secure 4th place in the league and the chance to play in Europe. Despite both teams starting the game strongly the contest fizzled out to a 0–0 draw. This was enough for Lechia to secure their place in the following seasons Europa Conference League, only their third time of playing European football in their history.

=== Current era - relegation from Ekstraklasa and return (2022–)===

The following 2022–23 season was very unsuccessful for Lechia. In the Conference League qualifiers, after beating Akademija Pandev in the first round, they got eliminated from European football by Rapid in the following round. They ended their Polish Cup journey in the round of 16, losing the penalty shootout to Legia, who went on to win the competition. Most notably however, the &quot;White-Greens&quot; were relegated after losing at home to Zagłębie Lubin in the 31st matchday on 6 May 2023, ending their fifteen-year stint in the top flight.

Following relegation, many of the key players left the club, such as Łukasz Zwoliński, Jarosław Kubicki, Michał Nalepa and Flávio Paixão, among others. Led by their new manager Szymon Grabowski, Lechia contested the first round of the 2023–24 I liga against Chrobry Głogów with a matchday squad consisting of 8 youth players with no prior senior team playing experience. The club was also facing financial and organizational issues, including delayed staff payments and having to use placeholder kits in the early stages of the season. Following change of ownership in August, the arrival of foreign players such as Ivan Zhelizko, Maksym Khlan, Rifet Kapić and the record signing of Camilo Mena, Lechia found their footing in the second division. On 11 May 2024, they were promoted back to Ekstraklasa at their first attempt, after a 4–3 win over Wisła Kraków. They later became I liga champions on 19 May, following a 2–1 Tricity Derby win over Arka Gdynia.

==Historic club names==

== Fan culture ==
 
Lechia Gdańsk is the most supported club in northern Poland, and is one of the most supported clubs in the country, despite not always being successful. Most of the support comes from Gdańsk and the Pomeranian region. The biggest supporters group is the &quot;Lions of the North&quot; group () who organise displays in the stadium as well as travel to away games. Outside of Gdańsk the club have 24 official fan groups linked to the club, with more unofficial fan groups. The official and unofficial fan groups can be found in the towns of; Braniewo, Bytów, Chojnice, Czersk, Dzierzgoń, Frombork, Gdynia, Gniew, Kartuzy, Kościerzyna, Kwidzyn, Lębork, Malbork, Mława, Miłobądz, Nowe, Nowy Dwór Gdański, Nowy Staw, Nowy Targ, Pelplin, Pisz, Pruszcz Gdański, Prabuty, Przodkowo, Pszczółki, Rumia, Sierakowice, Skarszewy, Skórcz, Smętowo, Sopot, Starogard Gdański, Sztum, Tczew, Tuchom, Ustka, Władysławowo, Wejherowo, Zblewo and Żukowo, with the club also having a fan group in England.

In the 1980s, many of the club&#x27;s fans were active in the Solidarity movement which was fighting the communist regime in Poland. This included Lech Wałęsa, a fan of Lechia Gdańsk who was at the front of the Solidarity movement and became the first elected President of Poland after the fall of communism. Due to Gdańsk&#x27;s role with the Solidarity movement, it is not unusual to see anti-communist slogans on banners in the stadium. A phrase often used by the club and the fans is &quot;We&#x27;re creating history&quot; (), which can be associated to the role Lechia fans have had on the fall of communism in Poland, and with the club&#x27;s increasing competitiveness in recent years, such as winning the Polish Cup, the Polish Super Cup and finishing third in the Ekstraklasa all in 2019.

Famous Lechia fans include Lech Wałęsa, the leader of the Solidarity trade union which helped to bring an end to communist rule in Poland and Poland&#x27;s second President, Donald Tusk, the current prime minister of Poland and the President of the European Council from 2014 to 2019 is also a Lechia fan. Paweł Adamowicz, the mayor of Gdańsk from 1998 until his assassination in 2019, was a lifelong Lechia fan. He used his role as mayor of the city to help the club during its reformation in 2001.

=== Fan trouble ===

As with most football clubs during their history, both in the sport in general and in Poland, Lechia Gdańsk have had their own issues relating to the club&#x27;s fans. On 25 May 2021 Gdańsk hosted the Europa League Final match between Villarreal and Manchester United. The night before the match saw Manchester United fans being attacked at a bar in the city, destroying the bar and leaving three United fans injured. While the reports after the attack were unconfirmed as to whether the fans were those of Lechia, the fans chanted &quot;Lechia Gdańsk&quot; as they were leaving the scene.

On 7 July 2022 an incident between Lechia fans before the match spilled into the stands during Lechia&#x27;s Europa Conference League with Akademija Pandev. The stadiums bar, T29 Sports Pub, was damaged before the group of fans entered the stadium and caused fighting in the stadiums Zielony section. The fight saw the match being suspended on 8 minutes, with the break lasting for 40 minutes before play resumed. Police made arrests in the days after the match, with the Mayor of Gdańsk stating that taxpayer money would not be used to help the refurbishing of the bar. On 15 July, UEFA announced that Lechia would be handed a €50k fine, and one match to be played behind closed doors. The stadium closure punishment was announced to be suspended for 2 years, meaning the club would not have to serve the suspension if there was to be no crowd trouble within this time.

===Friendships===
====Current friendships====
The fans have a friendship with Śląsk Wrocław with which the two clubs fans have had a friendship since 1977, and have had friendly relations since 1967. This is the oldest fan friendship in Polish football. During the 2017/18 season, the two sets of fans celebrated their 40th Friendship Anniversary. Games between the two are often called &quot;The Friendship Match&quot;.

There is also a mutual friendship between fans of Gryf Słupsk and Lechia Gdańsk. Gryf Słupsk are also from the Pomeranian area of Poland. The two teams have rarely met competitively due to Gryf often playing in the lower regional divisions. Gryf set up the Amber Cup Tournament, an indoor football tournament which takes place during the winter break. Gryf Słupsk hosted the tournament and have featured many times, winning in 2009, before the tournament was moved to Gdańsk due to the rise in popularity, and was hosted by Lechia Gdańsk from 2016 to 2018.

There are many other teams in the Pomeranian province which have friendly relations with Lechia or have sympathies towards the team. The Tricity Derby which is contested by the two biggest teams in the Pomeranian area has split the teams in the region with many fans backing Lechia in the derby. These are generally fans from; Chojniczanka Chojnice, Bytovia Bytów, Cartusia Kartuzy, Czarni Pruszcz Gdański, KP Starogard Gdański, Unia Tczew, Pomezania Malbork, Rodło Kwidzyn and Olimpia Sztum.

Other teams&#x27; fans who have friendly relations with Lechia include; Jeziorak Iława, Miedź Legnica, Hutnik Kraków, Mławianka Mława and Czech team SFC Opava. Despite being a basketball team, Czarni Słupsk fans are also closely linked with Lechia fans.

While not a friendship, Lechia fans have had an “agreement” () with Stomil Olsztyn since 2016. Typically if agreements last the two teams become friends and develop a “friendship” (). Lechia fans supposedly also have an agreement with Raków Częstochowa, and friendly relations with Górnik Łęczna.

====Former friendships====
From 1983 until 1988 Lechia was part of a fan coalition which consisted of Widzew Łódź, Wisła Kraków, Jagiellonia Białystok, and Ruch Chorzów, being the biggest coalition in Poland at the time. The coalition broke up when Lechia fans wanted Śląsk Wrocław to join the coalition, but opposition from Widzew, Jagiellonia and Ruch prevented the coalition from growing. As a result, the coalition split with Lechia and Wisła fans siding with Śląsk.

Lechia fans had an agreement with Wisła Kraków dating back to 1973, and from 1988 until 2016 both sets of fans were involved in a fan coalition with Śląsk Wrocław. Wisła left the &quot;Three Kings of Great Cities&quot; () coalition to join a new coalition of Widzew Łódź and Ruch Chorzów. This upset both Lechia and Śląsk fans as fans of Ruch Chorzów and Widzew Łódź were involved in the murder of a Śląsk fan in 2003. The main Lechia Gdańsk fan group posted that the decision for Wisła to form a friendship with Ruch was unacceptable for the fans of Lechia, and that the friendship was to be terminated. The main Śląsk Wrocław fan group posted a similar response the following day officially ending the TKWM alliance.

While not technically a former friendship it was also documented that Lechia fans had agreements with both Piast Gliwice and Wisła Płock since at least 2017 until around 2020. While this agreement did not progress into a friendship between fans, it is unlikely that there will be negative thoughts between each team&#x27;s fans, as with the case of Wisła Kraków, and have a more neutral opinion of each other.

===Rivals===
Their biggest rivals are Arka Gdynia, the games between the two are known as the &quot;Tricity derby&quot; (). The two teams are the largest in the Tricity area, with Lechia representing Gdańsk and Arka representing Gdynia, these are the two largest cities in the Tricity area. The Tricity derby impacts the Pomeranian region as a whole as fans of the smaller clubs in the region will also sympathise with either Arka or Lechia, with some counties being fully behind one of the teams with other counties being split between the two. Lechia receives the greatest support outside of Gdańsk from Słupsk, Starogard Gdański, Chojnice, Malbork, Sopot, and Lębork. Arka receives most of its support outside of Gdynia from Tczew, Wejherowo, Rumia, and Kościerzyna. Lechia has the most success in the derby winning 16 to Arka&#x27;s 11, with Lechia also being undefeated to Arka in the Ekstraklasa (10 wins, 4 draws).

Lech Poznań and Cracovia are rivals dating back to the time with their alliance with Wisła. This was due to the two largest fan coalitions in Poland, &quot;Three Kings of Great Cities&quot; (Lechia, Śląsk, and Wisła) and &quot;The Great Triad&quot; (Arka, Cracovia, and Lech) with any of the opposite coalition teams playing each other resulting in a big and hotly contested match.

In recent years there has been a growing rivalry with Legia Warsaw. While Legia have often been challenging for titles and trophies for much of their history, Lechia have not. While Lechia has been more competitive in recent years, and are finishing higher in the table, the matches between the two sides is starting to have more importance, with the Lechia home game against Legia often being one of the highest attended games of the season.

Other clubs whose fans have negative views of Lechia and vice versa are; Pogoń Szczecin (due to both clubs being from Northern regions in Poland, where historically there have been few competitive football clubs), Zagłębie Lubin (due to Zagłębie being the main rivals of Śląsk Wrocław, Lechia&#x27;s biggest friendship), Jagiellonia Białystok, Ruch Chorzów, Widzew Łódź, Motor Lublin (despite Motor fans having a friendship with Śląsk Wrocław), GKS Katowice, Zawisza Bydgoszcz, Elana Toruń, Polonia Bytom, Górnik Zabrze, and Russian club FC Spartak Moscow.

Since 2016 Wisła Kraków has since turned into a rivalry for some fans, while other fans still see the club in a more positive light.

Bałtyk Gdynia is another rivalry due to the geographically close proximity between the two clubs. Over recent years, however, this fixture has not been much of a rivalry due to the teams being in different divisions for many seasons. This rivalry was at its biggest in the 1990s when the two clubs played each other often in the second tier.

Gedania Gdańsk and Stoczniowiec Gdańsk have historically been a derby for Lechia with games between any of the three teams being known as the Gdańsk Derby (). The rivalry with Gedania was at its biggest in the 1940s and 1950s while the rivalry with Polonia was at its height from the late 1960s to early 1980s. Due to the current leagues, the teams are in, this is no longer seen as a major rivalry, with fans of both Gedania and Stoczniowiec more likely to support Lechia in big games than Lechias opponents.

While not rivals per se with any of these teams in a competitive capacity, these local teams fans are all aligned with Arka for the Tricity derby and are, as such seen in lower regard compared to other local teams; Gwardia Koszalin, Kaszubia Kościerzyna, Gryf Wejherowo, Wisła Tczew and Orkan Rumia.

====Tricity derby====

The Tricity derby is a match between Lechia and Arka Gdynia. The first derby was held on 2 September 1964 and was a 2–1 win for Lechia Gdańsk.
====Gdańsk derby====

The Gdańsk Derby are games between teams based in Gdańsk. Historically the derby has referred to games between Lechia Gdańsk, Gedania Gdańsk and Stoczniowiec Gdańsk.

The first derby held between Lechia and Gedania Gdańsk was held on 23 September 1945 and was a 7–2 win for Lechia Gdańsk. The last time this derby was played was on 27 June 2004.
The first derby held between Lechia and Stoczniowiec Gdańsk was held on 20 August 1967 and was a 2–1 win for Stoczniowiec Gdańsk. The last time this derby was played was on 7 May 1983.
== Stadia ==
===Stadion Gdańsk===

The Polsat Plus Arena Gdańsk, previously called the &quot;Baltic Arena&quot;, &quot;PGE Arena Gdańsk&quot; (2010 – 2015), &quot;Stadion Energa Gdańsk&quot; (2015 – 2020) is the home stadium of Lechia Gdańsk. The stadium is located on ul. Pokoleń Lechii Gdańsk (&quot;Generations of Lechia Gdańsk street&quot;) in the northern part of the city (Letnica district). The capacity of the stands is 41,620 spectators, all seated and roofed. Stadion Gdańsk is the largest arena in Ekstraklasa and the third largest in the country (after National Stadium and Silesia Stadium).

Construction of the stadium started in 2008 and was completed mid-2011. The opening match was between Lechia Gdańsk and Cracovia and ended with 1–1 draw. The first international match, Poland – Germany, took place on 6 September 2011 and ended 2–2. The match was relocated from Warsaw because the National Stadium was not ready. Stadion Gdańsk is used by Lechia Gdańsk since &#x27;the White-and-Green&#x27; relocated there from MOSiR Stadium.

The stadium was also one of the designated venues for the finals of Euro 2012. It hosted four matches during the tournament. Three matches in Group C and one quarter-final were played here. In 2010 the official name of the stadium changed to PGE Arena Gdańsk, on the basis of a sponsorship agreement with Polska Grupa Energetyczna (PGE Group). The contract with PGE ended, however, on 30 September 2015, after PGE chose not to renew the contract. On 9 November 2015 Energa was revealed as the new stadium&#x27;s sponsor until 30 November 2020. On 21 May 2021 stadium&#x27;s management signed a sponsorship agreement with Polsat TV broadcaster. The stadium hosted the 2021 UEFA Europa League Final as the &quot;Gdańsk Stadium&quot; due to UEFA sponsorship regulations.

===MOSiR Stadium / Gdańsk Sports Center Stadium===

The Lechia Gdańsk stadium from 1945 to 2011 was the MOSiR Stadium. In 2000 the ownership of the stadium changed from MOSiR to Gdańsk Sports Center, also seeing a change in the stadiums name. Now it&#x27;s officially known as &quot;Gdańsk Sports Center Stadium&quot;, the &quot;Lechia Gdańsk Stadion&quot; or simply the &quot;Lechia Stadion&quot; but has often been called by Lechia fans, &quot;Traugutta&quot; or &quot;Traugutta 29&quot;, the street and address of the stadium. The stadium is most well known for the European Cup game against Juventus where around 40,000 fans attended the game, just over three times more than the capacity of 12,244. Since Lechia moved to the Stadion Energa Gdańsk the stadium has been used for first team training, matches for the Lechia Gdańsk Ladies team, the Lechia Gdańsk II team, and formerly also held games for the Lechia Gdańsk rugby team.

====Avenue of Stars====
At the MOSiR Stadium Lechia have an &quot;Avenue of Stars&quot; which commemorates the efforts and success of former players and coaches. There are currently 21 players with stars at the stadium, including all-time top goalscorer, Roman Rogocz, and all-time appearance maker, Zdzisław Puszkarz. Due to MOSiR becoming the training ground in 2011 after the move to the PGE Arena Gdańsk there have been calls for the stars to be moved due to the new stadium by some fans, while others see the stadium as the historic home of Lechia Gdańsk and the perfect place to keep the players&#x27; commemorative stars.

The players who have a star to commemorate their time with Lechia Gdańsk are Jerzy Apolewicz, Michał Globisz, Józef Gładysz, Andrzej Głownia, Henryk Gronowski, Robert Gronowski, Jerzy Jastrzębowski, Bogusław Kaczmarek, Alfred Kokot, Henryk Kokot, Roman Korynt, Jerzy Kruszczyński, Lech Kulwicki, Hubert Kusz, Władysław Musiał, Ryszard Polak, Zdzisław Puszkarz, Andrzej Salach, Jakub Smug, Roman Rogocz, Zbigniew Żemojtel.

===Attendance===

Attendance statistics since the start of the 2011–12 season after the club moved to the Stadion Energa Gdańsk.

*All of the released attendance figures for Lechia Gdańsk before the 2011-12 Ekstraklasa season were rounded to the nearest 500.

†Season still in progress.

== Colours, badges and banners ==


===Kit history===
Lechia Gdańsk&#x27;s colours have always been green and white. In the first years of the club, Lechia wore green shirts with white shorts and either green or white socks. Predominantly throughout Lechias history the team has worn all green shirts, however, there were a few seasons in which Lechia wore white as their home colours. During the 1960–61 season, Lechia wore green and white stripes for the first time. It was this season when the Lechia badge featured on the shirts for the first time, however, the badge did not return to the Lechia shirts until the 1996–97 season. After that season Lechia wore all green shirts until the 2002–03 season when Lechia wore an all-white kit. 2006–07 saw for the first time in Lechia&#x27;s history the team wore an all-white kit with green hoops on the shirt, the same colours worn by Lechia Lwów, from which the expelled fans after WW2 created Lechia Gdańsk. Since the turn of the century, Lechia has been more creative with their designs for the home kits. From the team wearing all green home shirts from 1960 to 2002, there has since been a return of the green and white stripes for the 2011–12 season, an all-white kit with a green sash on the front for the 2012–14 seasons, as well as the hooped design, which was first worn in the 2006–07, and has since been worn during the 2008–10 seasons, and continuously since the 2015–16 season. The only time in Lechia&#x27;s early history when the club deviated from their traditional white or green was in the 1982–83 Polish Cup final when the team wore white shirts, red shorts, and white socks, colours reminiscent of the Poland national team.

During Lechia&#x27;s history, the away shirt colours have often always been the opposite of the home shirt. When the home shirt was green, the away was white, and vice versa. 2009 saw the introduction of Lechia&#x27;s first non-white/green kit, with an all-black away kit introduced. Lechia released an all red third shirt for the 2014–15 season, with an all-red kit being used as the club&#x27;s away or third colours from 2014 to 2020. The 2018–19 season saw the introduction of another previously unused colour for a kit. Lechia wore an all-grey away kit for that season, replacing the all green kit which had been the away kit for the previous season. This grey kit was used by the team from 2018 to 2022 and was notably worn by Lechia in two cup finals.

While white and green have always been the club&#x27;s home colours, Lechia have not always worn these colours while playing at home. On 9 February 2019 Lechia wore an all-black kit for their home game against Pogoń Szczecin to commemorate the death of Paweł Adamowicz, the mayor of Gdańsk at the time of his murder, and a lifelong Lechia fan. This was the first time in their history a predominantly green or white kit was not worn by Lechia for a home game. The game finished 2–1 to Lechia, with goals from Filip Mladenović and Flávio Paixão. An all-red kit was worn on 10 November 2019, again against Pogoń Szczecin, to commemorate the 101st anniversary of Polish independence. That same match Lechia attempted to break the Polish record for most people singing the full Polish national anthem at the same time, which was 3,171 people, breaking the record with 7,614.

====Cup winning kits====

The Lechia Gdańsk kits worn when the club has won a cup final.

===Badge history===

The badge design of Lechia has stayed roughly the same since 1945 with only slight changes when the club&#x27;s name changed or when Lechia had a merger with another club. The design of the Lechia badge has always been a triangular pennant with the flagpole on the left. The flag has always been green, with a white horizontal stripe through the middle, and the symbol of Gdańsk coat of arms in the centre. The name &quot;Lechia&quot; has always featured on the badge. In 1995 Lechia experienced a major change to their official club badge. The merger with Olimpia Poznan saw the flag featured in a circle with &quot;Olimpia–Lechia Gdansk&quot; featured at the bottom. A similar thing happened again when Lechia experienced a merger with Polonia Gdańsk in 1998. After the Polonia merger broke up in 2001, Lechia returned once again to their normal badge design, which has been used continuously since then with only minor changes in 2016.

The badge was often not worn on the shirts. They were first worn on the kits in 1960, with a return in 1963. After the 1963–64 season the badges did not reappear again until 1996 but have featured on every shirt since. The first symbol to appear on a Lechia shirt was a large white &quot;L&quot; which featured on the shirts for the 1947–48 season.

===Banners===

Banners first started to appear at Lechia&#x27;s MOSiR Stadium in the 1980s with the first Lechia banners made and displayed being &quot;&quot;&#x27;Lechia Pany!&quot; (as is the case with most flags and banners, it is stylised in all capitals) and &quot;Lechia Karwiny&quot; (Karwiny being a district in Gdynia). Other older flags that make regular appearances in Lechia games are those displaying &quot;Forza Lechia&quot;, &quot;Lechia Pride of Gdańsk&quot;, &quot;Biało-Zieloni&quot;, and &quot;Lechia Gdańsk Forever&quot;. Banners have been used to display support for the team, show where the fans are from (such as the English fan club, Malbork, Sopot, etc.), political statements, and support for friendly teams (such as Śląsk Wrocław, Gryf Słupsk, and formerly Wisła Kraków). Over the years some of the older flags displayed have been damaged, stolen, or remade. Many flags were stored by the Lechia Ultra&#x27;s in a warehouse which was broken into and the flags stolen, leaving only those stored elsewhere, or kept by individuals, to survive the raid, while many of the older flags have been damaged through wear and tear, complications with storage, and simply through age. Many iconic flags for the fans throughout the club&#x27;s history have often been remade due to age, these include the remaking of the original flags showing the Gdańsk districts, such as &quot;Chełm&quot;, &quot;Orunia&quot;, &quot;Oliwa&quot;, and &quot;Morena&quot;&quot;. In total over 300 flags and banners have been documented throughout Lechia&#x27;s history.

The stealing of banners can give ultra groups a sense of prestige and a higher status and standing among ultra groups from other clubs. Once instance of Lechia stealing a flag was in 2007 when Lechia fans stole a &quot;Władcy Północy&quot; banner belonging to Arka Gdynia. During the Tricity Derby that season the Lechia fans showed disrespect to Arka by hanging the banner upside down before setting the banner on fire. After the banner had been burned the fans revealed their own version of the &quot;Władcy Północy&quot;, in the same style as the Arka banner, but in white and green instead of blue and yellow. The Lechia &quot;Władcy Północy&quot; banner has featured predominantly at home games since 2007.

== Records and statistics ==
=== All-time ===

*First ever game: 2 September 1945, Milicyjny Klube Sportowy Wrzeszcz, 4–6
*First ever win: 9 September 1945, Wojskowy Klub Sportowy, 9–1
*Biggest win: 11 May 2000, LKS Waplewo – 15–0
*Biggest defeat: 13 November 1949, Polonia Bytom – 8–0
*Highest scoring game: 11 May 2000, LKS Waplewo – 15–0
*Most goals in a game: 20 September 1945, Stanisław Baran vs Wojskowy Klub Sportowy – 7 goals
*Most total goals in a season: Bartłomiej Stolc – 2001–02 season – 40 goals
*Most league goals in a season: Bartłomiej Stolc – 2002–03 season – 34 goals
*Most league goals in a season: &quot;(top three divisions)&quot; Jerzy Kruszczyński 1983–84 season – 31 goals
*Most league goals for Lechia Gdańsk: Flávio Paixão – 85 goals
*Most goals in all competitions for Lechia Gdańsk: Roman Rogocz – 109 goals
*Most apps for Lechia Gdańsk: Zdzisław Puszkarz – 325 apps
*Highest transfer fee paid: Daniel Łukasik, 2014 – PLN 3.75 million (£720k, €800k) 
*Highest transfer fee received: Vanja Milinković-Savić, 2017 – PLN 10.5 million (£2.34 million, €2.6 million)

=== Ekstraklasa ===

*Debut match in Ekstraklasa: March 20, 1949, Cracovia – Lechia Gdańsk 5–1
*First win in Ekstraklasa: March 27, 1949, Lechia Gdańsk – Ruch Chorzów 5–3
*Most Lechia goals in the Ekstraklasa: Flávio Paixão – 85 goals
*Most Lechia apps in the Ekstraklasa: Flávio Paixão – 239 apps

=== Individual achievements ===

*League top goalscorer: Jerzy Kruszczyński (1983–84 – II Liga) – 31 goals
*League top goalscorer: Marco Paixão (2016–17 – Ekstraklasa) – 18 goals
*Most different leagues played in for Lechia Mateusz Bąk (2000–2010, 2013–17) 6 different divisions – Klasa A group Gdańsk IV (sixth tier), Liga okręgowa group Gdańsk II (fifth tier), IV liga group Pomorska (fourth tier), III liga group II (third tier), II liga (second tier), Ekstraklasa (first tier).
*Most promotions with Lechia: Mateusz Bąk (2000–10, 2013–17) 5 promotions – sixth tier to first tier.
*First non-Polish player: Sargis Khachatryan (Armenia) – Debut: 13 May 1993

=== Stadium statistics ===

*Last game at the MOSiR Stadium Gdańsk: May 29, 2011, Zagłębie Lubin, 1–2
*Last win at the MOSiR Stadium Gdańsk: May 22, 2011, Lech Poznań, 2–1
*Last Lechia goalscorer at the MOSiR Stadium Gdańsk: May 29, 2011, Abdou Razack Traoré
*First game at the Stadion Energa Gdańsk: August 14, 2011, Cracovia, 1–1
*First win at the Stadion Energa Gdańsk: September 12, 2011, Górnik Zabrze, 2–1
*First Lechia goalscorer at the Stadion Energa Gdańsk: August 14, 2011, Fred Benson
*Highest attendance: September 29, 1983, Juventus, UEFA Cup Winners Cup – 40,000 (estimate)

===Player statistics===

The top ten most appearances and goal scorers for Lechia Gdańsk.

(Stats correct as of 14 June 2023)


== Club sponsors and kit manufacturers ==


It is important to note that sometimes there is an overlap between the years and when there are different club sponsors and kit manufacturers. This is due to the fact that in the late 1990s and early 2000s it was common for Lechia to wear multiple kits made by different manufactures in the same season. For example, during the 2003–04 season Lechia wore kits manufactured by wit-sport, Legea, Erima, and kits that were self-made.

Notes

† During the 1995–96 season the Olimpia-Lechia team started the season with kids being made by local kit manufacturer PJ Sport and with the team sponsor being Nata. During the winter break Kelme took over as kit manufacturer and Canal+ became the team&#x27;s main sponsor.

‡ During the 1999–2000 season the Lechia-Polonia team used four different kits made by three different manufacturers. With each different manufactured kit Lechia had a different sponsor on the front of that shirt.

§ This design was the only one worn by the three teams that have played under the Lechia Gdańsk name. This particular shirt shown was worn by Lechia Gdańsk between 1996 and 1998. When this design was worn by Olimpia-Lechia in 1996 it was with Canal+ sponsorship and not with the Nata sponsorship.

== Honours ==
===League===

*Ekstraklasa
** Third place: 1956, 2018–19
*I liga
** Champions: 1951, 1983–84, 2007–08, 2023–24
** Runners-up: 1954, 1974–75, 1975–76, 1977–78
** Third place: 1978–79
*II liga
** Champions: 1971–72, 1982–83, 2004–05
** Runners-up: 1967–68, 1970–71
** Third place: 1969–70, 1997–98

===Cup===
*Polish Cup
** Winners: 1982–83, 2018–19
** Runners-up: 1955, 2019–20
*Polish Super Cup:
** Winners: 1983, 2019

===Europe===
*European Cup Winners Cup:
** First round: 1983–84
*Europa League
** Second qualifying round: 2019–20

===Indoor football===
*Amber Cup
**Winners: 2011, 2013, 2016, 2017
**Runners-up: 2012
**Third place: 2015

== League participation ==
As of the 2021–22 season.

== Lechia in Europe ==
== Ownership ==
During the communist era of the club&#x27;s history, it was owned and run by employment sectors. When the club was first created it was used for the workers of the Port Reconstruction Office (), and thus owned by the Port Reconstruction Office itself, later becoming a club for construction workers (). Both &quot;Biuro Odbudowy Portów&quot; and &quot;Budowlani&quot; being included in the club&#x27;s official name when they were run by these sectors.

In 2007 Tadeusz Dąbrowski unsuccessfully tried to invest in the club. In 2009 Andrzej Kuchar became the majority shareholder for the club, a position he held until late 2013 when he sold his shares.

In 2014 it became known that 72% of the club shares are controlled by an investment company named Wroclawskie Centrum finansowo (WCF) with the club being owned by Franz-Josef Wernze. WCF is owned by Swiss investor W&amp;C Vermögensverwaltungs AG in which Philipp Wernze, the son of the German businessman and Lechia owner Franz-Josef Wernze, is involved. In summer 2014 this German control over Lechia became more and more obvious when several players from Germany joined the club. Under Wernze&#x27;s wings are also the German clubs Viktoria Köln and Lok Leipzig. In 2017 the shares of the company&#x27;s main shareholder, Lechia Investment, were taken over from W&amp;C Vermögensverwaltungs by Advancesport AG. This saw Franz-Josef Wernze staying as the owner of Lechia, but with his son Philipp Wernze, the main shareholder in Advancesport AG, having a greater role within the club and within his father&#x27;s company, ETL Group.

During the summer of 2022 there were rumours of the club looking to be sold by current owners Franz-Josef Wernze and Advancesport AG (owned by Franz&#x27;s son Philippe Wernze and Adam Mandziara). The sale was due to Franz&#x27;s poor health and the financial position of the club. Nothing came to a sale during 2022 and Franz-Josef Wernze died on 27 April 2023. On 6 July 2023 Adam Mandziara confirmed that Lechia were in the final stages of being bought by Emirate investment fund company MADA Global Fund For Income Opportunities (or simply MADA Global), with the investment fund having created a new company called Football Culture Poland (FCP) for the purpose of taking control of Lechia.

== Players ==
=== Current squad ===










===Out on loan===


=== Notable players ===
The players below played for their respective countries at any point during their career with the dates showing their time with Lechia.
; Poland
* Arkadiusz Bąk (1995)
* Krzysztof Baszkiewicz (1950–1953)
* Jarosław Bieniuk (1995–1998), (2012–2014)
* Ariel Borysiuk (2014–2016), (2018–2019)
* Piotr Brożek (2012–2013)
* Stanisław Baran (1945)
* Adam Buksa (2014–2016)
* Stanisław Burzyński (1965–1969)
* Paweł Dawidowicz (2011–2014)
* Tomasz Dawidowski (2009–2012)
* Jan Erlich (1978–1981)
* Adam Fedoruk (1998–2001)
* Przemysław Frankowski (2012–2014)
* Zygmunt Gadecki (1960–1962)
* Jacek Grembocki (1982–1986), (1996–1997)
* Henryk Gronowski (1949–1967)
* Robert Gronowski (1949–1958)
* Tadeusz Hogendorf (1945)
* Marcin Kaczmarek (2008–2010)
* Rafał Kaczmarczyk (1989–1994)
* Jakub Kałuziński (2020–2023)
* Jerzy Kasalik (1975–1976)
* Alfred Kokot (1946–1953)
* Roman Korynt (1953–1967)
* Jakub Kosecki (2011–2012)
* Rafał Kosznik (2006–2008), (2010)
* Juliusz Kruszankin (1996)
* Janusz Kupcewicz (1986–1988)
* Marek Ługowski (1985–1994)
* Daniel Łukasik (2014–2020)
* Maciej Makuszewski (2014–2017)
* Sebastian Małkowski (2008–2013)
* Marcin Mięciel (1990–1993)
* Sebastian Mila (2000–2001), (2015–2018)
* Jarosław Nowicki (1985–1989)

* Mariusz Pawlak (1988–1996), (2006–2007)
* Sławomir Peszko (2015–2020)
* Mirosław Pękala (1985–1988)
* Rafał Pietrzak (2020–2023)
* Zdzisław Puszkarz (1966–1981), (1986–1988)
* Grzegorz Rasiak (2012–2013)
* Grzegorz Oprządek (1963–1967)
* Artur Sobiech (2018–2019)
* Janusz Stawarz (1985–1990)
* Łukasz Surma (2009–2013)
* Grzegorz Szamotulski (1991–1993)
* Mirosław Tłokiński (1975–1976)
* Łukasz Trałka (2008)
* Kacper Urbański (2019–2021)
* Jakub Wawrzyniak (2015–2018)
* Jakub Wilk (2012)
* Sławomir Wojciechowski (1989–1993), (2004–2007)
* Grzegorz Wojtkowiak (2015–2019)
* Rafał Wolski (2016–2020)
* Hubert Wołąkiewicz (2007–2011)
* Paweł Wszołek (2004–2005)
* Marek Zieńczuk (1996–1999), (2010)

; Afghanistan
* Omran Haydary (2020–2023)

; Armenia
* Levon Hayrapetyan (2011–2013)

; Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Stojan Vranješ (2014–2015)

; Bulgaria
* Simeon Slavchev (2016–2018)

; Burkina Faso
* Abdou Razack Traoré (2010–2012)

; Canada
* Steven Vitória (2016–2019)

; Congo DR
* Christopher Oualembo (2012–2014)

; Croatia
* Antonio Čolak (2014–2015)
* Mario Maloča (2015–2018) (2019–2023)
* Mato Miloš (2017–2018)
* Luka Vučko (2011–2012)

; Curaçao
* Gino van Kessel (2017)

; Ghana
* Joseph Aziz (1995)
* Emmanuel Tetteh (1995–1996)

; Guinea-Bissau
* Romário Baldé (2017–2019)
* Rudinilson Silva (2014–2016)

;Haiti
* Joenal Castma (1999–2000)

; Indonesia
* Egy Maulana Vikri (2018–2021)
* Witan Sulaeman (2021–2022)

; Israel
* Joel Abu Hanna (2022–2023)

; Japan
* Daisuke Matsui (2013)

; Latvia
* Oļegs Laizāns (2010)
* Ivans Lukjanovs (2009–2012)
* Kristers Tobers (2020–2023)

; Lithuania
* Vytautas Andriuškevičius (2010–2013)
* Donatas Kazlauskas (2015–2016)

;Mali
* Bassekou Diabaté (2021–2023)

;Martinique
* Bédi Buval (2010–2011)

; Serbia
* Danijel Aleksić (2014)
* Miloš Krasić (2015–2018)
* Vanja Milinković-Savić (2016–2017)
* Filip Mladenović (2018–2020)

; Slovakia
* Lukáš Haraslín (2015–2020)
* Dušan Kuciak (2017–2024)
* Jaroslav Mihalík (2019–2021)

; Ukraine
* Serhiy Buletsa (2024–)

; United States
* Jerzy Panek (1973)

; Dual nationals;
;Israel &amp; United States 
* Kenny Saief (2020–2021)
==Lechia Gdańsk II and Lechia&#x27;s Academy==
===Lechia Gdańsk II===

Lechia Gdańsk operates an official second team, known as Lechia Gdańsk II, which currently plays in the fifth tier in the IV liga Pomerania. In its early years the second team was only used for games in the Polish Cup, fielding teams in four cup competitions in their first 50 years as a club. For the 1995–96 season the merger between Lechia Gdańsk and Olimpia Poznań creating Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk, saw the second team running as the continuation of the &quot;Lechia Gdańsk&quot; team in the III liga.

Lechia Gdańsk II officially became the second team in the Polish league system for the 2005–06 season. The purpose of the second team was to provide more playing experience for the younger players, while providing game time for players returning from injury. The second team played for 11 continuous seasons, achieving their highest result of 2nd in the III liga in the 2014–15 season. In 2016 it was announced that the second team was to be discontinued before it was reintroduced again for the start of the 2018–19 season.

===Lechia Gdańsk Academy===

In 2015 it was announced that all of the youth teams would once again be returning to Lechia, with Lechia taking control of coaching and player development. It was announced that there would be 11 age groups which would make up the academy starting from the Under-7&#x27;s to the Under-23&#x27;s. After 3 years, the Lechia Academy had 12 teams under their control, with other 200 staff seeing over the development. From the summer of 2019 the academy has been home to multiple levels of girls football teams with the formal incorporation of the Lechia Gdańsk Ladies into the Lechia Gdańsk structure.

====Partnerships====

Lechia have partnerships with academies in the Gdańsk and surrounding regions. The agreements provide Lechia with the best players, the teams to take part in competitions organised by Lechia, and better training for the coaches. Currently Lechia have partnerships with APK Jedynka Kartuzy, GAP Sparta Gdańsk, Unia Tczew, and AWFiS Gdańsk.

Current partnerships
Former partnerships
==Lechia Gdańsk Ladies==

Initially Lechia Gdańsk was in close cooperation with Grupa Lotos for the AP LOTOS Gdańsk academy and ladies football team. The team was formerly known as &quot;Akademia Piłkarska Lechia Gdańsk&quot; due to the close association the two teams once had. The ladies team wore the Lechia kits to start with before disagreements led to Lechia and APLG starting to work more independently. Due to APLG and Lechia going in different directions Lechia&#x27;s focus was less on the APLG ladies team and making a team of their own.

Lechia became closely linked with Biało-Zielone Gdańsk, which was formed in 2014. Biało-Zielone was another team closely linked with Lechia but was not officially part of the Lechia set up. In 2019 it was announced that the team would be incorporated into the Lechia Gdańsk academy structure and that their name was to become Lechia Gdańsk Ladies. The Lechia Ladies team currently plays in the III liga (Pomeranian group).

== Managers ==

The following list contains the statistics from all competitive games after 1 July 2001, when Lechia Gdańsk was re-founded in the sixth tier.

Stats correct as of 7 December 2024. The managers in &quot;italics&quot; were given the contract on a caretaker basis.

===Managerial statistics===

Stats correct as of 31 December 2021.

*Most games as manager: Jerzy Jastrzębowski – (156 games)
*Most wins as manager: Jerzy Jastrzębowski – 103
*Most draws as manager: Bogusław Kaczmarek – 44
*Most defeats as manager: Stanisław Stachura – 66
*Highest win percentage in managers Lechia career (minimum 10 games): Tadeusz Małolepszy - 78.9% (30 wins in 38 games)
*Lowest win percentage in managers Lechia career (minimum 10 games): Edward Wojewódzki - 7.7% (1 wins in 13 games)
*Managers who have managed at least 100 games for Lechia: Jerzy Jastrzębowski (156), Bogusław Kaczmarek (148), Piotr Stokowiec (139), Stanisław Stachura (127)

== Lechia Lwów (1903–1939) ==

Lechia Gdańsk shares a lot of its history with Lechia Lwów, most notably the club&#x27;s name as well as the colours used. Lechia Lwów was the oldest football team in Poland with many of the fans of the team moving to Gdańsk after Poland&#x27;s borders were changed after World War II, Lwów being given to Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, and the expulsion of Poles from Ukraine. Due to Lechia Lwów and Lechia Gdańsk sharing many of the same fans, Lechia Gdańsk is often seen as Lechia Lwów&#x27;s &quot;sister team&quot;. Lechia Lwów often played in the Polish second division, playing once in the top tier in the 1931 season suffering relegation that same season. The Lechia Gdańsk 2012–13 kit had &quot;1903&quot; written on their socks in commemoration of Lechia Lwów&#x27;s 110 year anniversary since their founding.

In 2019 the Retro Liga was formed in Poland of teams who had been disbanded in 1939 due to the outbreak of World War II. The league followed the same rules and kit standards of those in 1919 when the Polish Football Association was formed. Lechia Lwów were crowned the inaugural winners of the Retro Liga at the end of the 2019 season, also defending their title for the 2020 season.

== See also ==

* Football in Poland
* List of football teams
* Champions&#x27; Cup/League
* UEFA Cup

== References ==

== External links ==

*Official website – lechia.pl (in Polish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q734785" start="0" end="13" title="Lechia Gdańsk" label="Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="29" end="37" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="52" end="58" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="76" end="87" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125565008" start="95" end="109" title="2024–25 Ekstraklasa" label="2024–25 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947114" start="128" end="142" title="2023–24 I liga" label="2023–24 I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="184" end="192" title="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="198" end="202" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811326" start="262" end="273" title="Lechia Lwów" label="Lechia Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961536" start="324" end="330" title="Lechia" label="Lechia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="511" end="530" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Polish top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="622" end="632" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="638" end="654" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="868" end="879" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163046" start="1056" end="1062" title="I liga" label="I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1162" end="1168" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049753" start="2045" end="2057" title="Gdańsk Derby" label="Gdańsk Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049495" start="2072" end="2086" title="Gedania 1922 Gdańsk" label="Gedania Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811326" start="2460" end="2471" title="Lechia Lwów" label="Lechia Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q465922" start="2538" end="2569" title="Gdańsk University of Technology" label="Gdańsk University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q547898" start="2579" end="2587" title="Population exchange between Poland and Soviet Ukraine" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="2593" end="2597" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="2798" end="2810" title="Ekstraklasa" label="top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q266293" start="3385" end="3389" title="1949 Ekstraklasa" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="4638" end="4644" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="4649" end="4656" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564720" start="4763" end="4774" title="Wawel Kraków" label="OWKS Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142711" start="4776" end="4792" title="Górnik Wałbrzych (football)" label="Górnik Wałbrzych"/>
<link wikidata="Q770080" start="4797" end="4811" title="Gwardia Warsaw" label="Gwardia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="4962" end="4982" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16593413" start="5120" end="5143" title="Young Leaders Rally Cup" label="Young Leaders Rally Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16481968" start="5177" end="5187" title="League Cup in Polish Football" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="5730" end="5741" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q140487" start="7016" end="7030" title="Zagłębie Sosnowiec" label="Stal Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q9175055" start="7781" end="7796" title="Bogdan Adamczyk" label="Bogdan Adamczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288161" start="7798" end="7814" title="Henryk Gronowski" label="Henryk Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310815" start="7816" end="7832" title="Robert Gronowski" label="Robert Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164658" start="7834" end="7846" title="Roman Korynt" label="Roman Korynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35814747" start="7848" end="7859" title="Hubert Kusz" label="Hubert Kusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199244" start="7861" end="7873" title="Czesław Lenc" label="Czesław Lenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199306" start="7875" end="7890" title="Czesław Nowicki" label="Czesław Nowicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164716" start="7896" end="7908" title="Roman Rogocz" label="Roman Rogocz"/>
<link wikidata="Q664658" start="8068" end="8072" title="1955 Ekstraklasa" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q345142" start="8269" end="8277" title="ŁKS Łódź" label="ŁKS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="8279" end="8290" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q140487" start="8292" end="8310" title="Zagłębie Sosnowiec" label="Zagłębie Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="8342" end="8354" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="8454" end="8464" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198933" start="8562" end="8580" title="Sandecja Nowy Sącz" label="Sandecja Nowy Sącz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="8582" end="8594" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q958856" start="8596" end="8606" title="Odra Opole" label="Odra Opole"/>
<link wikidata="Q770080" start="8611" end="8625" title="Gwardia Warsaw" label="Gwardia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q928642" start="8673" end="8692" title="Stadion Wojska Polskiego" label="Polish Army Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="8754" end="8763" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133230" start="8769" end="8775" title="Henryk Kempny" label="Kempny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359838" start="8798" end="8802" title="Ernest Pohl" label="Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725527" start="8807" end="8819" title="Jerzy Słaboszowski" label="Słaboszowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164716" start="9440" end="9446" title="Roman Rogocz" label="Rogocz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9354238" start="9565" end="9578" title="Tadeusz Foryś" label="Tadeusz Foryś"/>
<link wikidata="Q95567728" start="10248" end="10268" title="Bronisław Szlagowski" label="Bronisław Szlagowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q140487" start="10297" end="10315" title="Zagłębie Sosnowiec" label="Zagłębie Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="10708" end="10719" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q847998" start="10834" end="10840" title="1958 Ekstraklasa" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q848262" start="11108" end="11112" title="1959 Ekstraklasa" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q140487" start="11214" end="11228" title="Zagłębie Sosnowiec" label="Stal Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q848253" start="11344" end="11348" title="1960 Ekstraklasa" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q538226" start="11433" end="11437" title="1961 Ekstraklasa" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q684943" start="11555" end="11559" title="1962 Ekstraklasa" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q534852" start="12675" end="12682" title="1962–63 Ekstraklasa" label="1962-63"/>
<link wikidata="Q9175055" start="13272" end="13287" title="Bogdan Adamczyk" label="Bogdan Adamczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65564694" start="13289" end="13304" title="Jerzy Apolewicz" label="Jerzy Apolewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q72043472" start="13306" end="13321" title="Janusz Charczuk" label="Janusz Charczuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164658" start="13323" end="13335" title="Roman Korynt" label="Roman Korynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199306" start="13337" end="13352" title="Czesław Nowicki" label="Czesław Nowicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q74289376" start="13354" end="13371" title="Zbigniew Żemojtel" label="Zbigniew Żemojtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288161" start="13391" end="13407" title="Henryk Gronowski" label="Henryk Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="13996" end="14007" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="14097" end="14110" title="Tricity Derby" label="Tricity Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q210262" start="15094" end="15102" title="II liga" label="III liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191504" start="15221" end="15237" title="Arkonia Szczecin" label="Arkonia Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049753" start="15412" end="15424" title="Gdańsk Derby" label="Gdańsk Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="15430" end="15449" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9175055" start="15769" end="15784" title="Bogdan Adamczyk" label="Bogdan Adamczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="16022" end="16039" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9359423" start="18639" end="18652" title="Tomasz Korynt" label="Tomasz Korynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107210884" start="18657" end="18672" title="Andrzej Głownia" label="Andrzej Głownia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106840641" start="18910" end="18926" title="Leonard Radowski" label="Leonard Radowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="18932" end="18949" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="19075" end="19086" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="19144" end="19150" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="19289" end="19296" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q770080" start="19812" end="19826" title="Gwardia Warsaw" label="Gwardia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="19943" end="19956" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107334547" start="19971" end="19992" title="Krzysztof Matuszewski" label="Krzysztof Matuszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9281610" start="20517" end="20528" title="Gryf Słupsk" label="Gryf Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="20549" end="20560" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366681" start="20566" end="20577" title="Unia Tarnów (football)" label="Unia Tarnów"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="20678" end="20690" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="22013" end="22023" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="22235" end="22246" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q328655" start="22284" end="22297" title="Śląsk Wrocław" label="Śląsk Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q140487" start="22322" end="22340" title="Zagłębie Sosnowiec" label="Zagłębie Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="22372" end="22384" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="22449" end="22462" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q66360546" start="22531" end="22547" title="Krzysztof Górski" label="Krzysztof Górski"/>
<link wikidata="Q66009969" start="22552" end="22567" title="Marek Kowalczyk" label="Marek Kowalczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="22698" end="22714" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="22903" end="22914" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348280" start="22959" end="22976" title="1983 Polish Super Cup" label="won the Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724917" start="22999" end="23017" title="Jerzy Kruszczyński" label="Jerzy Kruszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="23578" end="23604" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="23722" end="23730" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="24124" end="24134" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="24205" end="24216" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724758" start="24450" end="24469" title="Jerzy Jastrzębowski" label="Jerzy Jastrzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q540492" start="24661" end="24680" title="1984–85 Ekstraklasa" label="1984–85 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="25017" end="25030" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q847833" start="25519" end="25526" title="1987–88 Ekstraklasa" label="1987-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="25549" end="25557" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019858" start="25997" end="26011" title="Olimpia Poznań" label="Olimpia Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="26117" end="26131" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142711" start="26250" end="26266" title="Górnik Wałbrzych" label="Górnik Wałbrzych"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="26913" end="26920" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="26948" end="26954" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="26961" end="26965" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="26970" end="26976" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="26982" end="26988" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="27056" end="27069" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="27152" end="27156" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019858" start="27605" end="27619" title="Olimpia Poznań" label="Olimpia Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753564" start="27630" end="27651" title="Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk" label="Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="27847" end="27858" title="Reserve team" label="second team"/>
<link wikidata="Q252761" start="27878" end="27897" title="1995–96 Ekstraklasa" label="1995–96 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="28548" end="28562" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Polonia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753563" start="28573" end="28594" title="Lechia-Polonia Gdańsk" label="Lechia-Polonia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951995" start="30002" end="30009" title="2007–08 II liga (Poland)" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856079" start="30188" end="30201" title="Stadion Gdańskiego Ośrodka Sportu" label="MOSiR Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q958856" start="30303" end="30313" title="Odra Opole" label="Odra Opole"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513505" start="30460" end="30475" title="Maciej Rogalski" label="Maciej Rogalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156153" start="30477" end="30489" title="Paweł Buzała" label="Paweł Buzała"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196932" start="30495" end="30512" title="Piotr Cetnarowicz" label="Piotr Cetnarowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="30838" end="30849" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q847833" start="31008" end="31027" title="1987–88 Ekstraklasa" label="1987–88 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924113" start="31389" end="31396" title="2009–10 Ekstraklasa" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225246" start="31500" end="31518" title="2009–10 Polish Cup" label="2009–10 Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="31568" end="31579" title="Jagiellonia Bialystok" label="Jagiellonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="31800" end="31814" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="UEFA Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856079" start="31904" end="31917" title="Stadion Gdańskiego Ośrodka Sportu" label="MOSiR Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q338962" start="32085" end="32099" title="2010–11 Ekstraklasa" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q308362" start="32410" end="32422" title="Abdou Razack Traoré" label="Abdou Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349715" start="32549" end="32567" title="2010–11 Polish Cup" label="2010–11 Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="32590" end="32595" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856079" start="32670" end="32683" title="Stadion Gdańskiego Ośrodka Sportu" label="MOSiR Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="32862" end="32876" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112444" start="32916" end="32923" title="2011–12 Ekstraklasa" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q182385" start="32958" end="32969" title="Stadion Energa Gdańsk" label="new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="33032" end="33040" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068017" start="33298" end="33305" title="2012–13 Ekstraklasa" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q262569" start="33468" end="33482" title="Polonia Warsaw" label="Polonia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11093415" start="33690" end="33709" title="2013–14 Ekstraklasa" label="2013–14 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360337" start="34136" end="34162" title="2014–15 UEFA Europa League" label="2014–15 UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q167781" start="34170" end="34187" title="Zawisza Bydgoszcz" label="Zawisza Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13533355" start="34200" end="34218" title="2013–14 Polish Cup" label="2013–14 Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q848007" start="34303" end="34307" title="1956 Ekstraklasa" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543222" start="34348" end="34355" title="2014–15 Ekstraklasa" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q449496" start="34492" end="34506" title="Sebastian Mila" label="Sebastian Mila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="34862" end="34875" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20034958" start="34878" end="34885" title="2015–16 Ekstraklasa" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q449496" start="34936" end="34940" title="Sebastian Mila" label="Mila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219193" start="34945" end="34952" title="Daniel Łukasik" label="Łukasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q370509" start="35030" end="35044" title="Ariel Borysiuk" label="Ariel Borysiuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q402320" start="35046" end="35061" title="Sławomir Peszko" label="Sławomir Peszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q263738" start="35063" end="35079" title="Jakub Wawrzyniak" label="Jakub Wawrzyniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q349316" start="35081" end="35100" title="Grzegorz Wojtkowiak" label="Grzegorz Wojtkowiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q201910" start="35142" end="35154" title="Miloš Krasić" label="Miloš Krasić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777973" start="35499" end="35514" title="Grzegorz Kuświk" label="Grzegorz Kuświk"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="35538" end="35542" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24054572" start="35646" end="35653" title="2016–17 Ekstraklasa" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q18933936" start="35729" end="35737" title="Lukáš Haraslín" label="Haraslín"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294578" start="35876" end="35888" title="Marco Paixão" label="Marco Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="35893" end="35906" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q357650" start="35919" end="35931" title="Rafał Wolski" label="Rafał Wolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="35946" end="35956" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q439930" start="35961" end="35973" title="Dušan Kuciak" label="Dušan Kuciak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="35979" end="35988" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q836991" start="36212" end="36217" title="Pogoń Szczecin" label="Pogoń"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197028" start="36251" end="36267" title="Piotr Wiśniewski" label="Piotr Wiśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786685" start="36272" end="36283" title="Mateusz Bąk" label="Mateusz Bąk"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="36670" end="36675" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="36837" end="36841" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="36846" end="36857" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="37164" end="37175" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24287194" start="37211" end="37229" title="2016–17 Polish Cup" label="2016–17 Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294578" start="37231" end="37243" title="Marco Paixão" label="Marco Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570741" start="37350" end="37362" title="Marcin Robak" label="Marcin Robak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60538970" start="37401" end="37408" title="2017–18 Lechia Gdańsk season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198808" start="37791" end="37810" title="Bruk-Bet Termalica Nieciecza" label="Termalica Nieciecza"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="37812" end="37823" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="37828" end="37841" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294578" start="37962" end="37967" title="Marco Paixão" label="Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="37972" end="37978" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio"/>
<link wikidata="Q449496" start="38094" end="38108" title="Sebastian Mila" label="Sebastian Mila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817863" start="38221" end="38236" title="Piotr Stokowiec" label="Piotr Stokowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q54112739" start="38341" end="38360" title="2018–19 Ekstraklasa" label="2018–19 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753744" start="38391" end="38405" title="2018–19 Lechia Gdańsk season" label="2018-19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="38425" end="38446" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q402320" start="38453" end="38468" title="Sławomir Peszko" label="Sławomir Peszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q717583" start="38568" end="38585" title="Arvydas Novikovas" label="Arvydas Novikovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="38763" end="38775" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="38853" end="38867" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="38982" end="38993" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="39006" end="39017" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="39223" end="39235" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577908" start="39237" end="39252" title="CWKS Resovia (football)" label="Resovia Rzeszow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198808" start="39257" end="39285" title="Bruk-Bet Termalica Nieciecza" label="Bruk-Bet Termalica Nieciecza"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="39465" end="39473" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="39570" end="39582" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q134255" start="39665" end="39678" title="Górnik Zabrze" label="Górnik Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q287236" start="39701" end="39718" title="Raków Częstochowa" label="Raków Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="39745" end="39766" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q179693" start="39823" end="39839" title="Kazimierz Górski National Stadium" label="National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="39870" end="39883" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406836" start="39954" end="39957" title="Video assistant referee" label="VAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q222945" start="39959" end="39972" title="Artur Sobiech" label="Artur Sobiech"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="40047" end="40057" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q64413630" start="40574" end="40595" title="2019 Polish Super Cup" label="2019 Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="40629" end="40642" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18933936" start="40659" end="40673" title="Lukáš Haraslín" label="Lukáš Haraslín"/>
<link wikidata="Q24427822" start="40687" end="40703" title="Jarosław Kubicki" label="Jarosław Kubicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q63226317" start="40788" end="40805" title="Patryk Sokołowski" label="Patryk Sokołowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q53165589" start="41057" end="41083" title="2019–20 UEFA Europa League" label="2019–20 UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q211906" start="41119" end="41129" title="Brøndby IF" label="Brøndby IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="41206" end="41219" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523927" start="41224" end="41237" title="Patryk Lipski" label="Patryk Lipski"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050600" start="41563" end="41570" title="2019–20 Lechia Gdańsk season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232004" start="41630" end="41644" title="Žarko Udovičić" label="Žarko Udovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q345142" start="41745" end="41753" title="ŁKS Łódź" label="ŁKS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475269" start="41830" end="41841" title="Wisła Płock" label="Wisła Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="41961" end="41973" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="42021" end="42035" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="42054" end="42067" title="Tricity Derby" label="Tricity Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q222945" start="42105" end="42118" title="Artur Sobiech" label="Artur Sobiech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="42123" end="42136" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q345142" start="42591" end="42599" title="ŁKS Łódź" label="ŁKS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306889" start="42713" end="42729" title="Miroslav Radović" label="Miroslav Radović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18933936" start="43710" end="43724" title="Lukáš Haraslín" label="Lukáš Haraslín"/>
<link wikidata="Q222945" start="43726" end="43739" title="Artur Sobiech" label="Artur Sobiech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219193" start="43741" end="43755" title="Daniel Łukasik" label="Daniel Łukasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q357650" start="43757" end="43769" title="Rafał Wolski" label="Rafał Wolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q402320" start="43774" end="43789" title="Sławomir Peszko" label="Sławomir Peszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q963817" start="43795" end="43810" title="Błażej Augustyn" label="Błażej Augustyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q328655" start="44110" end="44123" title="Śląsk Wrocław" label="Śląsk Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q85408718" start="44348" end="44363" title="Kacper Urbański" label="Kacper Urbański"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="44609" end="44629" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="44731" end="44744" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="45299" end="45310" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="45535" end="45543" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q638504" start="45789" end="45805" title="Filip Mladenović" label="Filip Mladenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18933936" start="45839" end="45853" title="Lukáš Haraslín" label="Lukáš Haraslín"/>
<link wikidata="Q8603" start="45881" end="45894" title="U.S. Sassuolo Calcio" label="U.S. Sassuolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="46123" end="46135" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160640" start="46259" end="46275" title="Jaroslav Mihalík" label="Jaroslav Mihalík"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384885" start="47003" end="47022" title="Puszcza Niepołomice" label="Puszcza Niepołomice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000763" start="48129" end="48143" title="Radomiak Radom" label="Radomiak Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q32818790" start="48699" end="48715" title="Tomasz Kaczmarek" label="Tomasz Kaczmarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198779" start="49062" end="49075" title="GKS Górnik Łęczna" label="Górnik Łęczna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="49110" end="49122" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q106576238" start="49968" end="49982" title="Filip Koperski" label="Filip Koperski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000763" start="50217" end="50231" title="Radomiak Radom" label="Radomiak Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q107155569" start="50689" end="50699" title="2021–22 Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198772" start="50813" end="50825" title="Warta Poznań" label="Warta Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="51348" end="51372" title="UEFA Europa Conference League" label="Europa Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q106086343" start="51583" end="51611" title="2022–23 UEFA Europa Conference League" label="Conference League qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24914473" start="51627" end="51643" title="Akademija Pandev" label="Akademija Pandev"/>
<link wikidata="Q131215" start="51710" end="51715" title="SK Rapid Wien" label="Rapid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51757" end="51767" title="2022–23 Polish Cup#Round of 16" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="51960" end="51974" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403553" start="52132" end="52148" title="Łukasz Zwoliński" label="Łukasz Zwoliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q24427822" start="52150" end="52166" title="Jarosław Kubicki" label="Jarosław Kubicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q14405333" start="52168" end="52181" title="Michał Nalepa (footballer, born 1993)" label="Michał Nalepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="52186" end="52199" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q123135782" start="52240" end="52256" title="Szymon Grabowski" label="Szymon Grabowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947114" start="52298" end="52312" title="2023–24 I liga" label="2023–24 I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113698" start="52321" end="52335" title="Chrobry Głogów" label="Chrobry Głogów"/>
<link wikidata="Q120738407" start="52591" end="52597" title="2023–24 Lechia Gdańsk season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832036" start="52679" end="52692" title="Ivan Zhelizko" label="Ivan Zhelizko"/>
<link wikidata="Q105421752" start="52694" end="52706" title="Maksym Khlan" label="Maksym Khlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270479" start="52708" end="52719" title="Rifet Kapić" label="Rifet Kapić"/>
<link wikidata="Q84849606" start="52746" end="52757" title="Camilo Mena" label="Camilo Mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="52910" end="52922" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="52986" end="52999" title="Tricity Derby" label="Tricity Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="53009" end="53020" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="53252" end="53258" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="53267" end="53277" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160814" start="53609" end="53617" title="Braniewo" label="Braniewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q326577" start="53619" end="53624" title="Bytów" label="Bytów"/>
<link wikidata="Q740241" start="53626" end="53634" title="Chojnice" label="Chojnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015160" start="53636" end="53642" title="Czersk" label="Czersk"/>
<link wikidata="Q551422" start="53644" end="53653" title="Dzierzgoń" label="Dzierzgoń"/>
<link wikidata="Q497115" start="53655" end="53663" title="Frombork" label="Frombork"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="53665" end="53671" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q305067" start="53673" end="53678" title="Gniew" label="Gniew"/>
<link wikidata="Q640355" start="53680" end="53687" title="Kartuzy" label="Kartuzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935784" start="53689" end="53700" title="Kościerzyna" label="Kościerzyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q326582" start="53702" end="53709" title="Kwidzyn" label="Kwidzyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q497148" start="53711" end="53717" title="Lębork" label="Lębork"/>
<link wikidata="Q146820" start="53719" end="53726" title="Malbork" label="Malbork"/>
<link wikidata="Q983868" start="53728" end="53733" title="Mława" label="Mława"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108467" start="53735" end="53743" title="Miłobądz" label="Miłobądz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164023" start="53745" end="53749" title="Nowe" label="Nowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604251" start="53751" end="53768" title="Nowy Dwór Gdański" label="Nowy Dwór Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021282" start="53770" end="53779" title="Nowy Staw" label="Nowy Staw"/>
<link wikidata="Q231593" start="53781" end="53790" title="Nowy Targ" label="Nowy Targ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027142" start="53792" end="53799" title="Pelplin" label="Pelplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q985005" start="53801" end="53805" title="Pisz" label="Pisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q988590" start="53807" end="53822" title="Pruszcz Gdański" label="Pruszcz Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q988169" start="53824" end="53831" title="Prabuty" label="Prabuty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021240" start="53833" end="53842" title="Przodkowo" label="Przodkowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q254856" start="53844" end="53853" title="Pszczółki, Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pszczółki"/>
<link wikidata="Q78712" start="53855" end="53860" title="Rumia" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021091" start="53862" end="53873" title="Sierakowice, Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Sierakowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015036" start="53875" end="53884" title="Skarszewy" label="Skarszewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q954116" start="53886" end="53892" title="Skórcz" label="Skórcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978130" start="53894" end="53901" title="Smętowo Chmieleńskie" label="Smętowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="53903" end="53908" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q503146" start="53910" end="53927" title="Starogard Gdański" label="Starogard Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q640368" start="53929" end="53934" title="Sztum" label="Sztum"/>
<link wikidata="Q474697" start="53936" end="53941" title="Tczew" label="Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978475" start="53943" end="53949" title="Tuchom" label="Tuchom"/>
<link wikidata="Q321010" start="53951" end="53956" title="Ustka" label="Ustka"/>
<link wikidata="Q836965" start="53958" end="53970" title="Władysławowo" label="Władysławowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q672949" start="53972" end="53981" title="Wejherowo" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168231" start="53983" end="53989" title="Zblewo" label="Zblewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161893" start="53994" end="54000" title="Żukowo" label="Żukowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="54043" end="54050" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="54115" end="54125" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="54178" end="54184" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="54200" end="54211" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55830" start="54313" end="54332" title="List of heads of state of Poland" label="President of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="54767" end="54777" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="54783" end="54799" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="54827" end="54838" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="54880" end="54891" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="54911" end="54933" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55830" start="55009" end="55025" title="List of heads of state of Poland" label="second President"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="55027" end="55038" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="55085" end="55118" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065090" start="55159" end="55174" title="Paweł Adamowicz" label="Paweł Adamowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q502619" start="55180" end="55195" title="List of mayors of Gdańsk" label="mayor of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656863" start="55576" end="55595" title="2021 UEFA Europa League Final" label="Europa League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297" start="55610" end="55620" title="Villarreal CF" label="Villarreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="55625" end="55642" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="56075" end="56099" title="UEFA Europa Conference League" label="Europa Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24914473" start="56105" end="56121" title="Akademija Pandev" label="Akademija Pandev"/>
<link wikidata="Q328655" start="56916" end="56929" title="Śląsk Wrocław" label="Śląsk Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776126" start="57231" end="57251" title="Lechia Gdańsk &amp;amp; Śląsk Wrocław (Fan Friendship)" label="The Friendship Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q9281610" start="57310" end="57321" title="Gryf Słupsk" label="Gryf Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="57371" end="57381" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60527975" start="57517" end="57537" title="Amber Cup Tournament" label="Amber Cup Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="57852" end="57871" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="57955" end="57968" title="Tricity Derby" label="Tricity Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498918" start="58145" end="58166" title="Chojniczanka Chojnice" label="Chojniczanka Chojnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182810" start="58168" end="58181" title="Bytovia Bytów" label="Bytovia Bytów"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047449" start="58183" end="58199" title="Cartusia Kartuzy" label="Cartusia Kartuzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375803" start="58201" end="58223" title="Czarni Pruszcz Gdański" label="Czarni Pruszcz Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384926" start="58225" end="58245" title="KP Starogard Gdański" label="KP Starogard Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366684" start="58247" end="58257" title="Unia Tczew" label="Unia Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823045" start="58259" end="58276" title="Pomezania Malbork" label="Pomezania Malbork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357520" start="58278" end="58291" title="Rodło Kwidzyn" label="Rodło Kwidzyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580583" start="58296" end="58309" title="Olimpia Sztum" label="Olimpia Sztum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174229" start="58384" end="58398" title="Jeziorak Iława" label="Jeziorak Iława"/>
<link wikidata="Q769793" start="58400" end="58413" title="Miedź Legnica" label="Miedź Legnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056679" start="58415" end="58428" title="Hutnik Kraków" label="Hutnik Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716461" start="58430" end="58445" title="Mławianka Mława" label="Mławianka Mława"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="58450" end="58455" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093314" start="58461" end="58470" title="SFC Opava" label="SFC Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149258" start="58505" end="58518" title="Czarni Słupsk" label="Czarni Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q651966" start="58635" end="58649" title="Stomil Olsztyn S.A." label="Stomil Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q287236" start="58802" end="58819" title="Raków Częstochowa" label="Raków Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198779" start="58849" end="58862" title="GKS Górnik Łęczna" label="Górnik Łęczna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="58967" end="58978" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="58980" end="58992" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="58994" end="59015" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="59021" end="59033" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q328655" start="59133" end="59146" title="Śląsk Wrocław" label="Śląsk Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="59675" end="59687" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="59692" end="59703" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="60164" end="60177" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475269" start="60182" end="60193" title="Wisła Płock" label="Wisła Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="60506" end="60517" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="60568" end="60581" title="Tricity derby" label="Tricity derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="60668" end="60674" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="60697" end="60703" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="60789" end="60799" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="61074" end="61080" title="Słupsk" label="Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q503146" start="61082" end="61099" title="Starogard Gdański" label="Starogard Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q740241" start="61101" end="61109" title="Chojnice" label="Chojnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q146820" start="61111" end="61118" title="Malbork" label="Malbork"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="61120" end="61125" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q497148" start="61131" end="61137" title="Lębork" label="Lębork"/>
<link wikidata="Q474697" start="61196" end="61201" title="Tczew" label="Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q672949" start="61203" end="61212" title="Wejherowo" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q78712" start="61214" end="61219" title="Rumia" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q935784" start="61225" end="61236" title="Kościerzyna" label="Kościerzyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="61358" end="61369" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="61391" end="61402" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="61407" end="61415" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="61828" end="61840" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q836991" start="62291" end="62305" title="Pogoń Szczecin" label="Pogoń Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="62432" end="62446" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="62539" end="62560" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="62562" end="62574" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="62576" end="62587" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q727918" start="62589" end="62601" title="Motor Lublin" label="Motor Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q925935" start="62663" end="62675" title="GKS Katowice" label="GKS Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q167781" start="62677" end="62694" title="Zawisza Bydgoszcz" label="Zawisza Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090343" start="62696" end="62707" title="Elana Toruń" label="Elana Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q859458" start="62709" end="62722" title="Polonia Bytom" label="Polonia Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q134255" start="62724" end="62737" title="Górnik Zabrze" label="Górnik Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q29112" start="62756" end="62773" title="FC Spartak Moscow" label="FC Spartak Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="62910" end="62923" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049495" start="63253" end="63267" title="Gedania 1922 Gdańsk" label="Gedania Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="63272" end="63291" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049753" start="63395" end="63407" title="Gdańsk Derby" label="Gdańsk Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623345" start="63979" end="63995" title="Gwardia Koszalin" label="Gwardia Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978314" start="63997" end="64017" title="Kaszubia Kościerzyna" label="Kaszubia Kościerzyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551160" start="64019" end="64033" title="Gryf Wejherowo" label="Gryf Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9375457" start="64035" end="64046" title="Wisła Tczew" label="Wisła Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64051" end="64062" title="Orkan Rumia" label="Orkan Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="64092" end="64105" title="Tricity derby" label="Tricity derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="64136" end="64147" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049753" start="64257" end="64269" title="Gdańsk Derby" label="Gdańsk Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="64303" end="64309" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049495" start="64379" end="64393" title="Gedania 1922 Gdańsk" label="Gedania Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="64398" end="64417" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182385" start="64823" end="64847" title="Stadion Gdańsk" label="Polsat Plus Arena Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="65001" end="65008" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856079" start="65817" end="65830" title="Stadion Gdańskiego Ośrodka Sportu" label="MOSiR Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9253957" start="66299" end="66305" title="Energa SA" label="Energa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282171" start="66454" end="66460" title="Polsat" label="Polsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656863" start="66500" end="66529" title="2021 UEFA Europa League Final" label="2021 UEFA Europa League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="67197" end="67205" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051339" start="67421" end="67441" title="Lechia Gdańsk Ladies (football)" label="Lechia Gdańsk Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755816" start="67452" end="67468" title="Lechia Gdańsk II and Lechia&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="Lechia Gdańsk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753568" start="67512" end="67531" title="RC Lechia Gdańsk" label="Lechia Gdańsk rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164716" start="67794" end="67806" title="Roman Rogocz" label="Roman Rogocz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="67839" end="67856" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q65564694" start="68246" end="68261" title="Jerzy Apolewicz" label="Jerzy Apolewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836009" start="68263" end="68277" title="Michał Globisz" label="Michał Globisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11730324" start="68279" end="68292" title="Józef Gładysz" label="Józef Gładysz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107210884" start="68294" end="68309" title="Andrzej Głownia" label="Andrzej Głownia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288161" start="68311" end="68327" title="Henryk Gronowski" label="Henryk Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310815" start="68329" end="68345" title="Robert Gronowski" label="Robert Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724758" start="68347" end="68366" title="Jerzy Jastrzębowski" label="Jerzy Jastrzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908766" start="68368" end="68386" title="Bogusław Kaczmarek" label="Bogusław Kaczmarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685347" start="68388" end="68400" title="Alfred Kokot" label="Alfred Kokot"/>
<link wikidata="Q89411468" start="68402" end="68414" title="Henryk Kokot" label="Henryk Kokot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164658" start="68416" end="68428" title="Roman Korynt" label="Roman Korynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724917" start="68430" end="68448" title="Jerzy Kruszczyński" label="Jerzy Kruszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753495" start="68450" end="68463" title="Lech Kulwicki" label="Lech Kulwicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q35814747" start="68465" end="68476" title="Hubert Kusz" label="Hubert Kusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041231" start="68478" end="68494" title="Władysław Musiał" label="Władysław Musiał"/>
<link wikidata="Q41750630" start="68496" end="68509" title="Ryszard Polak" label="Ryszard Polak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="68511" end="68528" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9153481" start="68530" end="68544" title="Andrzej Salach" label="Andrzej Salach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305022" start="68546" end="68556" title="Jakub Smug" label="Jakub Smug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164716" start="68558" end="68570" title="Roman Rogocz" label="Roman Rogocz"/>
<link wikidata="Q74289376" start="68572" end="68589" title="Zbigniew Żemojtel" label="Zbigniew Żemojtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182385" start="68698" end="68719" title="Stadion Energa Gdańsk" label="Stadion Energa Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811326" start="69764" end="69775" title="Lechia Lwów" label="Lechia Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q74126872" start="70438" end="70456" title="1982–83 Polish Cup" label="1982–83 Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="70552" end="70572" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q836991" start="71545" end="71559" title="Pogoń Szczecin" label="Pogoń Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065090" start="71588" end="71603" title="Paweł Adamowicz" label="Paweł Adamowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q502619" start="71609" end="71624" title="List of mayors of Gdańsk" label="mayor of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q638504" start="71844" end="71860" title="Filip Mladenović" label="Filip Mladenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="71865" end="71878" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q836991" start="71939" end="71953" title="Pogoń Szczecin" label="Pogoń Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342323" start="71995" end="72014" title="National Independence Day (Poland)" label="Polish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q482988" start="72116" end="72131" title="Poland Is Not Yet Lost" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069129" start="72539" end="72557" title="Pennon" label="triangular pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="72690" end="72696" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019858" start="72875" end="72889" title="Olimpia Poznan" label="Olimpia Poznan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="73056" end="73070" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Polonia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856079" start="73672" end="73685" title="Stadion Gdańskiego Ośrodka Sportu" label="MOSiR Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9281610" start="74366" end="74377" title="Gryf Słupsk" label="Gryf Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q859458" start="76155" end="76168" title="Polonia Bytom" label="Polonia Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479950" start="76272" end="76287" title="Stanisław Baran" label="Stanisław Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875570" start="76355" end="76371" title="Bartłomiej Stolc" label="Bartłomiej Stolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875570" start="76432" end="76448" title="Bartłomiej Stolc" label="Bartłomiej Stolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724917" start="76543" end="76561" title="Jerzy Kruszczyński" label="Jerzy Kruszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="76626" end="76639" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164716" start="76702" end="76714" title="Roman Rogocz" label="Roman Rogocz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="76757" end="76774" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219193" start="76814" end="76828" title="Daniel Łukasik" label="Daniel Łukasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517223" start="76902" end="76924" title="Vanja Milinković-Savić" label="Vanja Milinković-Savić"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="77047" end="77055" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="77135" end="77147" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="77191" end="77204" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296244" start="77254" end="77267" title="Flávio Paixão" label="Flávio Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724917" start="77337" end="77355" title="Jerzy Kruszczyński" label="Jerzy Kruszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294578" start="77411" end="77423" title="Marco Paixão" label="Marco Paixão"/>
<link wikidata="Q24054572" start="77425" end="77446" title="2016–17 Ekstraklasa" label="2016–17 – Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786685" start="77504" end="77515" title="Mateusz Bąk" label="Mateusz Bąk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786685" start="77792" end="77803" title="Mateusz Bąk" label="Mateusz Bąk"/>
<link wikidata="Q71333125" start="77890" end="77908" title="Sargis Khachatryan" label="Sargis Khachatryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="77910" end="77917" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="78023" end="78037" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="78096" end="78107" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q308362" start="78180" end="78199" title="Abdou Razack Traoré" label="Abdou Razack Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="78259" end="78267" title="KS Cracovia (football)" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134255" start="78334" end="78347" title="Górnik Zabrze" label="Górnik Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029204" start="78425" end="78436" title="Fred Benson" label="Fred Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="78478" end="78486" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="79957" end="79968" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q848007" start="79985" end="79989" title="1956 Ekstraklasa" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q54112739" start="79991" end="79998" title="2018–19 Ekstraklasa" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q163046" start="80000" end="80006" title="I liga" label="I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951995" start="80036" end="80043" title="2007–08 II liga" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947114" start="80045" end="80052" title="2023–24 I liga" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q210262" start="80125" end="80132" title="II liga" label="II liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="80250" end="80260" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q74126872" start="80273" end="80280" title="1982–83 Polish Cup" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q54864682" start="80282" end="80289" title="2018–19 Polish Cup" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q64854647" start="80311" end="80318" title="2019-20 Polish Cup" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="80320" end="80336" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348280" start="80350" end="80354" title="1983 Polish Super Cup" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q64413630" start="80356" end="80360" title="2019 Polish Super Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="80376" end="80400" title="UEFA Cup Winners Cup" label="European Cup Winners Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q264469" start="80418" end="80425" title="1983–84 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="80427" end="80440" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q53165589" start="80469" end="80476" title="2019–20 UEFA Europa League" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q60527975" start="80501" end="80510" title="Amber Cup Tournament" label="Amber Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047036" start="81515" end="81518" title="WCF World Rankings" label="WCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q695008" start="81866" end="81879" title="FC Viktoria Köln" label="Viktoria Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q162317" start="81884" end="81895" title="1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig" label="Lok Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691806" start="82255" end="82264" title="ETL Group" label="ETL Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="82726" end="82733" title="United Arab Emirates" label="Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q672396" start="83199" end="83212" title="Arkadiusz Bąk" label="Arkadiusz Bąk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11749085" start="83222" end="83243" title="Krzysztof Baszkiewicz" label="Krzysztof Baszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q947510" start="83258" end="83274" title="Jarosław Bieniuk" label="Jarosław Bieniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q370509" start="83302" end="83316" title="Ariel Borysiuk" label="Ariel Borysiuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q606277" start="83344" end="83356" title="Piotr Brożek" label="Piotr Brożek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479950" start="83371" end="83386" title="Stanisław Baran" label="Stanisław Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619158" start="83396" end="83406" title="Adam Buksa" label="Adam Buksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9342978" start="83421" end="83440" title="Stanisław Burzyński (footballer)" label="Stanisław Burzyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273217" start="83455" end="83471" title="Paweł Dawidowicz" label="Paweł Dawidowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530978" start="83486" end="83503" title="Tomasz Dawidowski" label="Tomasz Dawidowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11717409" start="83518" end="83528" title="Jan Erlich" label="Jan Erlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106804" start="83543" end="83555" title="Adam Fedoruk" label="Adam Fedoruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043990" start="83570" end="83591" title="Przemysław Frankowski" label="Przemysław Frankowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075794" start="83606" end="83621" title="Zygmunt Gadecki" label="Zygmunt Gadecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029636" start="83636" end="83651" title="Jacek Grembocki" label="Jacek Grembocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288161" start="83679" end="83695" title="Henryk Gronowski" label="Henryk Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310815" start="83710" end="83726" title="Robert Gronowski" label="Robert Gronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9354327" start="83741" end="83758" title="Tadeusz Hogendorf" label="Tadeusz Hogendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757218" start="83768" end="83784" title="Marcin Kaczmarek (footballer, born 1979)" label="Marcin Kaczmarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282441" start="83799" end="83816" title="Rafał Kaczmarczyk" label="Rafał Kaczmarczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q96575708" start="83831" end="83847" title="Jakub Kałuziński" label="Jakub Kałuziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q388776" start="83862" end="83875" title="Jerzy Kasalik" label="Jerzy Kasalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685347" start="83890" end="83902" title="Alfred Kokot" label="Alfred Kokot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164658" start="83917" end="83929" title="Roman Korynt" label="Roman Korynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q556194" start="83944" end="83957" title="Jakub Kosecki" label="Jakub Kosecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282443" start="83972" end="83985" title="Rafał Kosznik" label="Rafał Kosznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11729314" start="84008" end="84026" title="Juliusz Kruszankin" label="Juliusz Kruszankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q981877" start="84036" end="84052" title="Janusz Kupcewicz" label="Janusz Kupcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768628" start="84067" end="84081" title="Marek Ługowski" label="Marek Ługowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219193" start="84096" end="84110" title="Daniel Łukasik" label="Daniel Łukasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005314" start="84125" end="84143" title="Maciej Makuszewski" label="Maciej Makuszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476881" start="84158" end="84177" title="Sebastian Małkowski" label="Sebastian Małkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370602" start="84192" end="84206" title="Marcin Mięciel" label="Marcin Mięciel"/>
<link wikidata="Q449496" start="84221" end="84235" title="Sebastian Mila" label="Sebastian Mila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160831" start="84263" end="84279" title="Jarosław Nowicki" label="Jarosław Nowicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766039" start="84295" end="84309" title="Mariusz Pawlak" label="Mariusz Pawlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q402320" start="84337" end="84352" title="Sławomir Peszko" label="Sławomir Peszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781908" start="84367" end="84382" title="Mirosław Pękala" label="Mirosław Pękala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282457" start="84397" end="84411" title="Rafał Pietrzak" label="Rafał Pietrzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389820" start="84426" end="84443" title="Zdzisław Puszkarz" label="Zdzisław Puszkarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q444453" start="84471" end="84486" title="Grzegorz Rasiak" label="Grzegorz Rasiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q107834748" start="84501" end="84518" title="Grzegorz Oprządek" label="Grzegorz Oprządek"/>
<link wikidata="Q222945" start="84533" end="84546" title="Artur Sobiech" label="Artur Sobiech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720489" start="84561" end="84575" title="Janusz Stawarz" label="Janusz Stawarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q360215" start="84590" end="84602" title="Łukasz Surma" label="Łukasz Surma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354742" start="84617" end="84637" title="Grzegorz Szamotulski" label="Grzegorz Szamotulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316158" start="84652" end="84670" title="Mirosław Tłokiński" label="Mirosław Tłokiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q384145" start="84685" end="84698" title="Łukasz Trałka" label="Łukasz Trałka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85408718" start="84708" end="84723" title="Kacper Urbański" label="Kacper Urbański"/>
<link wikidata="Q263738" start="84738" end="84754" title="Jakub Wawrzyniak" label="Jakub Wawrzyniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369051" start="84769" end="84779" title="Jakub Wilk" label="Jakub Wilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q671761" start="84789" end="84811" title="Sławomir Wojciechowski" label="Sławomir Wojciechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q349316" start="84839" end="84858" title="Grzegorz Wojtkowiak" label="Grzegorz Wojtkowiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q357650" start="84873" end="84885" title="Rafał Wolski" label="Rafał Wolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062645" start="84900" end="84918" title="Hubert Wołąkiewicz" label="Hubert Wołąkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342989" start="84933" end="84946" title="Paweł Wszołek" label="Paweł Wszołek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894684" start="84961" end="84975" title="Marek Zieńczuk" label="Marek Zieńczuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q40567185" start="85013" end="85026" title="Omran Haydary" label="Omran Haydary"/>
<link wikidata="Q638598" start="85052" end="85069" title="Levon Hayrapetyan" label="Levon Hayrapetyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699366" start="85110" end="85124" title="Stojan Vranješ" label="Stojan Vranješ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517656" start="85151" end="85166" title="Simeon Slavchev" label="Simeon Slavchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q308362" start="85197" end="85216" title="Abdou Razack Traoré" label="Abdou Razack Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718823" start="85241" end="85255" title="Steven Vitória" label="Steven Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q127576" start="85282" end="85302" title="Christopher Oualembo" label="Christopher Oualembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15431979" start="85328" end="85341" title="Antonio Čolak" label="Antonio Čolak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898898" start="85356" end="85368" title="Mario Maloča" label="Mario Maloča"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787712" start="85395" end="85405" title="Mato Miloš" label="Mato Miloš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436342" start="85420" end="85430" title="Luka Vučko" label="Luka Vučko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396434" start="85456" end="85471" title="Gino van Kessel" label="Gino van Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q347540" start="85490" end="85501" title="Joseph Aziz" label="Joseph Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816480" start="85511" end="85526" title="Emmanuel Tetteh" label="Emmanuel Tetteh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560726" start="85558" end="85571" title="Romário Baldé" label="Romário Baldé"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236493" start="85586" end="85602" title="Rudinilson Silva" label="Rudinilson Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193991" start="85625" end="85638" title="Joenal Castma" label="Joenal Castma"/>
<link wikidata="Q38693736" start="85666" end="85683" title="Egy Maulana Vikri" label="Egy Maulana Vikri"/>
<link wikidata="Q66705695" start="85698" end="85712" title="Witan Sulaeman" label="Witan Sulaeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41342743" start="85737" end="85751" title="Joel Abu Hanna" label="Joel Abu Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q331938" start="85775" end="85789" title="Daisuke Matsui" label="Daisuke Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253141" start="85809" end="85822" title="Oļegs Laizāns" label="Oļegs Laizāns"/>
<link wikidata="Q784829" start="85832" end="85847" title="Ivans Lukjanovs" label="Ivans Lukjanovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47353277" start="85862" end="85877" title="Kristers Tobers" label="Kristers Tobers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757231" start="85905" end="85929" title="Vytautas Andriuškevičius" label="Vytautas Andriuškevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16449805" start="85944" end="85962" title="Donatas Kazlauskas" label="Donatas Kazlauskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106218645" start="85984" end="86000" title="Bassekou Diabaté" label="Bassekou Diabaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q813899" start="86028" end="86038" title="Bédi Buval" label="Bédi Buval"/>
<link wikidata="Q981046" start="86063" end="86078" title="Danijel Aleksić" label="Danijel Aleksić"/>
<link wikidata="Q201910" start="86088" end="86100" title="Miloš Krasić" label="Miloš Krasić"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517223" start="86115" end="86137" title="Vanja Milinković-Savić" label="Vanja Milinković-Savić"/>
<link wikidata="Q638504" start="86152" end="86168" title="Filip Mladenović" label="Filip Mladenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18933936" start="86195" end="86209" title="Lukáš Haraslín" label="Lukáš Haraslín"/>
<link wikidata="Q439930" start="86224" end="86236" title="Dušan Kuciak" label="Dušan Kuciak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160640" start="86251" end="86267" title="Jaroslav Mihalík" label="Jaroslav Mihalík"/>
<link wikidata="Q64015184" start="86293" end="86307" title="Serhiy Buletsa" label="Serhiy Buletsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184227" start="86335" end="86346" title="Jerry Panek" label="Jerzy Panek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235815" start="86404" end="86415" title="Kenny Saief" label="Kenny Saief"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755816" start="86556" end="86572" title="Lechia Gdańsk II and Lechia&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="Lechia Gdańsk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="86706" end="86716" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019858" start="86853" end="86867" title="Olimpia Poznań" label="Olimpia Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753564" start="86877" end="86898" title="Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk" label="Olimpia-Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051339" start="88104" end="88124" title="Lechia Gdańsk Ladies" label="Lechia Gdańsk Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256909" start="88643" end="88654" title="Grupa Lotos" label="Grupa Lotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q98684470" start="88663" end="88678" title="AP Orlen Gdańsk" label="AP LOTOS Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724758" start="89908" end="89927" title="Jerzy Jastrzębowski" label="Jerzy Jastrzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724758" start="89965" end="89984" title="Jerzy Jastrzębowski" label="Jerzy Jastrzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908766" start="90015" end="90033" title="Bogusław Kaczmarek" label="Bogusław Kaczmarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9343100" start="90065" end="90083" title="Stanisław Stachura" label="Stanisław Stachura"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676300" start="90159" end="90177" title="Tadeusz Małolepszy" label="Tadeusz Małolepszy"/>
<link wikidata="Q64853173" start="90277" end="90294" title="Edward Wojewódzki" label="Edward Wojewódzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724758" start="90381" end="90400" title="Jerzy Jastrzębowski" label="Jerzy Jastrzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908766" start="90408" end="90426" title="Bogusław Kaczmarek" label="Bogusław Kaczmarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817863" start="90434" end="90449" title="Piotr Stokowiec" label="Piotr Stokowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q9343100" start="90457" end="90475" title="Stanisław Stachura" label="Stanisław Stachura"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="90800" end="90804" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="90820" end="90855" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036444" start="90878" end="90896" title="World War II evacuation and expulsion" label="Poles from Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392565" start="91353" end="91363" title="Retro Liga" label="Retro Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q309008" start="91541" end="91568" title="Polish Football Association" label="Polish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888210" start="91744" end="91762" title="Football in Poland" label="Football in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q951054" start="91765" end="91787" title="List of football teams" label="List of football teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="91790" end="91816" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions&amp;#x27; Cup/League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="91819" end="91827" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772206" wikidata="Q1382711" url="?curid=772206" title="Al Hibbler">
<text>Albert George Hibbler (August 16, 1915 – April 24, 2001) was an American baritone vocalist, who sang with Duke Ellington&#x27;s orchestra before having several pop hits as a solo artist. Some of Hibbler&#x27;s singing is classified as rhythm and blues, but he is best seen as a bridge between R&amp;B and traditional pop music. According to one authority, &quot;Hibbler cannot be regarded as a jazz singer but as an exceptionally good interpreter of twentieth-century popular songs who happened to work with some of the best jazz musicians of the time.&quot;

==Early life==
Hibbler was born in Tyro, Mississippi, United States, and was blind from birth. Some sources give his birth name as Andrew George Hibbler. At the age of 12 he moved to Little Rock, Arkansas, where he attended Arkansas School for the Blind, joining the school choir. Later he began working as a blues singer in local bands, failing his first audition for Duke Ellington in 1935. However, after winning an amateur talent contest in Memphis, Tennessee, he was given his start with Dub Jenkins and his Playmates; Jenkins was a popular Memphis saxophonist and bandleader. He later joined a band led by Jay McShann in 1942, and the following year joined Ellington&#x27;s orchestra, replacing Herb Jeffries.

==Career==
He stayed with Ellington for almost eight years, and featured on a range of Ellington standards, including &quot;Do Nothin&#x27; Til You Hear From Me&quot;, the words for which were written specifically for him and which reached #6 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop chart (and #1 for eight weeks on the &quot;Harlem Hit Parade&quot;) in 1944, &quot;I Ain&#x27;t Got Nothin&#x27; But the Blues,&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Just a Lucky So-and-So&quot;. Although Hibbler&#x27;s style was described as &quot;mannered&quot;, &quot;over-stated&quot;, and &quot;full of idiosyncrasies&quot; and &quot;bizarre vocal pyrotechnics&quot;, he was also considered &quot;undoubtedly the best&quot; of Ellington&#x27;s male vocalists. While with Ellington, Hibbler won the &quot;Esquire&quot; New Star Award in 1947 and the &quot;Down Beat&quot; award for Best Band Vocalist in 1949.

Hibbler left Ellington&#x27;s band in 1951 after a dispute over his wages. He then recorded with various bands including those of Johnny Hodges and Count Basie, and for various labels including Mercury and Norgran, a subsidiary of Verve Records, for whom he released an LP, &quot;Al Hibbler Favorites&quot;, in 1953. In 1954 he released a more successful album, &quot;Al Hibbler Sings Duke Ellington&quot;, and in 1955, he started recording with Decca Records, with immediate success. His biggest hit was &quot;Unchained Melody&quot;, which reached #3 on the US pop chart, sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. Hibbler&#x27;s version also reached #2 in the UK Singles Chart, becoming his only chart hit in the United Kingdom. Its success led to network appearances, including a live jazz club remote on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Monitor&quot;. Other hits were &quot;He&quot; (1955), &quot;11th Hour Melody&quot; and &quot;Never Turn Back&quot; (both in 1956). &quot;After the Lights Go Down Low&quot; (also in 1956) was his last top ten hit.

===Activism===
In the late 1950s and 1960s, Hibbler became a civil rights activist, marching with protestors and getting arrested in 1959 in New Jersey and in 1963 in Alabama. The notoriety of this activism discouraged major record labels from carrying his work, but Frank Sinatra supported him and signed him to a contract with his label, Reprise Records. However, Hibbler made very few recordings after that, occasionally doing live appearances through the 1990s. In 1971, Hibbler sang two songs at Louis Armstrong&#x27;s funeral. In 1972 he made an album, &quot;A Meeting of the Times&quot;, with another fiercely independent blind musician, the multi-instrumentalist Rahsaan Roland Kirk.

==Death and legacy==
He died at Holy Cross Hospital in Chicago in April 2001, at the age of 85. He is buried at Lincoln Cemetery in Blue Island, Illinois.

==Discography==

===Solo singles discography===
===Albums===
* &quot;Sings Duke Ellington&quot; (Norgran, 1954)
* &quot;Favorites&quot; (Norgran, 1954)
* &quot;Melodies by Al Hibbler&quot; (Argo/Chess, 1956)
* &quot;Sings Love Songs&quot; (Verve, 1956)
* &quot;Starring Al Hibbler&quot; (Decca, 1956)
* &quot;After the Lights Go Down Low: The Voice of Al Hibbler&quot; (Atlantic, 1957)
* &quot;Here&#x27;s Hibbler&quot; (Decca, 1957)
* &quot;I Surrender Dear&quot; (Score/Aladdin, 1957)
* &quot;Torchy and Blue&quot; (Decca, 1958)
* &quot;Al Hibbler Remembers&quot; (Decca, 1958)
* &quot;Hits by Hibbler&quot; (Decca, 1958)
* &quot;Monday Every Day: Al Hibbler Sings the Blues&quot; (Reprise, 1961)
* &quot;Big Boy Blues&quot; (Grand Prix Series, 1964)
* &quot;Shades of Blue&quot; (Sunset, 1968)
* &quot;A Meeting of the Times&quot; with Rahsaan Roland Kirk (Atlantic, 1972)
* &quot;Christmas with Al Hibbler&quot; (Holiday, 1981)
* &quot;Solitude&quot; (Pickwick, 1997)

With Count Basie
* &quot;Basie Jazz&quot; (Clef MGC-633, 1954 [recordings from 1952])

===Compilations===
* &quot;The Chronological Al Hibbler 1946–1949&quot; Classics, 2002)
* &quot;The Chronological Al Hibbler 1950–1952&quot; (Classics, 2003)

==See also==
*List of artists under the Decca Records label
*List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard R&amp;B chart
*List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart
*List of people from Little Rock, Arkansas

==References==
==External links==
* Al Hibbler Discography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1382711" start="0" end="21" title="Al Hibbler" label="Albert George Hibbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="73" end="81" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="106" end="120" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="160" end="163" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="235" end="251" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="305" end="326" title="traditional pop" label="traditional pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="394" end="398" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="601" end="612" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="614" end="627" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="637" end="642" title="Blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="743" end="764" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791861" start="784" end="813" title="Arkansas School for the Blind" label="Arkansas School for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="834" end="839" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="869" end="874" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="1005" end="1023" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684347" start="1172" end="1183" title="Jay McShann" label="Jay McShann"/>
<link wikidata="Q126958" start="1261" end="1274" title="Herb Jeffries" label="Herb Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q931128" start="1401" end="1437" title="Do Nothin&amp;#x27; Til You Hear From Me" label="Do Nothin&amp;#x27; Til You Hear From Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1533" end="1542" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="1549" end="1558" title="pop chart" label="pop chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="1590" end="1619" title="R&amp;amp;B chart" label="&amp;quot;Harlem Hit Parade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637145" start="1697" end="1728" title="I&amp;#x27;m Just a Lucky So-and-So" label="I&amp;#x27;m Just a Lucky So-and-So"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="2049" end="2056" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="2100" end="2109" title="Down Beat" label="Down Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q455176" start="2285" end="2298" title="Johnny Hodges" label="Johnny Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="2303" end="2314" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="2349" end="2356" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="2386" end="2399" title="Verve Records" label="Verve Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="2425" end="2427" title="LP album" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417892" start="2569" end="2573" title="1955 in music" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="2601" end="2614" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q949416" start="2666" end="2682" title="Unchained Melody" label="Unchained Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="2776" end="2785" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2833" end="2849" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906708" start="2959" end="2975" title="big band remote" label="jazz club remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900468" start="2996" end="3003" title="Monitor (NBC Radio)" label="Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688670" start="3033" end="3035" title="He (song)" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417892" start="3043" end="3047" title="1955 in music" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354681" start="3120" end="3124" title="1956 in music" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240696" start="3133" end="3161" title="After the Lights Go Down Low (song)" label="After the Lights Go Down Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="3196" end="3203" title="top 40" label="top ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="3271" end="3283" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3351" end="3361" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="3377" end="3384" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="3435" end="3447" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="3477" end="3490" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="3550" end="3565" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="3711" end="3726" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658190" start="3775" end="3797" title="A Meeting of the Times" label="A Meeting of the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q553921" start="3881" end="3900" title="Rahsaan Roland Kirk" label="Rahsaan Roland Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885264" start="3935" end="3954" title="Holy Cross Hospital (Chicago)" label="Holy Cross Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3958" end="3965" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q577829" start="4035" end="4056" title="Blue Island, Illinois" label="Blue Island, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="4299" end="4304" title="Verve Records" label="Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="4347" end="4352" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979190" start="4368" end="4421" title="After the Lights Go Down Low (album)" label="After the Lights Go Down Low: The Voice of Al Hibbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="4429" end="4437" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="4743" end="4750" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658190" start="4864" end="4886" title="A Meeting of the Times" label="A Meeting of the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q553921" start="4898" end="4917" title="Rahsaan Roland Kirk" label="Rahsaan Roland Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="5037" end="5048" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24077846" start="5057" end="5067" title="Basie Jazz" label="Basie Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099663" start="5075" end="5079" title="Clef Records" label="Clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q96142581" start="5191" end="5199" title="Chronological Classics" label="Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568662" start="5292" end="5337" title="List of artists under the Decca Records label" label="List of artists under the Decca Records label"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606217" start="5339" end="5408" title="List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard R&amp;amp;B chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard R&amp;amp;B chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606218" start="5410" end="5480" title="List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632563" start="5482" end="5523" title="List of people from Little Rock, Arkansas" label="List of people from Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772208" wikidata="Q131731766" url="?curid=772208" title="Frederick Avery">
<text>Frederick Avery is the name of:

* Tex Avery (Frederick Bean Avery, 1908–1980), American animator, cartoonist, director, and voice actor
* Frederick Harold Avery, Canadian politician, MPP for Lincoln 1934–1937</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319723" start="35" end="44" title="Tex Avery" label="Tex Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q122827830" start="139" end="161" title="Frederick Harold Avery" label="Frederick Harold Avery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772212" wikidata="Q5240992" url="?curid=772212" title="David Westwood">
<text>David Westwood, QPM, is a British former police officer. He was Chief Constable of Humberside Police from March 1999 until March 2005. In 2004, he was suspended from July until September as a result of the Bichard report into the Soham murders.
Westwood joined Sussex Police as a constable in 1967, and became a Sergeant in Avon and Somerset Constabulary in 1975. He was promoted to Inspector in 1980. He moved to Humberside Police in 1992, becoming Chief Superintendent, then became Assistant Chief Constable of Merseyside in 1995. Westwood became Deputy Chief Constable of Humberside in 1997, becoming Chief Constable in 1999.

He was chairman of the Association of Chief Police Officers Race and Community Relations Committee from 2000 until 2003, overseeing the introduction of new procedures for the Police Service on race issues following the publication of Sir William Macpherson&#x27;s Inquiry into the murder of Stephen Lawrence. In 2001, Westwood was awarded the Queen&#x27;s Police Medal for services to policing.

As a result of failings by Humberside Police highlighted by the report into the Soham murders, the Home Secretary, David Blunkett, called for Westwood&#x27;s suspension, but the Humberside police authority chairman Colin Inglis initially refused. In July 2004, he was suspended after the High Court ruled that the police authority acted &quot;in default of its statutory duty&quot; by that refusal. Westwood was reinstated in September 2004, on condition he took early retirement in March 2005.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5240992" start="0" end="14" title="David Westwood" label="David Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792177" start="16" end="19" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Police Medal" label="QPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="41" end="55" title="police officer" label="police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242291" start="64" end="79" title="Chief Constable" label="Chief Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939895" start="83" end="100" title="Humberside Police" label="Humberside Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903597" start="206" end="220" title="Bichard report" label="Bichard report"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="230" end="243" title="Soham murders" label="Soham murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649467" start="261" end="274" title="Sussex Police" label="Sussex Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q165654" start="280" end="289" title="constable" label="constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829263" start="324" end="354" title="Avon and Somerset Constabulary" label="Avon and Somerset Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939895" start="414" end="431" title="Humberside Police" label="Humberside Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q860252" start="450" end="470" title="Chief Superintendent" label="Chief Superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820586" start="513" end="523" title="Merseyside Police" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q265339" start="653" end="689" title="Association of Chief Police Officers" label="Association of Chief Police Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015021" start="864" end="886" title="William Macpherson (judge)" label="Sir William Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q648413" start="911" end="937" title="murder of Stephen Lawrence" label="murder of Stephen Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792177" start="973" end="998" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Police Medal" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Police Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="1106" end="1119" title="Soham murders" label="Soham murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="1125" end="1139" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="1141" end="1155" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268553" start="1215" end="1231" title="police authority" label="police authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="1314" end="1324" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772214" wikidata="Q4074911" url="?curid=772214" title="Badaling Expressway">
<text>The Badaling Expressway (Simplified Chinese: 八达岭高速公路, Traditional Chinese: 八達嶺高速公路, Hanyu Pinyin: Bādálíng Gāosù Gōnglù) is an expressway in China which links urban Beijing to the Badaling stretch of the Great Wall of China. It continues toward Yanqing and leaves Beijing, becoming the Jingzhang Expressway.

Starting north of Madian Overpass on the Northern 3rd Ring Road, it runs for approximately 50 kilometres in a direction toward Beijing&#x27;s north-west.

The Badaling Expressway gets its name from the Badaling stretch of the Great Wall.

==History==
The expressway was constructed in January 1996 in three stages, culminating in the creation of a 69.98 kilometre long expressway in September 2001.

The previous expressway did not link with the Jingzhang Expressway. After the linking was complete, the stretch to Yanqing and Kangzhuang was opened, and the toll gate at Juyongguan was put out of service soon after.

==Road conditions==
===Warning===
Kilometre sections 49-50 heading out of Beijing are areas where fog may occur. The same applies for the stretch between Shahe and Xisanqi, especially at night. The Valley of Death (see relevant part of this article) is a (potential) speed trap &quot;and&quot; a black spot for traffic accidents. Other speed traps are around the area leaving urban and part of suburban Beijing.

===Tolls===
Tolls are /km as of 5th Ring Road intersection for sections south of the toll gate. (The 5th Ring Road intersection is free only for vehicles heading north toward Badaling.)
The entire stretch north of the 5th Ring Road to Kangzhuang costs (for small passenger cars).

===Lanes===
The expressway is 6 lanes (3 up, 3 down) from Madian - Nankou; and 4 lanes (2 up, 2 down) thereafter.

===Traffic===
Traffic is mainly concentrated in the Madian - Huilongguan section, and the Shangqing Bridge is a traffic bottleneck. It can become potentially slow after Juyongguan (mountainous region).

Long traffic jams can clog up to the extent that the stretch from Madian to Jianxiang can become a three-lane &quot;car park&quot; during rush hour. For the following stretch until the Qinghe Toll Gate, the right part of the expressway can get clogged up with vehicles leaving the expressway. During both rush hour periods, the Huilongguan exit is likely to form a large traffic line.

==Major exits==
Beijing Section: N. 3rd Ring Road, N. 4th Ring Road, N. 5th Ring Road, Huilongguan, N. 6th Ring Road, Changping, Nankou, Badaling, Yanqing.

==Service areas==
Service areas exist for both directions near Xisanqi and near Baige/Changping.

==Connections==
Ring Roads of Beijing: Connects with the N. 3rd Ring Road at Madian, the N. 4th Ring Road at Jianxiang Bridge, the N. 5th Ring Road at Qinghe, and the N. 6th Ring Road at Baige.

Jingzhang Expressway: Becomes the Jingzhang Expressway west of the City Boundary toll gate.

==The Expressway and the Great Wall==

The expressway passes by the Great Wall of China in the Badaling region. As a result, it offers three exits which are linked immediately (or in the vicinity of) with the Great Wall. (Note: All of these exits are in the split section of the expressway heading &quot;out&quot; of Beijing.)

Juyongguan Exit - Exit No. 15: The Great Wall at Juyongguan Pass is linked immediately with the expressway. Juyongguan Pass is a fort which is nearest Beijing the most. A stretch of Great Wall is also next to the Pass.

Shuiguan Exit - Exit No. 16: The Great Wall at Shuiguan is little-known and extremely steep. From the top there is a stretch of the Wall which has yet to be repaired (also known as &quot;the wild Great Wall&quot;). Note: There is no entry back into the expressway; you must proceed by minor routes back to Juyongguan.

Badaling Exit - Exit No. 18: The most famous and most frequented of all three exits is the one at Badaling. After passing a large car park, you head for the Badaling Great Wall, which has been frequented by millions of visitors.

==The &quot;Valley of Death&quot;==

===Valley of Death===
Kilometre sections 50-55 of the expressway into Beijing has what the road sign labels as &quot;serial downgrades&quot;. It actually means that there are continuous curves heading downward, spiralling downward. If one speeds in this section, fatal accidents can occur—and many have, leading to a climbing death toll. It begins right after the first tunnel after the expressway splits at Badaling, entering Beijing.

===Response===
Beijing police authorities enacted a low speed limit of 60 km/h for light-duty vehicles and 40 km/h for lorries. Lorries with questionable brakes and overloaded lorries are forced into a service area. Massive, nearly ubiquitous signposts were put in place, urging people to slow down, and numerous cameras are on permanent lookout for people who drive too quickly. A valley-wide loudspeaker system broadcasts speeders&#x27; vehicle licence numbers, and an electronic display records the licence plate of the speeding vehicle. Those who are caught face heavy fines and licence suspension. According to the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, exceeding 50% of the regulated limit results in loss of driving licence (plus a 2-year waiting period for reapplications) and a fine of (approximately ).

Five speed cameras and a GPRS wireless network for violator data transfer make this system highly effective. There is little tolerance outside of the posted speed limits.

In rare cases, police have reportedly stopped speeders near the disused Juyongguan toll gate.

===Safety and results===
Car safety is also a major feature on this part of the expressway. There are many emergency brake-fail areas, where cars that suffer brake failure can slow down by rolling into an upward hill full of pebbles. There are also &quot;Vehicle Self-Check Lines&quot;, emergency bays where faulty cars can be parked and the car itself checked for any mechanical problems.

No fatal accidents have occurred in the 200 days after the implementation of the new system.

==List of exits==
===Beijing section===
Listed are exits heading north and northwest as of Madian (N. 3rd Ring Road).
Symbols: ↗ = exit (↘ = exit only, → = only when heading for Kangzhuang, ← = only when heading for Madian), ⇆ = main interchange; ¥ = central toll gate, S = service area

* ⇆ 1: &quot;(Interchange with 3rd Ring Road)&quot; N. 3rd Ring Road
* ⇆ 2: &quot;(Interchange with 4th Ring Road)&quot; Beisihuan
* ↗ Anxiang North Road
* ↗ 5: (→, ↘) Qinghe and &quot;999&quot; Station
* ¥ Qinghe Central
* ⇆ 4: &quot;(Interchange with 5th Ring Road)&quot; N. 5th Ring Road &quot;-- exit numbering fell into disarray here&quot;
* ↗ 7: Xisanqi
* S Service Area, Filling Station
* ↗ 8: (→) Huillongguan
* ↗ 9: Bei&#x27;anhe
* ↗ 10: (→) Shahe, Yangfang
* ↗ 11: Xiaotangshan, Baige Road
* ⇆ 12: &quot;(Interchange with 6th Ring Road)&quot; &quot;Mentougou&quot;, Shunyi (N. 6th Ring Road) &quot;-- note: Road connection to Mentougou ✕&quot;
* S Service Area
* ↗ 13A: (→) Science Park
* ↗ 13B: (→) Changping, Ming Tombs
* ↗ 13C: (→) Changping Xiguan
* ↗ 13: (←) Changping, Huairou, Ming Tombs
* ↗ 14: Nankou, Chenzhuang
* ↗ 15: (→) The Great Wall at Juyongguan
* ↗ 16: (→, ↘) The Great Wall at Shuiguan
* ↗ 18: (→, ↘) The Great Wall at Badaling
* ↗ 19: Yanqing
* ↗ 20: Kangzhuang (→) / Kangzhuang, Badaling (←)
* ¥ City Boundary
: Continues as Jingzhang Expressway

== See also ==
* China National Highways
* Expressways of Beijing
* Expressways of China

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4074911" start="4" end="23" title="Badaling Expressway" label="Badaling Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="25" end="43" title="Simplified Chinese" label="Simplified Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="54" end="73" title="Traditional Chinese" label="Traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="84" end="96" title="Hanyu Pinyin" label="Hanyu Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="127" end="137" title="Controlled-access highway" label="expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="141" end="146" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="165" end="172" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q798826" start="180" end="188" title="Badaling" label="Badaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="204" end="223" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q596545" start="245" end="252" title="Yanqing County" label="Yanqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881225" start="286" end="306" title="Jingzhang Expressway" label="Jingzhang Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="359" end="372" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q798826" start="511" end="519" title="Badaling" label="Badaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="535" end="545" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881225" start="755" end="775" title="Jingzhang Expressway" label="Jingzhang Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q596545" start="824" end="831" title="Yanqing County" label="Yanqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063823" start="836" end="846" title="Kangzhuang, Beijing" label="Kangzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330063" start="880" end="890" title="Juyongguan" label="Juyongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11140225" start="1081" end="1086" title="Shahe, Beijing" label="Shahe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1091" end="1098" title="Xisanqi" label="Xisanqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585339" start="1194" end="1204" title="speed trap" label="speed trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="1372" end="1385" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="1558" end="1571" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063823" start="1575" end="1585" title="Kangzhuang, Beijing" label="Kangzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727688" start="1679" end="1685" title="Madian, Beijing" label="Madian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963471" start="1688" end="1694" title="Nankou railway station" label="Nankou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727688" start="1788" end="1794" title="Madian, Beijing" label="Madian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925579" start="1797" end="1808" title="Huilongguan" label="Huilongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488565" start="1826" end="1842" title="Shangqing Bridge" label="Shangqing Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330063" start="1905" end="1915" title="Juyongguan" label="Juyongguan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2015" end="2024" title="Jianxiang" label="Jianxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925579" start="2267" end="2278" title="Huilongguan" label="Huilongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="2361" end="2374" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="2379" end="2392" title="4th Ring Road" label="4th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="2397" end="2410" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925579" start="2412" end="2423" title="Huilongguan" label="Huilongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562949" start="2428" end="2441" title="6th Ring Road" label="6th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q393485" start="2443" end="2452" title="Changping District" label="Changping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963471" start="2454" end="2460" title="Nankou railway station" label="Nankou"/>
<link wikidata="Q798826" start="2462" end="2470" title="Badaling" label="Badaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q596545" start="2472" end="2479" title="Yanqing County" label="Yanqing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2545" end="2552" title="Xisanqi" label="Xisanqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4075401" start="2562" end="2567" title="Baige" label="Baige"/>
<link wikidata="Q393485" start="2568" end="2577" title="Changping District" label="Changping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078163" start="2596" end="2617" title="Ring Roads of Beijing" label="Ring Roads of Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="2640" end="2653" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727688" start="2657" end="2663" title="Madian, Beijing" label="Madian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="2672" end="2685" title="4th Ring Road" label="4th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="2689" end="2705" title="Jianxiang Bridge" label="Jianxiang Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="2714" end="2727" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267839" start="2731" end="2737" title="Qinghe Subdistrict, Beijing" label="Qinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562949" start="2750" end="2763" title="6th Ring Road" label="6th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4075401" start="2767" end="2772" title="Baige" label="Baige"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881225" start="2775" end="2795" title="Jingzhang Expressway" label="Jingzhang Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="2936" end="2955" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119617" start="5059" end="5121" title="Road Traffic Safety Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Road Traffic Safety Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q268756" start="5652" end="5678" title="Runaway truck ramp" label="emergency brake-fail areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727688" start="6121" end="6127" title="Madian, Beijing" label="Madian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="6132" end="6145" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="6349" end="6362" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="6373" end="6386" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="6418" end="6431" title="4th Ring Road" label="4th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="6439" end="6448" title="4th Ring Road" label="Beisihuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267839" start="6486" end="6492" title="Qinghe Subdistrict, Beijing" label="Qinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="6571" end="6584" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q240062" start="6595" end="6608" title="5th Ring Road" label="5th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6670" end="6677" title="Xisanqi" label="Xisanqi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6723" end="6735" title="Huillongguan" label="Huillongguan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6743" end="6756" title="Bei&amp;#x27;anhe" label="Bei&amp;#x27;anhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13662802" start="6776" end="6784" title="Yangfang" label="Yangfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241274" start="6793" end="6805" title="Xiaotangshan, Beijing" label="Xiaotangshan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6807" end="6817" title="Baige Road" label="Baige Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562949" start="6850" end="6863" title="6th Ring Road" label="6th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q185584" start="6877" end="6886" title="Mentougou District" label="Mentougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q393482" start="6894" end="6900" title="Shunyi District" label="Shunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562949" start="6905" end="6918" title="6th Ring Road" label="6th Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q393485" start="7028" end="7037" title="Changping District" label="Changping"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="7039" end="7049" title="Ming Tombs" label="Ming Tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q393485" start="7063" end="7072" title="Changping District" label="Changping"/>
<link wikidata="Q393485" start="7092" end="7101" title="Changping District" label="Changping"/>
<link wikidata="Q121911" start="7103" end="7110" title="Huairou District" label="Huairou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="7112" end="7122" title="Ming Tombs" label="Ming Tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963471" start="7131" end="7137" title="Nankou railway station" label="Nankou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7139" end="7149" title="Chenzhuang, Beijing" label="Chenzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="7166" end="7176" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330063" start="7180" end="7190" title="Juyongguan" label="Juyongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="7210" end="7220" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7224" end="7232" title="Shuiguan" label="Shuiguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="7252" end="7262" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q798826" start="7266" end="7274" title="Badaling" label="Badaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q596545" start="7283" end="7290" title="Yanqing County" label="Yanqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063823" start="7299" end="7309" title="Kangzhuang, Beijing" label="Kangzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063823" start="7316" end="7326" title="Kangzhuang, Beijing" label="Kangzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q798826" start="7328" end="7336" title="Badaling" label="Badaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881225" start="7374" end="7394" title="Jingzhang Expressway" label="Jingzhang Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847533" start="7413" end="7436" title="China National Highways" label="China National Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q785975" start="7439" end="7461" title="Expressways of Beijing" label="Expressways of Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q986648" start="7464" end="7484" title="Expressways of China" label="Expressways of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772221" wikidata="Q1053937" url="?curid=772221" title="Central Pacific Hurricane Center">
<text>The Central Pacific Hurricane Center (CPHC) of the United States National Weather Service is the official body responsible for tracking and issuing tropical cyclone warnings, watches, advisories, discussions, and statements for the Central Pacific region: from the equator northward, 140°W–180°W, most significantly for Hawai‘i. It is the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center (RSMC) for tropical cyclones in this region, and in this capacity is known as RSMC Honolulu.

Based in Honolulu, Hawaii, the CPHC is co-located with the National Weather Service&#x27;s Honolulu forecast office on the campus of the University of Hawaii at Mānoa. The Honolulu forecast office activates the CPHC when tropical cyclones form in, or move into, the Central Pacific region. The CPHC replaced the previous forecaster, the Joint Hurricane Warning Center, starting in the 1970 season.

== Area of responsibility ==

The CPHC&#x27;s area of responsibility is the Central Pacific (CP) region, which is an administrative region, not a meteorological one. It is not a tropical cyclone basin (a distinct area where cyclones form), but is still often referred to as the Central Pacific &quot;basin&quot; or Central North Pacific &quot;basin&quot;. The western edge of the area of responsibility, 180°W, is formally the antimeridian, though this coincides with the International Date Line for tropical latitudes, and thus these are often conflated. Meteorologically, this region covers the western part of the Eastern Pacific basin and the eastern part of the Western Pacific basin, though administratively the National Hurricane Center is responsible for the Eastern Pacific &quot;basin&quot; east of 140°W, and thus the Eastern Pacific &quot;region&quot; (EP) typically refers to region east of 140°W, not the whole meteorological basin. The region east of 140°W was formerly the responsibility of the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center; like the CPHC, it took responsibility in 1970, but it is now folded into the NHC.

In this area, the hurricane season lasts from June 1 through November 30. Practically, storms may form in the Eastern Pacific region (east or west of 140°W) and move west, possibly affecting Hawaii, or in the Western Pacific basin and move west, possibly affecting Asia. Smaller islands may also be affected, though this region is otherwise very sparsely populated.

==Hurricane naming system==

The Central Pacific Hurricane Center uses traditional Hawaiian names for hurricanes that form within its regional sphere of jurisdiction. It has formed four lists of names to choose from. As soon as all the names are exhausted from the first list, it moves on to the second, then third, then fourth, then back to the first and so on. Unlike the name list in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific, the names do not start at &quot;A&quot; every year. Four names have been retired, Iwa of 1982, Iniki of 1992, Paka of 1997 and Ioke of 2006. They were replaced by Io (which was later changed to Iona), Iolana, Pama and Iopa respectively. The next name to be used from the list is &#x27;Iona&#x27;.

==Forecasting system==
Since the 1990s, the CPHC has used the Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System to create forecasts, advisories, and their associated graphics.

==See also==

* Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC)

== References ==
==External links==
* (merged with the NHC&#x27;s since 2019)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053937" start="4" end="36" title="Central Pacific Hurricane Center" label="Central Pacific Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053937" start="38" end="42" title="Central Pacific Hurricane Center" label="CPHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="51" end="64" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="65" end="89" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="148" end="164" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326212" start="339" end="381" title="Regional Specialized Meteorological Center" label="Regional Specialized Meteorological Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053937" start="460" end="473" title="Central Pacific Hurricane Center" label="RSMC Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="485" end="501" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="613" end="642" title="University of Hawaii at Manoa" label="University of Hawaii at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574130" start="861" end="872" title="1970 Pacific hurricane season" label="1970 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q198782" start="1053" end="1075" title="tropical cyclone basin" label="tropical cyclone basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="1302" end="1314" title="antimeridian" label="antimeridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="1347" end="1370" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1492" end="1513" title="Tropical cyclone basins#Eastern Pacific" label="Eastern Pacific basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1542" end="1563" title="Tropical cyclone basins#Western Pacific" label="Western Pacific basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329523" start="1593" end="1618" title="National Hurricane Center" label="National Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330368" start="1886" end="1918" title="Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center" label="Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="2453" end="2461" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454226" start="2873" end="2884" title="Hurricane Iwa" label="Iwa of 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124214" start="2886" end="2899" title="Hurricane Iniki" label="Iniki of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307507" start="2901" end="2913" title="Typhoon Paka" label="Paka of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190829" start="2918" end="2930" title="Hurricane Ioke" label="Ioke of 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002556" start="3151" end="3196" title="Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System" label="Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142111" start="3278" end="3306" title="Joint Typhoon Warning Center" label="Joint Typhoon Warning Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772222" wikidata="Q1442877" url="?curid=772222" title="Frank Aydelotte">
<text>Franklin Ridgeway Aydelotte (October 16, 1880 – December 17, 1956) was a U.S. educator. He became the first non-Quaker president of Swarthmore College and between 1921 and 1940 redefined the institution. He was active in the Rhodes Scholar program, helped evacuate intellectuals persecuted by the Nazis during the 1930s and served as director of the Institute for Advanced Study during World War II.

==Early and family life==
Aydelotte was born in a small town in Sullivan County, Indiana, the son of William Ephraim Aydelotte and Matilda Brunger Aydelotte, and had at least one sister. He attended Indiana University where he was an English major, a member of the Sigma Nu fraternity, earned a varsity letter in football, played in the exhibition football games at the 1904 Summer Olympics and graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1911. In 1907 he married Marie Jeanette Osgood. Their only child was William Osgood Aydelotte.

==Career==

After graduation, he became an English professor first at a teaching college in California, Pennsylvania, now called California University of Pennsylvania, then at Vincennes University and Louisville Male High School in Louisville, Kentucky. He became one of the first Rhodes Scholars and studied at Brasenose College, Oxford University. Aydelotte was the American Secretary to the Rhodes Trust from 1918 to 1952, overseeing the American program of the Rhodes Scholarship. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1923.

===President of Swarthmore College===

By 1921, Aydelotte was president of Swarthmore College where he successfully blended the educational processes he learned at Oxford with the traditional Hicksite Quaker values the college was founded on. He expanded the college to an economically viable size and developed a broad-based liberal arts educational curriculum that stressed academic excellence.

He introduced the Honors program at Swarthmore, based on his experiences at Oxford. Based on the premise that the only true education is self-education, the system created seminar courses for selected students that were more challenging than the regular curriculum. These students would not receive grades or examinations, but took oral examinations at the end of the senior year given by external examiners. This replaced the lecture method of teaching for the advanced students, and introduced the notion of the students reaching the faculty. This method of teaching has become the signature of a Swarthmore College education.

===Institute for Advanced Study===

Upon retiring from Swarthmore in 1940, Aydelotte directed the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, during and immediately after World War II (1940-1947). He had served on the Board of Directors since 1930. Soon after his arrival, he engineered the relocation at Princeton of the Economic and Financial Organization of the League of Nations. During Aydelotte&#x27;s time as the Institute&#x27;s director, notable faculty included: Albert Einstein, Kurt Gödel, John von Neumann and James Waddell Alexander II. 

Aydelotte was a member of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry that recommended Britain allow significantly more Jews to emigrate to Mandatory Palestine after World War II. In his diary, he wrote: “I left Washington pretty strongly anti-Zionist... But when you see at first hand what these Jews have done in Palestine... the greatest creative effort in the modern world. The Arabs are not equal to anything like it and would destroy all that the Jews have done... This we must not let them do.” However he also was clear in his opposition to the partition of Palestine and his support for equal rights for Arabs and Jews in Palestine. 

==Publications==
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Elizabethan Rogues and Vagabonds&quot;, Clarendon Press (1913)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;The Religion of Punch&quot;, The Nation, Volume 100, Issue # 2601, (May 6, 1915)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;The Oxford Stamp and Other Essays and Articles&quot;, Oxford University Press (1917)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;What the Americans Rhodes Scholar gets from Oxford&quot;, s.n (1920)
*Lawrence A. Crosby and Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Oxford of today: A manual for prospective Rhodes scholars&quot;, Oxford University Press (1922)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Honors Courses in American Colleges and Universities&quot;, National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences (1924)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Honors Courses at Swarthmore&quot;, Columbia (1931) 
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;The Educational Program of Swarthmore College&quot;, The College (1933)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Elizabethan Seamen in Mexico and Ports of the Spanish Main&quot;, The American Historical Review, Vol. 48, No. 1. (Oct., 1942), pp. 1–19. URL: JSTOR Stable
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;Breaking the Adademic Lock Step, The Development of Honors Work in American Colleges and Universities&quot;, Harper &amp; Brothers (1944)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;The American Rhodes Scholarships: A Review of the First Forty Years&quot;, Princeton University Press (1946)
*Frank Aydelotte, &quot;The Vision of Cecil Rhodes, A Review of the First Forty Years of the American Scholarships&quot;, Geoffrey Cumberlege (1946)

==Death and legacy==
Aydelotte died in Princeton, New Jersey, on December 17, 1956, after several years of failing health. His papers are held by a library. His niece (who attended Swarthmore during his tenure), Mary A. R. Marshall became a leader opposing Massive Resistance and an influential delegate in the Virginia General Assembly.

==References==
*&quot;An adventure in education; Swarthmore College under Frank Aydelotte&quot;, Macmillan, (New York, 1941)
*Frances Blanshard, &quot;Frank Aydelotte of Swarthmore&quot;, Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, Ct. (1970) 
*Dan West, Nancy Harrison, Frank Aydelotte: Architect of Distinction - Swarthmore College Bulletin
*Bibliography for Frank Aydelotte story
*Frank Aydelotte 

==Further reading==
* Michael G. Moran. &quot;Frank Aydelotte and the Oxford Approach to English Studies in America, 1908-1940&quot;. University Press of America, 2006.
* Michael G. Moran. &quot;The Road Not Taken: Frank Aydelotte and the Thought Approach to Engineering Writing.&quot; &quot;Technical Communication Quarterly&quot; 2.2 (1993): 161-75.
* Michael G. Moran. &quot;Frank Aydelotte: AT&amp;T&#x27;s First Writing Consultant, 1917-1918.&quot; &quot;Journal of Technical Writing and Communication&quot; 25.3 (1995): 231-241.
* Ann Rinn. &quot;Rhodes Scholarships, Frank Aydelotte, and Collegiate Honors Education. &quot;Journal of the National Collegiate Honors Council&quot;, Spring/Summer 2003: 27-39; Online at http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/nchcjournal/127

==External links==
* Frank Aydelotte Papers, 1905–1956, Swarthmore College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1442877" start="0" end="27" title="Frank Aydelotte" label="Franklin Ridgeway Aydelotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="73" end="77" title="United States of America" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="112" end="118" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="132" end="150" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="225" end="239" title="Rhodes Scholar" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="350" end="378" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="386" end="398" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q426746" start="465" end="489" title="Sullivan County, Indiana" label="Sullivan County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="600" end="618" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483553" start="666" end="674" title="Sigma Nu" label="Sigma Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="771" end="791" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="806" end="820" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016265" start="893" end="917" title="William O. Aydelotte" label="William Osgood Aydelotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134176" start="1012" end="1036" title="California, Pennsylvania" label="California, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021159" start="1049" end="1086" title="California University of Pennsylvania" label="California University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526468" start="1096" end="1116" title="Vincennes University" label="Vincennes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689505" start="1121" end="1148" title="Louisville Male High School" label="Louisville Male High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="1152" end="1172" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1201" end="1216" title="Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q899030" start="1232" end="1249" title="Brasenose College" label="Brasenose College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1251" end="1268" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429605" start="1310" end="1326" title="the Rhodes Trust" label="the Rhodes Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1385" end="1403" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1427" end="1457" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="1543" end="1561" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q371260" start="1660" end="1668" title="Elias Hicks" label="Hicksite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1669" end="1675" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="2594" end="2621" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute of Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="2625" end="2646" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191823" start="2828" end="2888" title="Economic and Financial Organization of the League of Nations" label="Economic and Financial Organization of the League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2979" end="2994" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="2996" end="3006" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="3008" end="3024" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q723607" start="3029" end="3055" title="James Waddell Alexander II" label="James Waddell Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q541328" start="3089" end="3124" title="Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry" label="Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="3195" end="3214" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3299" end="3306" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="3437" end="3442" title="Palestinian Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29021430" start="5416" end="5435" title="Mary A. R. Marshall" label="Mary A. R. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="5461" end="5479" title="Massive Resistance" label="Massive Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="5515" end="5540" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772224" wikidata="Q5480067" url="?curid=772224" title="Francis Ayer">
<text>Francis Wayland Ayer (February 4, 1848March 5, 1923) was an American advertising businessman.

==Biography==
Ayer was born on February 4, 1848, to Nathaniel Wheeler Ayer and Joanna B. Wheeler in Lee, Massachusetts, though he was raised in western New York. Ayer&#x27;s mother died when he was three years old, and his father remarried Harriett Amanda Post. Ayer taught in district schools and spent one year studying at the University of Rochester before moving to Philadelphia. There he was hired by a religious newspaper for the position of an advertising solicitor, but by 1867 he founded the company N. W. Ayer &amp; Son, which he named after his father to give a degree of longevity and credibility to the business. Besides himself, he began with only a bookkeeper and US$25. 

In 1873 his father Nathaniel died. Two years later, May 5, 1875, he married his first wife, Rhandera Gilman. They had two daughters together. That same year he introduced the &quot;open contract&quot;.

In 1914 his first wife died, and five years later he remarried to Martha K. Lawson, on April 21, 1919.

Francis Ayer died from pneumonia at his country home at Meredith, New York on March 5, 1923, and was buried at Laurel Hill Cemetery.

==References==

*Ingham, John N. &quot;Biographical Dictionary of American Business Leaders A-G&quot;. Greenwook Publishing Group, 1983. p. 31-32
* 1860 U.S. census, population schedule. NARA microfilm publication M653, 1,438 rolls. Washington, D.C.: National Archives and Records Administration, n.d.

==External links==
*Biography at the Center for Interactive Advertising</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5480067" start="0" end="20" title="Francis Ayer" label="Francis Wayland Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="195" end="213" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="247" end="255" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="424" end="447" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="465" end="477" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869335" start="604" end="624" title="N. W. Ayer &amp;amp; Son" label="N. W. Ayer &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708223" start="1146" end="1164" title="Meredith, New York" label="Meredith, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499849" start="1201" end="1221" title="Laurel Hill Cemetery" label="Laurel Hill Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772241" wikidata="Q1327941" url="?curid=772241" title="Hurwitz quaternion">
<text>In mathematics, a [[Adolf Hurwitz|Hurwitz]] quaternion (or Hurwitz integer) is a quaternion whose components are &quot;either&quot; all integers &quot;or&quot; all half-integers (halves of odd integers; a mixture of integers and half-integers is excluded). The set of all Hurwitz quaternions is

:formula_1

That is, either &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;d&quot; are all integers, or they are all half-integers.
&quot;H&quot; is closed under quaternion multiplication and addition, which makes it a subring of the ring of all quaternions H. Hurwitz quaternions were introduced by .

A Lipschitz quaternion (or Lipschitz integer) is a quaternion whose components are all integers. The set of all Lipschitz quaternions

:formula_2

forms a subring of the Hurwitz quaternions &quot;H&quot;. Hurwitz integers have the advantage over Lipschitz integers that it is possible to perform Euclidean division on them, obtaining a small remainder.

Both the Hurwitz and Lipschitz quaternions are examples of noncommutative domains which are not division rings.

==Structure of the ring of Hurwitz quaternions==

As an additive group, &quot;H&quot; is free abelian with generators It therefore forms a lattice in R4. This lattice is known as the &quot;F&quot;4 lattice since it is the root lattice of the semisimple Lie algebra &quot;F&quot;4. The Lipschitz quaternions &quot;L&quot; form an index 2 sublattice of &quot;H&quot;.

The group of units in &quot;L&quot; is the order 8 quaternion group The group of units in &quot;H&quot; is a nonabelian group of order 24 known as the binary tetrahedral group. The elements of this group include the 8 elements of &quot;Q&quot; along with the 16 quaternions where signs may be taken in any combination. The quaternion group is a normal subgroup of the binary tetrahedral group U(&quot;H&quot;). The elements of U(&quot;H&quot;), which all have norm 1, form the vertices of the 24-cell inscribed in the 3-sphere.

The Hurwitz quaternions form an order (in the sense of ring theory) in the division ring of quaternions with rational components. It is in fact a maximal order; this accounts for its importance. The Lipschitz quaternions, which are the more obvious candidate for the idea of an &quot;integral quaternion&quot;, also form an order. However, this latter order is not a maximal one, and therefore (as it turns out) less suitable for developing a theory of left ideals comparable to that of algebraic number theory. What Adolf Hurwitz realised, therefore, was that this definition of Hurwitz integral quaternion is the better one to operate with. For a non-commutative ring such as H, maximal orders need not be unique, so one needs to fix a maximal order, in carrying over the concept of an algebraic integer.

==The lattice of Hurwitz quaternions==

The (arithmetic, or field) norm of a Hurwitz quaternion , given by , is always an integer. By a theorem of Lagrange every nonnegative integer can be written as a sum of at most four squares. Thus, every nonnegative integer is the norm of some Lipschitz (or Hurwitz) quaternion. More precisely, 
the number &quot;c&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) of Hurwitz quaternions of given positive norm &quot;n&quot; is 24 times the sum of the odd divisors of &quot;n&quot;. The generating function of the numbers &quot;c&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) is given by the level 2 weight 2 modular form
:formula_3 
where 
:formula_4
and
:formula_5
is the weight 2 level 1 Eisenstein series (which is a quasimodular form) and &quot;σ&quot;1(&quot;n&quot;) is the sum of the divisors of &quot;n&quot;.

==Factorization into irreducible elements==

A Hurwitz integer is called irreducible if it is not 0 or a unit and is not a product of non-units. 
A Hurwitz integer is irreducible if and only if its norm is a prime number. The irreducible quaternions are sometimes called prime quaternions, but this can be misleading as they are not primes in the usual sense of commutative algebra: it is possible for an irreducible quaternion to divide a product &quot;ab&quot; without dividing either &quot;a&quot; or &quot;b&quot;. Every Hurwitz quaternion can be factored as a product of irreducible quaternions. This factorization is not in general unique, even up to units and order, because a positive odd prime &quot;p&quot; can be written in 24(&quot;p&quot;+1) ways as a product of two irreducible Hurwitz quaternions of norm &quot;p&quot;, and for large &quot;p&quot; these cannot all be equivalent under left and right multiplication by units as there are only 24 units. However, if one excludes this case then there is a version of unique factorization. More precisely, every Hurwitz quaternion can be written uniquely as the product of a positive integer and a primitive quaternion (a Hurwitz quaternion not divisible by any integer greater than 1). The factorization of a primitive quaternion into irreducibles is unique up to order and units in the following sense: if 
:&quot;p&quot;0&quot;p&quot;1...&quot;p&quot;&quot;n&quot;
and 
:&quot;q&quot;0&quot;q&quot;1...&quot;q&quot;&quot;n&quot;
are two factorizations of some primitive Hurwitz quaternion into irreducible quaternions where &quot;p&quot;&quot;k&quot; has the same norm as &quot;q&quot;&quot;k&quot; for all &quot;k&quot;, then

: formula_6
for some units &quot;u&quot;&quot;k&quot;.

==Division with remainder==
The ordinary integers and the Gaussian integers allow a division with remainder or Euclidean division.

For positive integers &quot;N&quot; and &quot;D&quot;, there is always a quotient &quot;Q&quot; and a nonnegative remainder &quot;R&quot; such that
* &quot;N&quot; = &quot;QD&quot; + &quot;R&quot; where &quot;R&quot; &lt; &quot;D&quot;.
For complex or Gaussian integers &quot;N&quot; = &quot;a&quot; + i&quot;b&quot; and &quot;D&quot; = &quot;c&quot; + i&quot;d&quot;, with the norm N(&quot;D&quot;) &gt; 0, there always exist &quot;Q&quot; = &quot;p&quot; + i&quot;q&quot; and &quot;R&quot; = &quot;r&quot; + i&quot;s&quot; such that
* &quot;N&quot; = &quot;QD&quot; + &quot;R&quot;, where N(&quot;R&quot;) &lt; N(&quot;D&quot;).
However, for Lipschitz integers &quot;N&quot; = (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) and &quot;D&quot; = (&quot;e&quot;, &quot;f&quot;, &quot;g&quot;, &quot;h&quot;) it can happen that N(&quot;R&quot;) = N(&quot;D&quot;). This motivated a switch to Hurwitz integers, for which the condition N(&quot;R&quot;) &lt; N(&quot;D&quot;) is guaranteed.

Many algorithms depend on division with remainder, for example, Euclid&#x27;s algorithm for the greatest common divisor.

==See also==
* Gaussian integer
* Eisenstein integer
* The icosians
* The Lie group F4
* The E8 lattice

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327941" start="18" end="54" title="Hurwitz quaternion" label="[[Adolf Hurwitz|Hurwitz]] quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327941" start="59" end="74" title="Hurwitz quaternion" label="Hurwitz integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="81" end="91" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="136" end="143" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q743139" start="164" end="176" title="half-integer" label="half-integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="189" end="192" title="parity (mathematics)" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="519" end="526" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="534" end="538" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327941" start="558" end="559" title="Hurwitz quaternion" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327941" start="605" end="625" title="Hurwitz quaternion" label="Lipschitz quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327941" start="630" end="647" title="Hurwitz quaternion" label="Lipschitz integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181054" start="899" end="917" title="Euclidean division" label="Euclidean division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049224" start="1016" end="1030" title="noncommutative ring" label="noncommutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851442" start="1031" end="1038" title="domain (ring theory)" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q650741" start="1053" end="1067" title="division ring" label="division rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1135" end="1140" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454111" start="1159" end="1171" title="free abelian group" label="free abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096885" start="1209" end="1216" title="lattice (group)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q869077" start="1253" end="1275" title="F4 lattice" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot;4 lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q534131" start="1292" end="1304" title="root lattice" label="root lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366896" start="1312" end="1334" title="semisimple Lie algebra" label="semisimple Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q869077" start="1335" end="1349" title="F4 (mathematics)" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot;4"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="1441" end="1455" title="group of units" label="group of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="1480" end="1485" title="order of a group" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335680" start="1488" end="1504" title="quaternion group" label="quaternion group"/>
<link wikidata="Q592651" start="1546" end="1562" title="nonabelian group" label="nonabelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913919" start="1588" end="1612" title="binary tetrahedral group" label="binary tetrahedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="1782" end="1797" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q539008" start="1930" end="1937" title="24-cell" label="24-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274197" start="1955" end="1963" title="3-sphere" label="3-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431456" start="1998" end="2003" title="order (ring theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208658" start="2021" end="2032" title="ring theory" label="ring theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q650741" start="2041" end="2054" title="division ring" label="division ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="2075" end="2083" title="rational number" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431456" start="2112" end="2125" title="maximal order" label="maximal order"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="2419" end="2429" title="left ideal" label="left ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="2453" end="2476" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q58809" start="2483" end="2496" title="Adolf Hurwitz" label="Adolf Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049224" start="2615" end="2635" title="non-commutative ring" label="non-commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="2754" end="2771" title="algebraic integer" label="algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999258" start="2818" end="2845" title="field norm" label="(arithmetic, or field) norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q756946" start="2910" end="2929" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="theorem of Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q111124" start="2996" end="3003" title="square (algebra)" label="squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="3240" end="3247" title="divisor" label="divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q870797" start="3368" end="3380" title="modular form" label="modular form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313257" start="3450" end="3467" title="Eisenstein series" label="Eisenstein series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002045" start="3480" end="3497" title="quasimodular form" label="quasimodular form"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="3684" end="3688" title="unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3758" end="3772" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="3787" end="3799" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="3912" end="3918" title="prime element" label="primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="3941" end="3960" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="5385" end="5401" title="Gaussian integer" label="Gaussian integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181054" start="5438" end="5456" title="Euclidean division" label="Euclidean division"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="6524" end="6547" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="6556" end="6579" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="6597" end="6613" title="Gaussian integer" label="Gaussian integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262370" start="6616" end="6634" title="Eisenstein integer" label="Eisenstein integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058942" start="6641" end="6649" title="icosians" label="icosians"/>
<link wikidata="Q869077" start="6666" end="6668" title="F4 (mathematics)" label="F4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662154" start="6675" end="6685" title="E8 lattice" label="E8 lattice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772247" wikidata="Q769793" url="?curid=772247" title="Miedź Legnica">
<text>Miedź Legnica is a professional football club based in Legnica, Poland, that competes in the I liga, following relegation in 2023. Miedź was founded in 1971. 

In 2018, Miedź Legnica achieved promotion to the top flight for the first time in club&#x27;s history. After a three-year absence from the top flight, they were promoted again at the end of the 2021–22 season after winning the league.

== Players ==
=== Current squad ===










===Out on loan===




=== Notable players ===
Had international caps for their respective countries. Players listed in bold represented their countries while playing for Miedź.
;Poland
* Grzegorz Bartczak (2013–2020)
* Andrzej Bledzewski (2011–2015)
* Marcin Burkhardt (2013–2014)
* Łukasz Garguła (2015–2019)
* Jarosław Gierejkiewicz (1991–1992)
* Tomasz Jarzębowski (2010–2011)
* Romuald Kujawa (1999–2001)
* Wojciech Łobodziński (2012–2019)
* Piotr Madejski (2011–2014)
* Mariusz Mowlik (2011–2014)
* Marcin Nowacki (2011–2014)
* Marcin Robak (2002–2005)
* Michał Stasiak (2015–2017)
* Bartosz Ślusarski (2015–2016)
* Łukasz Załuska (2019–2020)
;Albania
* Enkeleid Dobi (2010)
;Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Adnan Kovačević (2024–)

;Cape Verde
* Kadú Alves (2015)
;Chile
* Ángelo Henríquez (2022–2023)
;Curacao
* Jurich Carolina (2021–2024)
;Croatia
* Mladen Bartulović (2017–2018)
;Denmark
* Jens Martin Gammelby (2022)
;Dominican Republic
* Carlos Heredia (2019–2020)
* Carlos Julio Martínez (2021–2023)
;Estonia
* Artjom Artjunin (2016)
* Henrik Ojamaa (2018–2020)
* Artur Pikk (2018–2020)
* Igor Subbotin (2016)
;Equatorial Guinea
* Iban Salvador (2023–2024) 

;Finland
* Petteri Forsell (2016–2017, 2018–2019)
;Haiti
* Kevin Lafrance (2014–2015)
;Latvia
* Valērijs Šabala (2015–2016)
;Lithuania
* Tadas Labukas (2015–2016)
;Luxembourg
* Jan Ostrowski (2019–2020)
;Montenegro
* Nemanja Mijušković (2019–2024)
;Netherlands
* Luciano Narsingh (2022–2023)
;Sweden
* Gustav Engvall (2025–)
;Trinidad and Tobago
* Keon Daniel (2014–2017)

== Honours ==
=== League ===
* I liga
**Champions: 2017–18, 2021–22

=== Cups ===
* Polish Cup
**Winners: 1991–92
* Polish Super Cup
**Runners-up: 1992

=== European competitions ===
:&quot;Miedź Legnica scores are given first in all scorelines.&quot;
== See also ==
* Miedź Legnica II (reserve team)

==References==


==External links==
* Miedź Legnica – 90minut.pl </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q769793" start="0" end="13" title="Miedź Legnica" label="Miedź Legnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="32" end="40" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q106274" start="55" end="62" title="Legnica" label="Legnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="64" end="70" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163046" start="93" end="99" title="I liga" label="I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962991" start="125" end="129" title="2022–23 Ekstraklasa" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q769793" start="131" end="136" title="Miedź Legnica" label="Miedź"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="299" end="309" title="Ekstraklasa" label="top flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354859" start="354" end="368" title="2021–22 I liga" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071230" start="629" end="646" title="Grzegorz Bartczak" label="Grzegorz Bartczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616391" start="661" end="679" title="Andrzej Bledzewski" label="Andrzej Bledzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332303" start="694" end="710" title="Marcin Burkhardt" label="Marcin Burkhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q345578" start="725" end="739" title="Łukasz Garguła" label="Łukasz Garguła"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493204" start="754" end="776" title="Jarosław Gierejkiewicz" label="Jarosław Gierejkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q939569" start="791" end="809" title="Tomasz Jarzębowski" label="Tomasz Jarzębowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q552976" start="853" end="873" title="Wojciech Łobodziński" label="Wojciech Łobodziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196975" start="888" end="902" title="Piotr Madejski" label="Piotr Madejski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766033" start="917" end="931" title="Mariusz Mowlik" label="Mariusz Mowlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757243" start="946" end="960" title="Marcin Nowacki" label="Marcin Nowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570741" start="975" end="987" title="Marcin Robak" label="Marcin Robak"/>
<link wikidata="Q957195" start="1002" end="1016" title="Michał Stasiak" label="Michał Stasiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q809571" start="1031" end="1048" title="Bartosz Ślusarski" label="Bartosz Ślusarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q384172" start="1063" end="1077" title="Łukasz Załuska" label="Łukasz Załuska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379017" start="1101" end="1114" title="Enkeleid Dobi" label="Enkeleid Dobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841919" start="1148" end="1163" title="Adnan Kovačević" label="Adnan Kovačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098221" start="1187" end="1197" title="Kadú Alves" label="Kadú Alves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112164" start="1214" end="1230" title="Ángelo Henríquez" label="Ángelo Henríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972371" start="1254" end="1269" title="Jurich Carolina" label="Jurich Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q978612" start="1293" end="1310" title="Mladen Bartulović" label="Mladen Bartulović"/>
<link wikidata="Q20641155" start="1334" end="1354" title="Jens Martin Gammelby" label="Jens Martin Gammelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q58808581" start="1384" end="1398" title="Carlos Heredia (footballer)" label="Carlos Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660081" start="1413" end="1434" title="Carlos Julio Martínez" label="Carlos Julio Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12359677" start="1458" end="1473" title="Artjom Artjunin" label="Artjom Artjunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q956338" start="1483" end="1496" title="Henrik Ojamaa" label="Henrik Ojamaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q714751" start="1511" end="1521" title="Artur Pikk" label="Artur Pikk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16405487" start="1536" end="1549" title="Igor Subbotin" label="Igor Subbotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811452" start="1578" end="1591" title="Iban Salvador" label="Iban Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894558" start="1617" end="1632" title="Petteri Forsell" label="Petteri Forsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q979558" start="1665" end="1679" title="Kevin Lafrance" label="Kevin Lafrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159992" start="1702" end="1717" title="Valērijs Šabala" label="Valērijs Šabala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345296" start="1743" end="1756" title="Tadas Labukas" label="Tadas Labukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30137153" start="1783" end="1796" title="Jan Ostrowski" label="Jan Ostrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q24701040" start="1823" end="1841" title="Nemanja Mijušković" label="Nemanja Mijušković"/>
<link wikidata="Q313877" start="1869" end="1885" title="Luciano Narsingh" label="Luciano Narsingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114032" start="1908" end="1922" title="Gustav Engvall" label="Gustav Engvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739127" start="1954" end="1965" title="Keon Daniel" label="Keon Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163046" start="2010" end="2016" title="I liga" label="I liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30132264" start="2030" end="2037" title="2017–18 I liga" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354859" start="2039" end="2046" title="2021–22 I liga" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="2063" end="2073" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688760" start="2085" end="2092" title="1991–92 Polish Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="2095" end="2111" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q107638994" start="2248" end="2264" title="Miedź Legnica II" label="Miedź Legnica II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772248" wikidata="Q1028779" url="?curid=772248" title="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón">
<text>Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón ( – 18 October 1526) was a Spanish magistrate and explorer who in 1526 established the short-lived San Miguel de Gualdape colony, one of the first European attempts at a settlement in what is now the United States. Ayllón&#x27;s account of the region inspired a number of later attempts by the Spanish and French governments to colonize the southeastern United States.

== Early life and education ==
Ayllón was born in Toledo around 1480, the younger son of a prominent family whose roots traced back to a high-ranking &quot;mozarab&quot; judge in Islamic Spain. His parents were city councilman Juan Vázquez de Ayllón and Inés de Villalobos. Ayllón received a good education in law and his father&#x27;s position gave him valuable insights into the practice of politics.

== In Hispaniola ==
In 1502, the Spanish Monarchs sent Nicolás de Ovando to serve as governor of Hispaniola in the Indies. Ayllón accompanied Ovando&#x27;s flotilla and arrived at the capital, Santo Domingo, in April 1502. In 1504, Ayllón was appointed &quot;alcalde mayor&quot;, the chief magistrate and administrative officer, of Concepción. Ayllón was expected to establish order in the turbulent gold-mining districts in the hinterlands of the island.

In 1509, Ovando and his lieutenants, including Ayllón, were recalled to Spain and subjected to a &quot;residencia&quot;, a review or audit of their term in office. Ayllón faced charges that he enriched himself unjustly but apparently was able to defend himself successfully with no harm to his career or his wealth. After his return to Spain he undertook additional studies in law and earned the equivalent of a master&#x27;s degree from the University of Salamanca.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand was concerned by his lack of control in the Indies and the growing influence of the new governor, Diego Colón. In 1511 Ferdinand established a royal appeals court, the &quot;Real Audiencia&quot; in Hispaniola. The king demonstrated considerable faith in Ayllón when he appointed him as one of three judges of this court, intended to assert royal power in the colonies. Ayllón reached Hispaniola in May 1512 and quickly became an influential figure in the politics of the island.

Around 1514, Ayllón married Ana de Bezerra, daughter of a wealthy miner, thus gaining wealth and prestige to add to his political power. He also acquired a sugar plantation and funded various slave-trading ventures. Some colonists complained that Ayllón and the other judges were unfairly dominating the slave-market and driving up the price of slaves.

When Ferdinand died in 1516, Cardinal Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros became regent for the young King Charles V. Cisneros was determined to end the abuse of the Indians. He had Ayllón and the other judges of the &quot;audencia&quot; suspended in 1517 and investigated for alleged abuses. However, when Cisneros was removed from the regency, the &quot;residencia&quot; was cut short, and the judges were restored to office in 1520.

== Narváez expedition ==
Even during his suspension, Ayllón remained an influential figure in the Indies. In 1519, after Hernán Cortés began his conquest of Mexico, Cortés declared his independence from Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar, the governor of Cuba and sponsor of the expedition. Fearful that the dispute between Cortés and Velázquez would escalate into open warfare, Crown authorities sent Ayllón first to Cuba to confer with Velázquez and then to Mexico in Pánfilo de Narváez&#x27;s expedition in an attempt to convince both sides to settle their differences in court. When Ayllón reached Mexico, he was forcibly detained by Narváez and sent back to Santo Domingo with nothing to show for his efforts.

== Exploration ==
After Ayllón&#x27;s reinstatement to the &quot;audiencia&quot;, a ship arrived at Santo Domingo sometime around August 1521. The pilot, Francisco Gordillo, had been hired by Ayllón to lead a slaving expedition to the Bahamas. Finding the islands completely depopulated, Gordillo and Pedro de Quexos, pilot of another slaving ship, sailed northwest in search of land rumored to be found in that direction. On June 24, 1521, they made landfall at Winyah Bay on the coast of present-day South Carolina. After some preliminary exploration of the region, they kidnapped sixty Indians and took them back to Hispaniola.

In addition to the Indian slaves, Gordillo and Quexos brought back glowing reports of the land they had found. They said it would not require military conquest and once settled the area would become a rich and prosperous colony. Ayllón was apparently inspired by these reports and soon wrote to the Spanish crown requesting permission to explore and settle the region. Later that same year he traveled to Spain on business for the &quot;audencia&quot; but used the opportunity to personally press his case for the new land. Ayllón took with him one of the captured Indians, who had recently been baptized as Francisco de Chicora. In Spain they met the court chronicler, Peter Martyr, with whom Chicora spoke at length about his people and homeland, and about neighboring provinces.

Ayllón signed a contract with the crown on June 12, 1523, allowing him to establish a settlement on the eastern seaboard and conduct trade with the local natives. He was appointed as governor for life and the title &quot;alguacil mayor&quot; (high sheriff) would be held by him and his heirs forever. In return for these and numerous other privileges, Ayllón was required to perform a more detailed exploration of the region, establish missions, churches, and a Franciscan monastery to support conversion of the native population. He was restrained from implementing an &quot;encomienda&quot; or other means of forcing Indian labor. While still in Spain, Ayllón was also named a &quot;comendador&quot; in the military order of Santiago.

Before returning to Hispaniola, Ayllón was ordered to Puerto Rico. There he was required to complete a number of pending investigations and audits of current and former government officials. From the Crown&#x27;s viewpoint, his efforts were successful in bringing some order to the government on the island and helped put an end to Diego Colón&#x27;s independent authority in the islands.
After an absence of three years, Ayllón returned to Santo Domingo around December 1524 and, per his contract, began organizing an expedition to explore the southeastern coast of North America. He hired Quexos to lead a voyage consisting of two caravels and about sixty crewmen. They set sail in early April 1525, with instructions to explore 200 leagues (640 nautical miles) of coastline, record necessary bearings and soundings, erect stone markers bearing the name of Charles V, and obtain Indians who might serve as guides and interpreters for future voyages. They made their first landfall on May 3, 1525, likely at the Savannah River. From there they continued north until reaching Winyah Bay, the site of their original landing in 1521. It is not clear how much further north Quexos traveled, perhaps as far as Chesapeake Bay. He reported that the coast beyond Winyah Bay was mostly sand dunes and pine scrub. The expedition returned to Santo Domingo in July 1525.

== Establishment of San Miguel de Gualdape and death ==
After Quexos&#x27; return, Ayllón began preparation for a voyage of settlement that he would lead personally. He spent his considerable fortune and incurred debt to outfit the expedition. He assembled a fleet of six vessels carrying about 600-700 passengers and crew. Some women, children and black enslaved people were included among the settlers. Supplies and livestock, including cows, sheep, pigs and a hundred horses, were loaded and the fleet departed in mid-July 1526. The large colonizing group landed in Winyah Bay on August 9, 1526. Their largest ship struck a sandbar and sank. There was no loss of life but a major portion of their supplies was lost. Ayllón ordered a replacement vessel to be built, probably the earliest example of European-style boat building in what is now the United States.

Ayllón looked for a suitable site to establish a settlement at nearby Pawleys Island, but the soil was poor and a sparse Indian population offered little chance for profitable trade. Several reconnaissance parties were sent out to search for better opportunities. Based on their reports, Ayllón decided to move about 200 miles south to a &quot;powerful river&quot;, probably Sapelo Sound in present-day Georgia. Early in September, the healthy men rode to the new site on horseback while the rest traveled by ship. When they reached Sapelo Sound, they began immediately to construct houses and a church.

The short-lived colony of San Miguel de Gualdape was formally established on the festival of Saint Michael, September 29, 1526. It was the first European settlement in the present-day United States. Ayllón&#x27;s rough-hewn town survived less than three months, with settlers enduring exhaustion, cold, hunger, disease, and troubles with the local natives. When Ayllón died on October 18, 1526, from an unnamed illness, the entire enterprise fell apart. The surviving colonists broke into warring factions and by mid-November decided to give up and sail back to Hispaniola. Of the 600-700 people whom Ayllón had brought with him, only 150 survivors reached Hispaniola that winter.

San Miguel de Gualdape was the first European colony in what is now the United States, preceding the unsuccessful colony at Pensacola, Florida, by 33 years, St. Augustine, Florida (the first successful colony) by 39 years, the Roanoke Colony by 61 years, and Jamestown, Virginia, by 81 years. Despite repeated attempts, archaeologists have been unable to locate the site of the town or the shipwreck in Winyah Bay.

==Legacy==
Peter Martyr&#x27;s &quot;Decades of the New World&quot; (1530) and especially Francisco Lopez de Gomara&#x27;s &quot;Historia general de las Indias&quot; (1552) helped spread the story of Ayllón&#x27;s new Andalusia into European lore about exploration. His explorations also contributed to Alonso de Chaves&#x27;s &quot;Espejo de Navegantes&quot; (), Giovanni Vespucci&#x27;s 1526 map and other future Spanish maps.

==See also==
*Hernando de Soto
*Tristán de Luna

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==Further reading==

==External links==
*Short biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1028779" start="0" end="23" title="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón" label="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784722" start="123" end="145" title="San Miguel de Gualdape" label="San Miguel de Gualdape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="444" end="450" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q671082" start="550" end="557" title="mozarab" label="mozarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="573" end="586" title="Islamic Spain" label="Islamic Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="831" end="847" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Spanish Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="853" end="870" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="895" end="905" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="991" end="1004" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663906" start="1057" end="1070" title="alcalde mayor" label="alcalde mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="1130" end="1140" title="La Vega, Dominican Republic" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="1697" end="1720" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="1734" end="1743" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="1842" end="1853" title="Diego Colón" label="Diego Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="1918" end="1932" title="Real Audiencia" label="Real Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="2380" end="2385" title="sugarcane" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="2616" end="2645" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="2674" end="2688" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="King Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="3130" end="3143" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="3154" end="3172" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="conquest of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="3212" end="3238" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40524" start="3471" end="3489" title="Pánfilo de Narváez" label="Pánfilo de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="3952" end="3959" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026651" start="4180" end="4190" title="Winyah Bay" label="Winyah Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="4219" end="4233" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484121" start="4957" end="4977" title="Francisco de Chicora" label="Francisco de Chicora"/>
<link wikidata="Q163381" start="5019" end="5031" title="Peter Martyr d&amp;#x27;Anghiera" label="Peter Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="5708" end="5718" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q757097" start="5850" end="5867" title="order of Santiago" label="order of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q370750" start="6883" end="6897" title="Savannah River" label="Savannah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="7076" end="7090" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230810" start="8166" end="8180" title="Pawleys Island" label="Pawleys Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420936" start="8471" end="8483" title="Sapelo River" label="Sapelo Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784722" start="8727" end="8749" title="San Miguel de Gualdape" label="San Miguel de Gualdape"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="8794" end="8807" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="9507" end="9525" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q487988" start="9540" end="9562" title="St. Augustine, Florida" label="St. Augustine, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="9610" end="9624" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="9642" end="9661" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163381" start="9810" end="9822" title="Peter Martyr d&amp;#x27;Anghiera" label="Peter Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248714" start="9836" end="9860" title="Decades of the New World" label="Decades of the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q721423" start="9889" end="9914" title="Francisco Lopez de Gomara" label="Francisco Lopez de Gomara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141106" start="9928" end="9958" title="Historia general de las Indias" label="Historia general de las Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="10017" end="10026" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064119" start="10163" end="10180" title="Giovanni Vespucci" label="Giovanni Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="10243" end="10259" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q890831" start="10261" end="10276" title="Tristán de Luna" label="Tristán de Luna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772249" wikidata="Q7867000" url="?curid=772249" title="USS Achelous">
<text>USS &quot;Achelous&quot; (ARL-1) was one of 39 tank landing ships converted into landing craft repair ships for service in the United States Navy during World War II. The lead ship in her class, she was named for the Greek god Achelous, the only U.S. Naval vessel to bear the name.

She was laid down as the unnamed LST-10 on 15 August 1942, at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania by the Dravo Corporation; launched on 25 November 1942; sponsored by Mrs. George F. Wolfe, the wife of the chief engineer of Dravo; named Achelous and redesignated ARL-1 on 13 January 1943; and commissioned on 2 April 1943, at Baltimore, Maryland.

==Service history==
&quot;Achelous&quot; held shakedown in Chesapeake Bay, stopped at Norfolk, Virginia, on 22 April, to take on supplies on 28 April, and sailed the same day with a convoy bound for North Africa. She paused in Bermuda from 2–9 May, and arrived in Oran, Algeria on 26 May.

&quot;Achelous&quot; moved to Bizerte, Tunisia, on 1 June, and remained there until 14 July, providing varied services to landing craft. Following the Allied invasion of Sicily, &quot;Achelous&quot; moored at Licata, Sicily from 15 July – 4 August, to perform repair work. She returned to Bizerte, on 15 August, and for the next three days endured two enemy air raids. During the second raid, &quot;Achelous&quot;&#x27; guns assisted in downing two German planes. &quot;Achelous&quot; spent one week in mid-September at Palermo, Sicily. She got underway with convoy UGS 19 on 16 October, reached Port Said, Egypt, on 23 October, and transited the Suez Canal on 25 October. The repair ship then headed for Massawa, Italian Eritrea, where she arrived on 31 October. The next day, she entered a British-owned floating drydock at Massawa. The ship left the drydock on 4 November and got underway for India. She arrived at Calcutta in early December and spent approximately one month providing services in the China Burma India theater.

In early 1944, &quot;Achelous&quot; left India and sailed to the Mediterranean to support operations along the Italian coast. She remained at these duties for seven months. In July, the landing craft repair ship began preparations for the assault on the southern coast of France. In mid-August, she dropped anchor off the French coast and set up a pontoon drydock to service landing craft used in the invasion. These duties occupied her through most of 1944. Late in the year, the repair ship was reassigned to the Pacific Ocean and began her voyage via the Strait of Gibraltar and the Panama Canal to her new area of operations. She transited the Panama Canal on 7 March 1945 and proceeded to Eniwetok, where she arrived on 24 April. &quot;Achelous&quot; then was assigned to support the invasion and occupation of Okinawa, her last combat operation of World War II. Following the War, &quot;Achelous&quot; returned to the west coast. She was placed out of commission in reserve in January 1947, and berthed in the Columbia River Group of the Pacific Reserve Fleet. &quot;Achelous&quot;&#x27; name was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 June 1973, and the ship was sold on 21 January 1974, to Overseas Shipyard, Ltd. of Hong Kong for scrapping.

==Awards==
&quot;Achelous&quot; earned two battle stars for World War II service.

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7867000" start="0" end="32" title="USS Achelous" label="USS &amp;quot;Achelous&amp;quot; (ARL-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229656" start="47" end="64" title="tank landing ship" label="tank landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="127" end="145" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="153" end="165" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="217" end="226" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="227" end="235" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="345" end="355" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305967" start="377" end="394" title="Dravo Corporation" label="Dravo Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="396" end="404" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867000" start="534" end="539" title="USS Achelous" label="ARL-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="564" end="576" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="597" end="616" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="678" end="692" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="705" end="722" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="846" end="853" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="889" end="896" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="939" end="946" title="Bizerte" label="Bizerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1060" end="1066" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1079" end="1085" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q431760" start="1118" end="1124" title="Licata" label="Licata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="1429" end="1436" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1468" end="1481" title="convoy UGS 19" label="convoy UGS 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="1505" end="1514" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="1556" end="1566" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q275635" start="1614" end="1621" title="Massawa" label="Massawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="1631" end="1638" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="1715" end="1731" title="floating drydock" label="floating drydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1805" end="1810" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1827" end="1835" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="1914" end="1931" title="China Burma India" label="China Burma India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2007" end="2020" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="2500" end="2519" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="2528" end="2540" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2758" end="2765" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946066" start="2986" end="3007" title="Pacific Reserve Fleet" label="Pacific Reserve Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="3061" end="3082" title="Naval Vessel Register" label="Naval Vessel Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035234" start="3240" end="3251" title="battle star" label="battle star"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772255" wikidata="Q6525642" url="?curid=772255" title="Leonard Porter Ayres">
<text>Leonard Porter Ayres (September 15, 1879 – October 29, 1946) was an American statistician. He played a central role in developing and analyzing large-scale statistical projects, especially for the Russell Sage Foundation. His best-known work dealt with comprehensive statistical studies of American casualties in the first and second world wars.

==Career==
Ayres was born at Niantic, Conn. His father was A clergymen and journalist, and editor of the &quot;Boston Advertiser.&quot; He studied at Boston University, earning a B.Ph. degree in 1902, A.M. degree in 1909 and Ph.D. degree in 1910. He also attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard University Summer School, and Teachers College, Columbia University (1907–1909).

He began teaching in 1902 as one of the first to carry American ideas and methods to Puerto Rico. There he was appointed superintendent of schools in the districts of Caguas and San Juan, and in 1906 became general superintendent of all the public schools on the island. He founded the Insular Bureau of Statistics.

Returning to live in the United States, Ayres was made head of the division of statistics in the Playground Association of America. Beginning in 1908, he was prominently identified with the work of the Russell Sage Foundation, especially as chairman of the committee in charge of the Backward Children Investigation. He co-authored a highly influential book on &quot;Laggards in Our Schools&quot; (1909) with Luther Halsey Gulick. They argued that the most important causes of retardation were environmental. He continued his studies of intelligence tests, and drafted widely adopted recommendations for yardsticks of student progress on intelligence tests for the elementary schools. Ayres found that curricula were typically fitted for the brightest rather than average student. He found that schools with low withdrawal rates were most efficient and economical. Historian Raymond Callahan has characterized as &quot;mechanical&quot; his methods of dealing with student retardation, elimination, and promotion. Furthermore he largely ignored social and educational factors, and he used non-comparable data.

In 1908-09 Ayres lectured on education at New York University. On behalf of the American Statistical Association in 1915 Ayres became secretary of the Joint Committee on Standards for Graphic Presentation, which was chaired by Willard C. Brinton. In 1917 he was elected as a Fellow of the American Statistical Association.
==United States Army==
On behalf of the Russell Sage Foundation, in April 1917 Ayres organized the Division of Statistics of the Council of National Defense. In October he was assigned responsibility for statistical reporting and analysis for the War Industries Board, the Priorities Committee, and the Allies&#x27; Purchasing Committee. In addition, he provided services to the Army. It had no statistical office until early 1918, when Ayres&#x27;s section came under military auspices and he was made a lieutenant colonel with a staff of fifty. He directed the Statistics Branch of the General Staff, preparing secret reports for them and for the White House. He was the first to apply modern methods of research, analysis, and presentation that he had developed at the foundation. He was assigned to General Pershing in France with a statistical staff of 250 people. His statistical summary, &quot;The War with Germany&quot; (1919), was then and now widely used by historians and analysts. He was assigned a similar role in 1940-42, with the rank of Brigadier General. He retired in 1942 and was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal.

==Cleveland==
In 1920, Ayres moved to Ohio as vice-president and chief economist of the Cleveland Trust Company. He edited a monthly economic review that was full of statistics and widely read nationally among business planners. After making pessimistic analyses of the state of the economy in the late 1920s, for example, he was one of the few economists to argue the October 1929 stock market crash foreshadowed a great depression. In the 1930s he argued in favor of public regulation of banking, minimized the negative side of abandoning the gold standard, and criticized the National Recovery Act, urging instead legislation to stimulate business to price and profit competition. These ideas were explained in his widely read book, The &quot;Economics of Recovery&quot; (1933). He was chairman of the Economic Policy Commission of the American Bankers Association for two terms, 1932-1941 and 1944-1946, and also served as an officer of the American Statistical Association, the American Economic Association, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

==Works==
His writings on educational subjects, besides reports and contributions to periodicals, are:

*&quot;A Course of Study for the Schools of San Juan&quot; (1905)
*&quot;Medical Inspection of Schools&quot;, with Luther H. Gulick (1908)
*&quot;Laggards in our Schools&quot; (1909, 1913)
*&quot;Open Air Schools&quot; (1910)
*&quot;Seven Great Foundations&quot; (1911)
*&quot;Health Work in the Public Schools&quot;, with May Ayres (1915)
*&quot;A Measuring Scale for Ability in Spelling&quot; (1915, republished by Mott Media, Milford, Michigan 1985)
Many of his articles in educational journals have been reprinted, among them, &quot;The Effect of Promotion Rate on School Efficiency&quot; (1913).

==References==
;Attribution

==Further reading==
* &quot;Leonard Porter Ayres.&quot; &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot; (1974). Online
* Glen, John M. et al. &quot;Russell Sage Foundation, 1907-1946&quot; (2 vols. (1947).

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6525642" start="0" end="20" title="Leonard Porter Ayres" label="Leonard Porter Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381762" start="197" end="220" title="Russell Sage Foundation" label="Russell Sage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754850" start="376" end="383" title="Niantic, Connecticut" label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="385" end="390" title="Connecticut" label="Conn."/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="497" end="514" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="615" end="652" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="654" end="672" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691246" start="692" end="729" title="Teachers College, Columbia University" label="Teachers College, Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="829" end="840" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381762" start="1263" end="1286" title="Russell Sage Foundation" label="Russell Sage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q764062" start="1470" end="1490" title="Luther Halsey Gulick" label="Luther Halsey Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2213" end="2232" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q467040" start="2251" end="2283" title="American Statistical Association" label="American Statistical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379795" start="2322" end="2375" title="Joint Committee on Standards for Graphic Presentation" label="Joint Committee on Standards for Graphic Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379795" start="2398" end="2416" title="Willard C. Brinton" label="Willard C. Brinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q467040" start="2460" end="2492" title="American Statistical Association" label="American Statistical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966797" start="2741" end="2761" title="War Industries Board" label="War Industries Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="3605" end="3632" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740314" start="3723" end="3746" title="Cleveland Trust Company" label="Cleveland Trust Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840918" start="4930" end="4946" title="Luther Gulick (physician)" label="Luther H. Gulick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772257" wikidata="Q3430647" url="?curid=772257" title="Richard Cockerill">
<text>Richard Cockerill (born 16 December 1970) is an English rugby union coach and former player and since January 2024 has been the Head Coach of the Georgian National Rugby Team. Prior to this he was the manager of Top 14 side Montpellier. He was the national team&#x27;s interim head coach between Eddie Jones and Steve Borthwick. He played as a hooker, spending the majority of his career at Leicester Tigers where he played 255 games over two spells, he won 27 caps for and was included in the 1999 Rugby World Cup squad. He won five league titles, two European Cups and two domestic cups as a player.

Following his retirement from playing in 2005 Cockerill became Leicester&#x27;s forwards coach, becoming head coach in 2009. He led Leicester to Premiership titles in 2009 and 2010, his first two years in charge, and a third title in 2013. After leaving Leicester he joined Toulon in 2017 on a temporary basis but succeeded in taking them to the final of the 2016-17 Top 14 season where they lost to Clermont.

In 2017 he was named as the head coach of Guinness Pro14 side Edinburgh Rugby, leading them to the Pro 14 playoffs for the first time. He extended his contract in April 2018 to remain as head coach with Edinburgh until 2021.

He left Edinburgh when his contract expired in 2021 and was appointed to Eddie Jones&#x27; coaching staff.

After Eddie Jones, Cockerill was appointed interim England coach in 2022.

==Playing career==

Cockerill was born in Rugby. Joining Leicester Tigers, he established himself as the B of the &quot;ABC club&quot; alongside Graham Rowntree (A) and Darren Garforth (C). Cockerill was an unused replacement for both the 2001 and 2002 Heineken Cup finals.

He made his England debut against Argentina in 1997 and later his first match at Twickenham was as a half-time replacement for the Bath hooker Andy Long in Clive Woodward&#x27;s first match in charge against the Wallabies; Long was young and clearly out of his depth. Cockerill&#x27;s performance earned him a starting place against New Zealand, where he stood up to Norm Hewitt during the haka (see book cover).

A dip in form led him to lose his first choice hooking position at Leicester to Dorian West. He was also dropped from the England side after criticising Woodward in his book entitled &quot;In Your Face&quot;. He subsequently moved to France, but signed again for Leicester for the 2004–05 season.

==Coaching career==

In 2005 he was appointed forwards coach at Leicester Tigers succeeding John Wells.
Cockerill served as acting head coach of Leicester Tigers in the early part of the 2007–08 season before Marcelo Loffreda arrived from Argentina in the wake of the Pumas&#x27; third-place finish in the 2007 Rugby World Cup. He also took over as acting head coach in February 2009 after Heyneke Meyer resigned due to family reasons. On 17 April 2009, Cockerill was confirmed in the head coach role.
On 16 May he guided Leicester to win the Premiership with a 10–9 win over London Irish in the final. A week later they lost in the final of the Heineken cup to Leinster 19–16 in Edinburgh. In the 2009–10 season Cockerill also led The Tigers to a second Premiership title in a row with a win over Saracens at Twickenham.
On 13 December 2016, it was announced that Cockerill was to be fired from his position if he did not &#x27;turn a corner&#x27; and subsequent defeats against various teams along with the players themselves asking for a change. On 2 January 2017 he was sacked after a home loss to Saracens in the Premiership.

Four days later, on 6 January 2017, he found a position with French TOP 14 team Toulon as a member of the coaching team for the 2016-2017 season.

On 20 February 2017, it was announced Cockerill has been appointed as head coach of Edinburgh Rugby for the 2017–18 Pro14 season. Following a downturn in results in the 2020/21 season it was announced in July 2021 that Cockerill would be leaving the club ahead of the 2021/22 season after 4 years in charge. 

On 3 September 2021, Cockerill was announced as &#x27;s new forwards coach, in Eddie Jones&#x27; coaching team.

After Eddie Jones was fired from his England post in December 2022, Cockerill was appointed interim England coach.

At the end of 2023, Cockerill became the head coach of the Georgian national rugby union team.

== Bibliography ==
* Richard Cockerill (with Michael Tanner as a ghost writer) &quot;In Your Face: A Rugby Odyssey&quot; 

==References==
==External links==
*Sporting heroes
*Tigers Coaches 2008–09
*Tigers player profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3430647" start="0" end="17" title="Richard Cockerill" label="Richard Cockerill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="48" end="55" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="56" end="67" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q609885" start="146" end="169" title="Georgia national rugby union team" label="Georgian National Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798" start="212" end="218" title="Top 14" label="Top 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q596985" start="224" end="235" title="Montpellier Hérault Rugby" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="344" end="350" title="Hooker (rugby union)" label="hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="391" end="407" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="494" end="514" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960" start="748" end="759" title="Premiership Rugby" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342711" start="770" end="774" title="2008-09 Premiership Rugby" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134769" start="779" end="783" title="2009-10 Premiership Rugby" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342709" start="837" end="841" title="2012-13 Premiership Rugby" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857064" start="877" end="883" title="RC Toulonnais" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885748" start="962" end="983" title="2016-17 Top 14 season" label="2016-17 Top 14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002" start="1056" end="1070" title="Pro14" label="Guinness Pro14"/>
<link wikidata="Q739613" start="1076" end="1091" title="Edinburgh Rugby" label="Edinburgh Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="1465" end="1470" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="1480" end="1496" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113276" start="1568" end="1583" title="Graham Rowntree" label="Graham Rowntree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016509" start="1592" end="1607" title="Darren Garforth" label="Darren Garforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598750" start="1662" end="1666" title="2001 Heineken Cup Final" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600136" start="1671" end="1675" title="2002 Heineken Cup Final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849136" start="1841" end="1850" title="Andy Long" label="Andy Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q921680" start="1854" end="1868" title="Clive Woodward" label="Clive Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051494" start="2065" end="2076" title="Norm Hewitt" label="Norm Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210843" start="2088" end="2092" title="Haka of the All Blacks" label="haka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037029" start="2192" end="2203" title="Dorian West" label="Dorian West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182710" start="2502" end="2512" title="John Wells (rugby)" label="John Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q841709" start="2597" end="2611" title="2007-08 Guinness Premiership" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q372453" start="2619" end="2635" title="Marcelo Loffreda" label="Marcelo Loffreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2649" end="2658" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="2678" end="2689" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Pumas&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="2716" end="2736" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q496505" start="2800" end="2813" title="Heyneke Meyer" label="Heyneke Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342711" start="2953" end="2964" title="2008–09 Guinness Premiership" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193020" start="2986" end="2998" title="London Irish" label="London Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613940" start="3056" end="3068" title="2009 Heineken Cup Final" label="Heineken cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3090" end="3099" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798" start="3610" end="3616" title="TOP 14" label="TOP 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857064" start="3622" end="3628" title="RC Toulonnais" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885748" start="3670" end="3686" title="2016–17 Top 14 season" label="2016-2017 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q739613" start="3773" end="3788" title="Edinburgh Rugby" label="Edinburgh Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640584" start="3797" end="3810" title="2017–18 Pro14" label="2017–18 Pro14"/>
<link wikidata="Q609885" start="4287" end="4321" title="Georgian national rugby union team" label="Georgian national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="4389" end="4401" title="ghost writer" label="ghost writer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772258" wikidata="Q420098" url="?curid=772258" title="Imidacloprid">
<text>Imidacloprid is a systemic insecticide belonging to a class of chemicals called the neonicotinoids which act on the central nervous system of insects. The chemical works by interfering with the transmission of stimuli in the insect nervous system. Specifically, it causes a blockage of the nicotinergic neuronal pathway. By blocking nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, imidacloprid prevents acetylcholine from transmitting impulses between nerves, resulting in the insect&#x27;s paralysis and eventual death. It is effective on contact and via stomach action. Because imidacloprid binds much more strongly to insect neuron receptors than to mammal neuron receptors, this insecticide is more toxic to insects than to mammals.

From 1999 through , imidacloprid was the most widely used insecticide in the world. Although it is now off patent, the primary manufacturer of this chemical is Bayer CropScience (part of Bayer AG). It is sold under many names for many uses; it can be applied by soil injection, tree injection, application to the skin of the plant, broadcast foliar, or ground application as a granular or liquid formulation, or as a pesticide-coated seed treatment. Imidacloprid is widely used for pest control in agriculture. Other uses include application to foundations to prevent termite damage, pest control for gardens and turf, treatment of domestic pets to control fleas, protection of trees from boring insects, and in preservative treatment of some types of lumber products.

A 2018 review by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) concluded that most uses of neonicotinoid pesticides such as Imidacloprid represent a risk to wild bees and honeybees. In 2022 the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) concluded that Imidacloprid is likely to adversely affect 79 percent of federally listed endangered or threatened species and 83 percent of critical habitats. The pesticide has been banned for all outdoor use in the entire European Union since 2018, but has a partial approval in the United States and some other countries. It still remains in widespread use in other major parts of the world.
==Use==

Imidacloprid is one of the most widely used insecticide in the world. Its major uses include:

* Seed treatment – Imidacloprid is a popular seed treatment insecticide in the world
* Agriculture – Control of aphids, cane beetles, thrips, stink bugs, locusts, and a variety of other insects that damage crops
* Arboriculture – Control of the emerald ash borer, hemlock woolly adelgid, and other insects that attack trees (including hemlock, maple, oak, and birch)
* Home Protection – Control of termites, carpenter ants, cockroaches, and moisture-loving insects
* Domestic animals – Control of fleas (applied to the back of the neck)
* Turf – Control of Japanese beetle larvae (exp. Grubs)
* Gardening – Control of aphids and other pests

When used on plants, imidacloprid, which is systemic, is slowly taken up by plant roots and slowly translocated up the plant via xylem tissue.

===Application to trees===
When used on trees, it can take 30–60 days to reach the top (depending on the size and height) and enter the leaves in high enough quantities to be effective. Imidacloprid can be found in the trunk, the branches, the twigs, the leaves, the leaflets, and the seeds. Many trees are wind pollinated. But others such as fruit trees, linden, catalpa, and black locust trees are bee and wind pollinated and imidacloprid would likely be found in the flowers in small quantities. Higher doses must be used to control boring insects than other types.

===Use in the United States===
The estimated annual use of the compound in US agriculture is mapped by the US Geological Service and shows an increasing trend from its introduction in 1994 to 2014 when it reached . However, use from 2015 to 2019 dropped following concerns about the effect of neonicotinoid chemicals on pollinating insects. In May 2019, the Environmental Protection Agency revoked approval for a number of products containing imidacloprid as part of a legal settlement, although some formulations continue to be available.

==History==
On January 21, 1986, a patent was filed and granted on May 3, 1988, for imidacloprid in the United States (U.S. Pat. No. 4,742,060) by Nihon Tokushu Noyaku Seizo K.K. of Tokyo, Japan. 

On March 25, 1992, Miles, Inc. (later Bayer CropScience) applied for registration of imidacloprid for turfgrass and ornamentals in the United States. On March 10, 1994, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency approved the registration of imidacloprid.

On January 26, 2005, the Federal Register noted the establishment of the &#x27;(Pesticide Tolerances for) Emergency Exemptions&#x27; for imidacloprid. Its use was granted to &quot;Hawaii (for the) use (of) this pesticide on bananas(,) and the States of Minnesota, Nebraska, and North Dakota to use (of) this pesticide on sunflower(s)&quot;. 
=== Registrations ===
Imidacloprid is sold under several brand names, including Confidor (Bayer CropScience India), Marathon (OHP, US).
==Biochemistry==

Imidacloprid is a systemic insecticide, belonging to the class of chloronicotinyl neonicotinoid insecticides. It works by interfering with the transmission of nerve impulses in insects by binding irreversibly to specific insect nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. It is in IRAC group 4A.

As a systemic pesticide, imidacloprid translocates or moves easily in the xylem of plants from the soil into the leaves, fruit, pollen, and nectar of a plant. Imidacloprid also exhibits excellent translaminar movement in plants and can penetrate the leaf cuticle and move readily into leaf tissue.

Since imidacloprid is effective at very low levels (nanogram and picogram), it can be applied at much lower concentrations (e.g., 0.05–0.125 lb/acre or 55–140 g/ha) than other insecticides. The availability of imidacloprid and its favorable toxicity package as compared to other insecticides on the market in the 1990s allowed the EPA to replace more toxic insecticides including the acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, the organophosphorus compounds, and methylcarbamates.

==Toxicology==
Based on laboratory rat studies, imidacloprid is rated as &quot;moderately toxic&quot; on an acute oral basis to mammals and low toxicity on a dermal basis by the World Health Organization and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (class II or III, requiring a &quot;Warning&quot; or &quot;Caution&quot; label). It is rated as an &quot;unlikely&quot; carcinogen and as weakly mutagenic by the U.S. EPA (group E). It is not listed for reproductive or developmental toxicity, but is listed on EPA&#x27;s Tier 1 Screening Order for chemicals to be tested under the Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program (EDSP). Tolerances for imidacloprid residues in food range from 0.02 mg/kg in eggs to 3.0 mg/kg in hops.

===Mammals===
Imidacloprid and its nitrosoimine metabolite (WAK 3839) have been well studied in rats, mice and dogs.

In dogs the LD50 is 450 mg/kg of body weight (i.e., in any sample of medium-sized dogs weighing , half of them would be killed after consuming 5,850 mg of imidacloprid, or about th of an ounce). The acute inhalation LD50 in rats was not reached at the greatest attainable concentrations, 69 milligrams per cubic meter of air as an aerosol, and 5,323 mg a.i./m3 of air as dust.

In mammals, the primary effects following acute high-dose oral exposure to imidacloprid are mortality, transient cholinergic effects (dizziness, apathy, locomotor effects, labored breathing) and transient growth retardation. Exposure to high doses may be associated with degenerative changes in the testes, thymus, bone marrow and pancreas. Cardiovascular and hematological effects have also been observed at higher doses.

The primary effects of longer term, lower-dose exposure to imidacloprid are on the liver, thyroid, and body weight (reduction). Low- to mid-dose oral exposures have been associated with reproductive toxicity, developmental retardation and neurobehavioral deficits in rats and rabbits. Imidacloprid is neither carcinogenic in laboratory animals nor mutagenic in standard laboratory assays.

It is not irritating to eyes or skin in rabbits and guinea pigs.

In humans, similar effects are expected. Primary effects following acute oral ingestion include emesis, diaphoresis, drowsiness and disorientation. 

===Bees===
Imidacloprid is acutely toxic to honeybees: its LD50 ranges from 5 to 70 nanograms per bee. Honeybee colonies vary in their ability to metabolize toxins, which explains this wide range. Imidacloprid is more toxic to bees than the organophosphate dimethoate (oral LD50 152 ng/bee) or the pyrethroid cypermethrin (oral LD50 160 ng/bee). The toxicity of imidacloprid to bees differs from most insecticides in that it is more toxic orally than by contact. The contact acute LD50 is 0.024 μg active ingredient per bee.

In laboratory studies, sublethal levels of imidacloprid have been shown to impair navigation, foraging behavior, feeding behavior, and olfactory learning performance in honeybees (&quot;Apis mellifera&quot;). In general, however, despite the fact that many laboratory studies have shown the potential for neonicotinoid toxicity, the majority of field studies have found only limited or no effects on honeybees.

In bumblebees, exposure to 10 ppb imidacloprid reduces natural foraging behaviour, increases worker mortality and leads to reduced brood development. The probable mechanism is that the mevalonate pathway is substantially downregulated by the chronic imidacloprid exposure, which can help to explain the imidacloprid impairment of the cognitive functions.

===Birds===
Imidacloprid is considered acutely toxic to birds, and to cause avian reproductive toxicity.

In bobwhite quail (&quot;Colinus virginianus&quot;), imidacloprid was determined to be moderately toxic with an 14-day LD50 of 152 mg a.i./kg. It was slightly toxic in a 5-day dietary study with an acute oral LC50 of 1,420 mg a.i./kg diet, a NOAEC of &lt; 69 mg a.i./kg diet, and a LOAEC = 69 mg a.i./kg diet. Exposed birds exhibited ataxia, wing drop, opisthotonos, immobility, hyperactivity, fluid-filled crops and intestines, and discolored livers. In a reproductive toxicity study with bobwhite quail, the NOAEC = 120 mg a.i./kg diet and the LOAEC = 240 mg a.i./kg diet. Eggshell thinning and decreased adult weight were observed at 240 mg a.i./kg diet.

Imidacloprid is highly toxic to four bird species: Japanese quail, house sparrow, canary, and pigeon. The acute oral LD50 for Japanese quail (&quot;Coturnix coturnix&quot;) is 31 mg a.i./kg bw with a NOAEL = 3.1 mg a.i./kg. The acute oral LD50 for house sparrow (&quot;Passer domesticus&quot;) is 41 mg a.i./kg bw with a NOAEL = 3 mg a.i./kg and a NOAEL = 6 mg a.i./kg. The LD50s for pigeon (&quot;Columba livia&quot;) and canary (&quot;Serinus canaria&quot;) are 25–50 mg a.i./kg. Mallard ducks are more resistant to the effects of imidacloprid with a 5-day dietary LC50 of &gt; 4,797 ppm. The NOAEC for body weight and feed consumption is 69 mg a.i./kg diet. Reproductive studies with mallard ducks showed eggshell thinning at 240 mg a.i./kg diet.

According to the European Food Safety Authority, imidacloprid poses a potential high acute risk for both herbivorous and insectivorous birds. Chronic risk has not been well established.

A 2014 observational study conducted in the Netherlands correlated declines in some bird populations with environmental imidacloprid residues, although it stopped short of concluding that the association was causal.

===Aquatic life===
Imidacloprid is highly toxic on an acute basis to aquatic invertebrates, with EC50 values = 0.037 - 0.115 ppm. It is also highly toxic to aquatic invertebrates on a chronic basis (effects on growth and movement): NOAEC/LOAEC = 1.8/3.6 ppm in daphnids; NOAEC = 0.001 in &quot;Chironomus&quot; midge, and NOAEC/LOAEC = 0.00006/0.0013 ppm in mysid shrimp.

Its toxicity to fish is relatively low; however, the EPA has requested review of secondary effects on fish with food chains that include sensitive aquatic invertebrates. Research published in 2018 demonstrated accumulation of imidacloprid in the blood of rainbow trout, contradicting claims from Bayer that persistence (bioaccumulation) does not occur with imidacloprid.

===Plant life===
Imidacloprid has been shown to turn off some genes that some rice varieties use to produce defensive chemicals. While imidacloprid is used for control of the brown planthopper and other rice pests, there is evidence that imidacloprid actually increases the susceptibility of the rice plant to planthopper infestation and attacks.
Imidacloprid has been shown to increase the rate of photosynthesis in upland cotton at temperatures above 36 degrees Celsius (97 degrees Fahrenheit).
==Environmental fate==

The main routes of dissipation of imidacloprid in the environment are aqueous photolysis (half-life = 1–4 hours) and plant uptake. The major photometabolites include imidacloprid desnitro, imidacloprid olefine, imidacloprid urea, and five minor metabolites. The end product of photodegradation is 6-chloronicotinic acid (6-CNA) and ultimately carbon dioxide. Since imidacloprid has a low vapor pressure, it normally does not volatilize readily.

Although imidacloprid breaks down rapidly in water in the presence of light, it remains persistent in water in the absence of light. It has a water solubility of .61 g/L, which is relatively high. In the dark, at pH between 5 and 7, it breaks down very slowly, and at pH 9, the half-life is about 1 year. In soil under aerobic conditions, imidacloprid is persistent with a half-life of the order of 1–3 years. On the soil surface, the half-life is 39 days. Major soil metabolites include imidacloprid nitrosimine, imidacloprid desnitro and imidacloprid urea, which ultimately degrade to 6-chloronicotinic acid, CO2, and bound residues. 6-Chloronicotinic acid is recently shown to be mineralized via a nicotinic acid (vitamin B3) pathway in a soil bacterium.

In soil, imidacloprid strongly binds to organic matter. When not exposed to light, imidacloprid breaks down slowly in water, and thus has the potential to persist in groundwater for extended periods. However, in a survey of groundwater in areas of the United States which had been treated with imidacloprid for the emerald ash borer, imidacloprid was usually not detected. When detected, it was present at very low levels, mostly at concentrations less than 1 part per billion (ppb) with a maximum of 7 ppb, which are below levels of concern for human health. The detections have generally occurred in areas with porous rocky or sandy soils with little organic matter, where the risk of leaching is high — and/or where the water table was close to the surface.

Based on its high water solubility (0.5-0.6 g/L) and persistence, both the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Pest Management Regulatory Agency in Canada consider imidacloprid to have a high potential to run off into surface water and to leach into ground water and thus warn not to apply it in areas where soils are permeable, particularly where the water table is shallow.

According to standards set by the environmental ministry of Canada, if used correctly (at recommended rates, without irrigation, and when heavy rainfall is not predicted), imidacloprid does not characteristically leach into the deeper soil layers despite its high water solubility (Rouchaud et al. 1994; Tomlin 2000; Krohn and Hellpointner 2002). In a series of field trials conducted by Rouchaud et al. (1994, 1996), in which imidacloprid was applied to sugar beet plots, it was consistently demonstrated that no detectable leaching of imidacloprid to the 10–20 cm soil layer occurred. Imidacloprid was applied to a corn field in Minnesota, and no imidacloprid residues were found in sample column segments below the 0–15.2 cm depth segment (Rice et al. 1991, as reviewed in Mulye 1995).

However, a 2012 water monitoring study by the state of California, performed by collecting agricultural runoff during the growing seasons of 2010 and 2011, found imidacloprid in 89% of samples, with levels ranging from 0.1 to 3.2 μg/L. 19% of the samples exceeded the EPA threshold for chronic toxicity for aquatic invertebrates of 1.05 μg/L. The authors also point out that Canadian and European guidelines are much lower (0.23 μg/L and 0.067 μg/L, respectively) and were exceeded in 73% and 88% of the samples, respectively. The authors concluded that &quot;imidacloprid commonly moves offsite and contaminates surface waters at concentrations that could harm aquatic invertebrates&quot;.
== Regulation ==

=== European Union ===

In the mid to late 1990s, French beekeepers reported a significant loss of bees, which they attributed to the use of imidacloprid. In 1999, the French Minister of Agriculture suspended the use of imidacloprid on sunflower seeds and appointed a team of expert scientists to examine the impact of imidacloprid on bees. In 2003, this panel issued a report which concluded that imidacloprid posed a significant risk to bees. In 2004, the French Minister of Agriculture suspended the use of imidacloprid as a seed treatment for sunflowers and maize (corn). Certain imidacloprid seed treatments were also temporarily banned in Italy, following preliminary monitoring studies that identified correlations between bee losses and the use of neonicotinoid pesticides.

In January 2013, a European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) report concluded that neonicotinoids posed an unacceptably high risk to bees: &quot;A high acute risk to honey bees was identified from exposure via dust drift for the seed treatment uses in maize, oilseed rape and cereals. A high acute risk was also identified from exposure via residues in nectar and/or pollen.&quot; The EFSA also identified a number of gaps in the scientific evidence and were unable to finalize risk assessments for some uses authorized in the European Union (EU). Following the report, EU member states voted to restrict the use of the three main neonics, including imidacloprid, for seed treatment, soil application (granules) and foliar treatment in crops attractive to bees.

In February 2018, the European Food Safety Authority published a further report concluding that neonicotinoids posed a serious danger to bees. In April 2018, the member states of the EU decided to ban the neonicotinoids for all outdoor uses.

=== United States ===
On July 1, 2022, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the United States banned commercial sales of imidacloprid and other neonicotinoids acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, thiacloprid, and thiamethoxam to the general public for all outdoor uses. Licensed dealers will be able to sell only to pesticide-licensed and certified individuals. The states of Maryland, Connecticut and Vermont also restrict use of neonicotinoid pesticides. 

==See also==
*Insecticide
*Neonicotinoid
*Pesticide toxicity to bees

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420098" start="0" end="12" title="Imidacloprid" label="Imidacloprid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="27" end="38" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="84" end="97" title="neonicotinoid" label="neonicotinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="116" end="138" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="290" end="302" title="Nicotinic" label="nicotinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="333" end="365" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="390" end="403" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="409" end="421" title="neurotransmitter" label="transmitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="622" end="631" title="Receptor (biochemistry)" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="670" end="681" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="885" end="902" title="Bayer CropScience" label="Bayer CropScience"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="912" end="920" title="Bayer" label="Bayer AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q12877084" start="1003" end="1017" title="tree injection" label="tree injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q252666" start="1159" end="1173" title="seed treatment" label="seed treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="1516" end="1546" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="1685" end="1730" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1960" end="1974" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q252666" start="2280" end="2294" title="seed treatment" label="seed treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="2347" end="2352" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239580" start="2355" end="2366" title="cane beetle" label="cane beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185628" start="2369" end="2375" title="thrips" label="thrips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270185" start="2377" end="2386" title="Halyomorpha halys" label="stink bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="2389" end="2395" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q127213" start="2449" end="2462" title="Arboriculture" label="Arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960177" start="2480" end="2497" title="emerald ash borer" label="emerald ash borer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712309" start="2499" end="2521" title="hemlock woolly adelgid" label="hemlock woolly adelgid"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="2570" end="2577" title="Hemlock tree" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="2579" end="2584" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="2586" end="2589" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="2595" end="2600" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="2633" end="2640" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q157875" start="2643" end="2656" title="carpenter ant" label="carpenter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="2659" end="2668" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q388162" start="2732" end="2736" title="flea" label="flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683382" start="2792" end="2807" title="Japanese beetle" label="Japanese beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="2853" end="2858" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="2976" end="2988" title="Translocation (botany)" label="translocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="3006" end="3011" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4279" end="4305" title="Nihon Tokushu Noyaku Seizo" label="Nihon Tokushu Noyaku Seizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="5098" end="5106" title="systemic effect" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="5162" end="5175" title="neonicotinoid" label="neonicotinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="5308" end="5341" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptors" label="nicotinic acetylcholine receptors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5352" end="5356" title="Insecticide Resistance Action Committee#Table of modes of action and classes of insecticide" label="IRAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="5406" end="5418" title="Translocation (botany)" label="translocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6317" end="6342" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="6351" end="6396" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="6517" end="6527" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895" start="6600" end="6612" title="reproductive" label="reproductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="6616" end="6629" title="developmental" label="developmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="6865" end="6869" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299024" start="7189" end="7194" title="Acute toxicity" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="7195" end="7205" title="inhalation" label="inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="7206" end="7210" title="LD50" label="LD50"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="8222" end="8228" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="8234" end="8244" title="guinea pig" label="guinea pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="8344" end="8350" title="emesis" label="emesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="8352" end="8363" title="diaphoresis" label="diaphoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="8365" end="8375" title="drowsiness" label="drowsiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937869" start="8380" end="8394" title="disorientation" label="disorientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="8639" end="8654" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421371" start="8655" end="8665" title="dimethoate" label="dimethoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745766" start="8696" end="8706" title="pyrethroid" label="pyrethroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412024" start="8707" end="8719" title="cypermethrin" label="cypermethrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299024" start="8873" end="8878" title="Acute toxicity" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="8879" end="8883" title="LD50" label="LD50"/>
<link wikidata="Q142651" start="9801" end="9815" title="Northern bobwhite" label="bobwhite quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="9917" end="9921" title="LD50" label="LD50"/>
<link wikidata="Q445205" start="10040" end="10045" title="NOAEC" label="NOAEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q445205" start="10344" end="10349" title="LOAEC" label="LOAEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q716869" start="10583" end="10597" title="Japanese quail" label="Japanese quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="10705" end="10718" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42326" start="10841" end="10847" title="rock dove" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192524" start="10894" end="10909" title="Serinus canaria" label="Serinus canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="10939" end="10946" title="Mallard" label="Mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="11313" end="11324" title="Herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="11329" end="11342" title="Insectivore" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299024" start="11666" end="11671" title="Acute toxicity" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="11689" end="11701" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286136" start="11709" end="11713" title="EC50" label="EC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114007" start="11796" end="11803" title="Chronic toxicity" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q445205" start="11844" end="11849" title="NOAEC" label="NOAEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q445205" start="11850" end="11855" title="LOAEC" label="LOAEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="11873" end="11880" title="daphnid" label="daphnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704714" start="11906" end="11916" title="Chironomus" label="Chironomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411080" start="11970" end="11982" title="mysid shrimp" label="mysid shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="12097" end="12107" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="12948" end="12955" title="aqueous" label="aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="12956" end="12966" title="photolysis" label="photolysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13044" end="13065" title="imidacloprid desnitro" label="imidacloprid desnitro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13067" end="13087" title="imidacloprid olefine" label="imidacloprid olefine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="13266" end="13280" title="vapor pressure" label="vapor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="13303" end="13313" title="Volatility (chemistry)" label="volatilize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960177" start="14398" end="14415" title="emerald ash borer" label="emerald ash borer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171454" start="14965" end="14998" title="Pest Management Regulatory Agency" label="Pest Management Regulatory Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="17532" end="17562" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18036" end="18050" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="18225" end="18231" title="foliar" label="foliar"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="18294" end="18324" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="18368" end="18382" title="neonicotinoids" label="neonicotinoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="18409" end="18412" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q421598" start="18674" end="18685" title="acetamiprid" label="acetamiprid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419355" start="18687" end="18699" title="clothianidin" label="clothianidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028468" start="18701" end="18712" title="dinotefuran" label="dinotefuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q416283" start="18714" end="18725" title="thiacloprid" label="thiacloprid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040678" start="18731" end="18743" title="thiamethoxam" label="thiamethoxam"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="18991" end="19002" title="Insecticide" label="Insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="19004" end="19017" title="Neonicotinoid" label="Neonicotinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171498" start="19019" end="19045" title="Pesticide toxicity to bees" label="Pesticide toxicity to bees"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772260" wikidata="Q273392" url="?curid=772260" title="Joyce Chepchumba">
<text>Joyce Chepchumba (born 6 November 1970 in Kericho) is a long distance athlete from Kenya, who won a bronze medal in marathon at the 2000 Summer Olympics.

== Achievements ==
*1995
**Tilburg Ten Miles winner
**Parelloop 10Kwinner 
*1997 
**London Marathon winner
*1998 
**Chicago Marathon winner
*1999 
**London Marathon winner 
**Chicago Marathon winner
**Berlin Half Marathon winner
**Great North Run winner
*2000 
**Tokyo International Women&#x27;s Marathon winner 
**2000 Summer Olympics bronze medallist 
**Berlin Half Marathon winner
*2001
**Berlin Half Marathon winner
*2002
**New York City Marathon winner
*2004
**Lisbon Half Marathon winner
**Berlin Half Marathon winner

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273392" start="0" end="16" title="Joyce Chepchumba" label="Joyce Chepchumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q996730" start="42" end="49" title="Kericho" label="Kericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q917206" start="56" end="69" title="Long-distance track event" label="long distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="70" end="77" title="Athletics (sport)" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="83" end="88" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="132" end="152" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343747" start="182" end="199" title="Tilburg Ten Miles" label="Tilburg Ten Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548072" start="209" end="218" title="Parelloop" label="Parelloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q578794" start="239" end="254" title="London Marathon" label="London Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071822" start="271" end="287" title="Chicago Marathon" label="Chicago Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175275" start="356" end="376" title="Berlin Half Marathon" label="Berlin Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q626188" start="386" end="401" title="Great North Run" label="Great North Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476232" start="418" end="459" title="Tokyo International Women&amp;#x27;s Marathon" label="Tokyo International Women&amp;#x27;s Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="470" end="490" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q873364" start="491" end="503" title="bronze medal" label="bronze medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175275" start="511" end="531" title="Berlin Half Marathon" label="Berlin Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175275" start="547" end="567" title="Berlin Half Marathon" label="Berlin Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752138" start="583" end="605" title="New York City Marathon" label="New York City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122695" start="621" end="641" title="Lisbon Half Marathon" label="Lisbon Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175275" start="651" end="671" title="Berlin Half Marathon" label="Berlin Half Marathon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772261" wikidata="Q905957" url="?curid=772261" title="Biodiesel production">
<text>Biodiesel production is the process of producing the biofuel, biodiesel, through the chemical reactions of transesterification and esterification. This process renders a product (chemistry) and by-products.

The fats and oils react with short-chain alcohols (typically methanol or ethanol). The alcohols used should be of low molecular weight. Ethanol is the most used because of its low cost, however, greater conversions into biodiesel can be reached using methanol. Although the transesterification reaction can be catalyzed by either acids or bases, the base-catalyzed reaction is more common. This path has lower reaction times and catalyst cost than those acid catalysis. However, alkaline catalysis has the disadvantage of high sensitivity to both water and free fatty acids present in the oils.

== Biorefinery process steps ==

The major steps required to synthesize biodiesel are as follows:

=== Feedstock pretreatment ===
*Feedstock
**Microbial oil
***Oleaginous microorganism
**Palm oil
**Soybean oil
**Coconut oil
**Vegetable fats and oils
**Jatropha
**Animal fat
**Waste oil

Common feedstock used in biodiesel production include:
*Yellow grease (recycled vegetable oil)
*Vegetable oil fuel
*Tallow

Lignocellulose generates byproducts that act as enzyme inhibitors, such as acetic acid, furfural, formic acid, vanillin, and these chemical inhibitors affect cell growth.

Recycled oil is processed to remove impurities from cooking, storage, and handling, such as dirt, charred food, and water. Virgin oils are refined, but not to a food-grade level. Degumming to remove phospholipids and other plant matter is common, though refinement processes vary. Water is removed because its presence during base-catalyzed transesterification results in the saponification (hydrolysis) of the triglycerides, producing soap instead of biodiesel.

A sample of the cleaned feedstock is then tested via titration against a standardized base solution, to determine the concentration of free fatty acids present in the vegetable oil sample. The acids are then either removed (typically through neutralization), or are esterified to produce biodiesel (or glycerides).

=== Reactions ===
Base-catalyzed transesterification reacts lipids (fats and oils) with alcohol (typically methanol or ethanol) to produce biodiesel and an impure coproduct, glycerol. If the feedstock oil is used or has a high acid content, acid-catalyzed esterification can be used to react fatty acids with alcohol to produce biodiesel. Other methods, such as fixed-bed reactors, supercritical reactors, and ultrasonic reactors, forgo or decrease the use of chemical reaction that reduces the quality of substance in chemistry.

=== Product purification ===

Products of the reaction include not only biodiesel, but also the byproducts soap, glycerol, excess alcohol, and trace amounts of water. All of these byproducts must be removed to meet the standards, but the order of removal is process-dependent.

The density of glycerol is greater than that of biodiesel, and this property difference is exploited to separate the bulk of the glycerol coproduct. Residual methanol is typically recovered by distillation and reused. Soaps can be removed or converted into acids. Residual water is also removed from the fuel.

== Reactions ==

=== Base-catalysed transesterification mechanism ===
The transesterification reaction is base catalyzed. Any strong base capable of deprotonating the alcohol will work (e.g. NaOH, KOH, sodium methoxide, etc.), but the sodium and potassium hydroxides are often chosen for their cost. The presence of water causes undesirable base hydrolysis, so the reaction must be kept dry.

In the transesterification mechanism, the carbonyl carbon of the starting ester (RCOOR1) undergoes nucleophilic attack by the incoming alkoxide (R2O−) to give a tetrahedral intermediate, which either reverts to the starting material, or proceeds to the transesterified product (RCOOR2). The various species exist in equilibrium, and the product distribution depends on the relative energies of the reactant and product.

== Production methods ==

=== Supercritical process ===
An alternative, catalyst-free method for transesterification uses supercritical methanol at high temperatures and pressures in a continuous process. In the supercritical state, the oil and methanol are in a single phase, and reaction occurs spontaneously and rapidly. The process can tolerate water in the feedstock, free fatty acids are converted to methyl esters instead of soap, so a wide variety of feedstocks can be used. Also the catalyst removal step is eliminated.
High temperatures and pressures are required, but energy costs of production are similar or less than catalytic production routes.

=== Ultra- and high-shear in-line and batch reactors ===
Ultra- and High Shear in-line or batch reactors allow production of biodiesel continuously, semi- continuously, and in batch-mode. This drastically reduces production time and increases production volume.

The reaction takes place in the high-energetic shear zone of the Ultra- and High Shear mixer by reducing the droplet size of the immiscible liquids such as oil or fats and methanol. Therefore, the smaller the droplet size the larger the surface area the faster the catalyst can react.

=== Ultrasonic reactor method ===
In the ultrasonic reactor method, the ultrasonic waves cause the reaction mixture to produce and collapse bubbles constantly; this cavitation simultaneously provides the mixing and heating required to carry out the transesterification process. Use of an ultrasonic reactor for biodiesel production can drastically reduce reaction time and temperatures, and energy input. Using such reactors, the process of transesterification can run inline rather than using the time-consuming batch processing. Industrial scale ultrasonic devices allow for processing of several thousand barrels per day.

=== Lipase-catalyzed method ===
Large amounts of research have focused recently on the use of enzymes as a catalyst for the transesterification. Researchers have found that very good yields could be obtained from crude and used oils using lipases. The use of lipases makes the reaction less sensitive to high free fatty-acid content, which is a problem with the standard biodiesel process. One problem with the lipase reaction is that methanol cannot be used because it inactivates the lipase catalyst after one batch. However, if methyl acetate is used instead of methanol, the lipase is not in-activated and can be used for several batches, making the lipase system much more cost-effective.

===Volatile fatty acids from anaerobic digestion of waste streams ===
Lipids have been drawing considerable attention as a substrate for biodiesel production owing to its sustainability, non-toxicity and energy efficient properties. However, due to cost reasons, attention must be focused on the non-edible sources of lipids, in particular oleaginous microorganisms. Such microbes have the ability to assimilate the carbon sources from a medium and convert the carbon into lipid storage materials. The lipids accumulated by these oleaginous cells can then be transesterified to form biodiesel.

== See also ==
*Biodiesel from CO2
*Box–Behnken design
*Dehulling

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Gerpen, J.V., &quot;Biodiesel processing and production&quot;, &quot;Fuel Processing Technology&quot;, 2005, 86, 1097–1107. 
* Ma, F. &amp; Hanna, M.A., &quot;Biodiesel production: a review&quot;, &quot;Bioresource Technology&quot;, 1999, 70, 1–15. 

==External links==
* Commercial mixing and processing relevant to biodiesel production
* Fast-Transesterification of Soybean Oil Using Ultrasonication
* Current State of Ultrasonic Processing for Fast Biodiesel Production
* Biodiesel Production Technology August 2002 – January 2004
* UNL Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Research and Publications
* Continuous Process for the Conversion of Vegetable Oils into Methyl Esters of Fatty Acids
* Biodiesel Safety and Best Management Practices for Small-Scale Noncommercial Use and Production </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q905957" start="0" end="20" title="Biodiesel production" label="Biodiesel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="53" end="60" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="62" end="71" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="85" end="103" title="chemical reactions" label="chemical reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q591576" start="107" end="126" title="transesterification" label="transesterification"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="131" end="145" title="esterification" label="esterification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751632" start="160" end="167" title="Rendering (animal products)" label="renders"/>
<link wikidata="Q542929" start="170" end="189" title="product (chemistry)" label="product (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="194" end="204" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="269" end="277" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="281" end="288" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="770" end="780" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="935" end="944" title="Raw material" label="Feedstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839263" start="947" end="960" title="Microbial oil" label="Microbial oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q118996639" start="964" end="988" title="Oleaginous microorganism" label="Oleaginous microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="991" end="999" title="Palm oil" label="Palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q926892" start="1002" end="1013" title="Soybean oil" label="Soybean oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216235" start="1016" end="1027" title="Coconut oil" label="Coconut oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="1030" end="1053" title="Vegetable fats and oils" label="Vegetable fats and oils"/>
<link wikidata="Q152986" start="1056" end="1064" title="Jatropha" label="Jatropha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423543" start="1067" end="1077" title="Animal fat" label="Animal fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q262336" start="1080" end="1089" title="Waste oil" label="Waste oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051883" start="1147" end="1160" title="Yellow grease" label="Yellow grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277761" start="1187" end="1205" title="Vegetable oil fuel" label="Vegetable oil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q863266" start="1207" end="1213" title="Tallow" label="Tallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q508355" start="1215" end="1229" title="Lignocellulose" label="Lignocellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q427492" start="1263" end="1279" title="enzyme inhibitor" label="enzyme inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="1290" end="1301" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412429" start="1303" end="1311" title="furfural" label="furfural"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="1313" end="1324" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33495" start="1326" end="1334" title="vanillin" label="vanillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="1373" end="1384" title="cell growth" label="cell growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q186915" start="1586" end="1599" title="phospholipids" label="phospholipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q335024" start="1763" end="1777" title="saponification" label="saponification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="1823" end="1827" title="soap" label="soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="1904" end="1913" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="1991" end="2001" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2117" end="2127" title="esterification" label="esterified"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="2227" end="2233" title="lipids" label="lipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="2274" end="2282" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2286" end="2293" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="2341" end="2349" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2423" end="2437" title="esterification" label="esterification"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="2459" end="2470" title="fatty acids" label="fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q414384" start="3489" end="3505" title="sodium methoxide" label="sodium methoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="3633" end="3643" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="4223" end="4236" title="supercritical fluid" label="supercritical"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="6176" end="6182" title="lipase" label="lipase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7243" end="7261" title="Gas to liquids#Biological gas-to-liquids .28Bio-GTL.29" label="Biodiesel from CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952019" start="7263" end="7281" title="Box–Behnken design" label="Box–Behnken design"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="7283" end="7292" title="Dehulling" label="Dehulling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772268" wikidata="Q186301" url="?curid=772268" title="SciTE">
<text>SciTE or SCIntilla based Text Editor is a cross-platform text editor written by Neil Hodgson using the Scintilla editing component. It is licensed under a minimal version of the Historical Permission Notice and Disclaimer.

Lightweight and built for speed, it is designed mainly for source editing, and performs syntax highlighting and inline function reference for many different languages. There is a standalone .exe available for Microsoft Windows, intended for USB flash drives. SciTE shares some features with other editors based on the Scintilla editing component such as Geany and Notepad++.

==History==
SciTE was first released in 1999.

==Customization==
SciTE is highly configurable. Although there is no graphical preferences window, settings can be altered by editing plain text configuration files. It is possible to have different settings for each language and project, as well as global or per user options. There are menu options in the standard install to open these files in the editor. These allow a high level of customization over things like shortcut keys, tabbing, code folding, fonts, and syntax highlighting.

In addition, the Lua programming language is embedded in SciTE, allowing the user further customization. One can write Lua scripts that have access to the contents of the buffer and the Scintilla API. The scripts can be triggered by a shortcut key, or on an event, providing the possibility for implementing auto-complete or other hook.

As early as 2003, 21 localizations of the menu texts and support of 36 different programming languages and other code formats was available, and the editor was capable of automatic conversion between line separator styles of different platforms and of detecting Unicode files. SciTE can export plain text files in PDF format.

==Features==
Features include replace in selection, regular expression replace with subgroups, find in files, code folding, API files, copy formatted, abbreviations, multiple selection, and support for variable width fonts. The editing layout consists of multiple tabs containing source, and additionally an output pane that displays output from scripts that have been run.

SciTE supports syntax highlighting of many languages. The full list of recognized languages can be found in the official documentation.

With version 4.0.5, large file support is possible. 

With version 4.1.0, it has experimental support for right-to-left languages, like Arabic.

==See also==
*List of text editors
*Comparison of text editors
*Scintilla (editing component)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186301" start="0" end="5" title="SciTE" label="SciTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q186301" start="9" end="36" title="SciTE" label="SCIntilla based Text Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="57" end="68" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420403" start="103" end="130" title="Scintilla (editing component)" label="Scintilla editing component"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773924" start="178" end="221" title="Historical Permission Notice and Disclaimer" label="Historical Permission Notice and Disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="283" end="289" title="source code" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q747907" start="312" end="331" title="syntax highlighting" label="syntax highlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="414" end="418" title="Executable" label=".exe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="433" end="450" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="465" end="481" title="USB flash drives" label="USB flash drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122464" start="578" end="583" title="Geany" label="Geany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033" start="588" end="597" title="Notepad++" label="Notepad++"/>
<link wikidata="Q908656" start="726" end="737" title="preferences" label="preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388460" start="1090" end="1102" title="code folding" label="code folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q207316" start="1154" end="1157" title="Lua (programming language)" label="Lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="1675" end="1689" title="newline" label="line separator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="1737" end="1744" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="1789" end="1799" title="PDF format" label="PDF format"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="1854" end="1872" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="1926" end="1929" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120538" start="1953" end="1966" title="Code snippets" label="abbreviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2450" end="2456" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705353" start="2473" end="2493" title="List of text editors" label="List of text editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q686760" start="2495" end="2521" title="Comparison of text editors" label="Comparison of text editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420403" start="2523" end="2552" title="Scintilla (editing component)" label="Scintilla (editing component)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772273" wikidata="Q370641" url="?curid=772273" title="Polish Super Cup">
<text>The Polish Super Cup (, ) is an annually held match between the champions of the Ekstraklasa and the Polish Cup winners or, if the Ekstraklasa champions also win the Polish Cup, the Cup&#x27;s runners-up. As of 2023, the Polish Super Cup has been played 33 times. The most successful club is Lech Poznań, who won 6 times. The most common participant has been Legia Warsaw, as they have played fourteen final games and lost their eight following finals since 2012. Unlike the Polish Cup, there is no extra time played in the competition, therefore in case of a draw after regular time, the match goes straight into a penalty shoot-out.

Legia Warsaw are the current holders of the trophy.

==Results==


==Performances==
===Performance by club===
===Performance by qualification===
==See also==
* Football in Poland
* Poland national football team
* List of Polish football champions
* Polish Cup

==References==
==External links==
*Poland – List of Super Cup Finals, RSSSF.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="4" end="20" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="81" end="92" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="101" end="111" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947083" start="211" end="215" title="2023 Polish Super Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="292" end="303" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="359" end="371" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="475" end="485" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="499" end="509" title="Overtime (sports)#Association football" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="616" end="633" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="636" end="648" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888210" start="796" end="814" title="Football in Poland" label="Football in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="817" end="846" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q469030" start="849" end="882" title="List of Polish football champions" label="List of Polish football champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="885" end="895" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772281" wikidata="Q6932430" url="?curid=772281" title="Muhammad Azam Shah">
<text>Mirza Abu&#x27;l Fayaz Qutb-ud-Din Mohammad Azam (28 June 1653 – 20 June 1707), commonly known as Azam Shah, was briefly the seventh Mughal emperor from 14 March to 20 June 1707. He was the third son of the sixth Mughal emperor Aurangzeb and his chief consort Dilras Banu Begum.

Azam was appointed as the heir-apparent (&quot;Shahi Ali Jah&quot;) to his father on 12 August 1681 and retained that position until Aurangzeb&#x27;s death. During his long military career, he served as the viceroy of Berar Subah, Malwa, Bengal, Gujarat and the Deccan. Azam ascended the Mughal throne in Ahmednagar upon the death of his father on 14 March 1707. However, he and his three sons, Bidar Bakht, Jawan Bakht and Sikandar Shan, were later defeated and killed by Azam Shah&#x27;s older half-brother, Shah Alam (later crowned as Bahadur Shah I), during the Battle of Jajau on 20 June 1707.

==Early life==
===Birth===
Qutb-ud-Din Muhammad Azam was born on 28 June 1653 in Burhanpur to Prince Muhi-ud-Din (later known as &#x27;Aurangzeb&#x27; upon his accession) and his first wife, Dilras Banu Begum. His mother, who died four years after giving birth to him, was the daughter of Mirza Badi-uz-Zaman Safavi (titled Shah Nawaz Khan) and a princess of the prominent Safavid dynasty of Persia. Therefore, Azam was not only a Timurid from his father&#x27;s side, but also had in him the royal blood of the Safavid dynasty, a fact which Azam was extremely proud of and after the death of his younger brother, Prince Muhammad Akbar, the only son of Aurangzeb who could boast of being of the purest blood.

Azam&#x27;s other half-brothers, Shah Alam (later Bahadur Shah I) and Muhammad Kam Bakhsh being the sons of Hindu wives of Aurangzeb. According to Niccolao Manucci, the courtiers were very impressed by Azam&#x27;s royal Persian ancestry and the fact that he was the grandson of Shah Nawaz Khan Safavi.

===Character===

As Azam grew up, he was distinguished for his wisdom, excellence, and chivalry. Aurangzeb used to be extremely delighted with his son&#x27;s noble character and excellent manners, and thought of him as his comrade rather than his son. He often used to say, &quot;between this pair of matchless friends, a separation is imminent.&quot; Azam&#x27;s siblings included his older sisters, the princesses: Zeb-un-Nissa, Zinat-un-Nissa, Zubdat-un-Nissa and his younger brother, Prince Muhammad Akbar.

==Personal life==

Azam was first married on 13 May 1668 to an Ahom princess, Ramani Gabharu, whose name was changed to Rahmat Bano Begum. She was the daughter of the Ahom king, Swargadeo Jayadhwaj Singh, and the marriage was a political one.

On 3 January 1669, Azam married his cousin, Princess Jahanzeb Banu Begum, the daughter of his eldest uncle Crown Prince Dara Shikoh and his beloved wife Nadira Bano Begum.

Jahanzeb was his chief wife and his favorite wife, whom he loved dearly. She gave birth to her eldest son on 4 August 1670. His grandfather Aurangzeb named him &#x27;Bidar Bakht&#x27;. Aurangzeb, throughout his life, always loved the three of Azam and Jahanzeb (who is his favorite daughter-in-law) and Prince Bidar Bakht, a brave and successful general. Bidar Bakht was also Aurangzeb&#x27;s favorite grandson.

Azam&#x27;s third marriage was fixed with Iran Dukht Rahmat Bano (Pari Bibi), daughter of Aurangzeb&#x27;s maternal uncle Shaista Khan. However, the marriage could not take place due to the sudden death of Pari Bibi in Dhaka in 1684. In her memory, a mazar (mausoleum) was constructed in Fort Aurangabad (now Lalbagh Fort) in Dhaka.

As part of a political alliance, Azam later married his third (and last) wife, Shahar Bano Begum (Padshah Bibi), in 1681. She was a princess of the Adil Shahi dynasty and the daughter of the ruler Ali Adil Shah II. Despite Bijapur and his other marriages, Azam&#x27;s love for Jahanzeb remained unchanged. Because when she died in 1705, he was filled with great sadness and despair, which darkened the rest of his life.

==Siege of Bijapur==
In 1685, Aurangzeb dispatched his son Muhammad Azam Shah with a force of nearly 50,000 men to capture Bijapur Fort and defeat Sikandar Adil Shah, the ruler of Bijapur, who refused to be a vassal. The Mughals led by Muhammad Azam Shah could not make any advancements upon Bijapur Fort mainly due to the superior usage of cannon batteries on both sides. Outraged by the stalemate, Aurangzeb himself arrived on 4 September 1686 and commanded the Siege of Bijapur after eight days of fighting and the Mughals were victorious.

==Subahdar of Bengal==
Prince Azam was appointed the governor (&quot;Subahdar&quot;) of Berar Subah, Malwa and Bengal from 1678 to 1701 upon the death of his predecessor, Azam Khan Koka. He successfully captured the Kamrup region in February 1679. He founded the incomplete Lalbagh Fort in Dacca. During his administration, Mir Maula was appointed &quot;Diwan&quot; and Muluk Chand as &quot;Huzur-Navis&quot; for revenue collection. Prince Azam was recalled by Aurangzeb and left Dacca on 6 October 1679. Under Marathas Bengal went under administration of the Nawabs of Murshidabad.

He later became the governor of Gujarat from 1701 to 1706.

==Accession==

In the third week of February 1707, in a bid to prevent a war of succession, Aurangzeb separated Azam and his younger half-brother, Kam Baksh, whom Azam particularly loathed. He sent Azam to Malwa and Kam Baksh to Bijapur. A few days before his death, he wrote farewell letters to Azam. The next morning, Azam who had tarried outside Ahmednagar instead of proceeding to Malwa, arrived at the imperial camp and conveyed his father&#x27;s body for burial at his tomb at Daulatabad. Azam Shah proclaimed himself Emperor and seized the throne. In the political struggles following the disputed succession, he and his son Prince Bidar Bakht were defeated and killed in the Battle of Jajau on 20 June 1707 against elder half-brother, Prince Muhammad Mu&#x27;azzam, who succeeded their father to the Mughal throne. Azam Shah was killed by a musket shot, which is believed to have been fired by Isha Khan Main, a jamindar of lakhi jangal of lahore subah. His grave along with that of his wife, lies in the dargah complex of Sufi saint, Sheikh Zainuddin, at Khuldabad near Aurangabad, which also houses the tomb of Aurangzeb to the west.

==Ancestry==

==Full title==

&quot;Padshah-i-Mumalik Abu&#x27;l Faaiz Qutb-ud-Din Muhammad Azam Shah-i-Ali Jah Ghazi&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6932430" start="0" end="48" title="Muhammad Azam Shah" label="Mirza Abu&amp;#x27;l Fayaz Qutb-ud-Din Mohammad Azam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932430" start="98" end="107" title="Muhammad Azam Shah" label="Azam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="133" end="147" title="Mughal emperors" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="228" end="237" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277043" start="260" end="277" title="Dilras Banu Begum" label="Dilras Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="306" end="319" title="heir-apparent" label="heir-apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890994" start="498" end="509" title="Berar Subah" label="Berar Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="511" end="516" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="518" end="524" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="526" end="533" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="542" end="548" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q938332" start="568" end="574" title="Peacock Throne" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223517" start="585" end="595" title="Ahmednagar" label="Ahmednagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904016" start="675" end="686" title="Bidar Bakht" label="Bidar Bakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q544228" start="818" end="832" title="Bahadur Shah I" label="Bahadur Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q21244903" start="846" end="861" title="Battle of Jajau" label="Battle of Jajau"/>
<link wikidata="Q593193" start="961" end="970" title="Burhanpur" label="Burhanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277043" start="1071" end="1088" title="Dilras Banu Begum" label="Dilras Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874815" start="1169" end="1195" title="Mirza Badi-uz-Zaman Safavi" label="Mirza Badi-uz-Zaman Safavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="1253" end="1268" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1272" end="1278" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595706" start="1500" end="1514" title="Sultan Muhammad Akbar" label="Muhammad Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q544228" start="1639" end="1653" title="Bahadur Shah I" label="Bahadur Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932564" start="1659" end="1678" title="Muhammad Kam Bakhsh" label="Muhammad Kam Bakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344635" start="1736" end="1752" title="Niccolao Manucci" label="Niccolao Manucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q169346" start="2309" end="2321" title="Zeb-un-Nissa" label="Zeb-un-Nissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204282" start="2323" end="2337" title="Zinat-un-Nissa" label="Zinat-un-Nissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074928" start="2339" end="2354" title="Zubdat-un-Nissa" label="Zubdat-un-Nissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q402392" start="2467" end="2471" title="Ahom people" label="Ahom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479441" start="2482" end="2496" title="Ramani Gabharu" label="Ramani Gabharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123209" start="2701" end="2720" title="Jahanzeb Banu Begum" label="Jahanzeb Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q604647" start="2768" end="2779" title="Dara Shikoh" label="Dara Shikoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462487" start="3356" end="3368" title="Shaista Khan" label="Shaista Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="3453" end="3458" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352470" start="3485" end="3502" title="mazar (mausoleum)" label="mazar (mausoleum)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801226" start="3522" end="3537" title="Lalbagh Fort" label="Fort Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907175" start="4112" end="4124" title="Bijapur Fort" label="Bijapur Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513543" start="4136" end="4154" title="Sikandar Adil Shah" label="Sikandar Adil Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509876" start="4453" end="4469" title="Siege of Bijapur" label="Siege of Bijapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585847" start="4602" end="4610" title="Subahdar" label="Subahdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890994" start="4621" end="4632" title="Berar Subah" label="Berar Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="4634" end="4639" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="4644" end="4650" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359677" start="4749" end="4762" title="Kamrup region" label="Kamrup region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801226" start="4807" end="4819" title="Lalbagh Fort" label="Lalbagh Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772929" start="4887" end="4892" title="Diwan (title)" label="Diwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="5044" end="5052" title="Maratha Empire" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819811" start="5093" end="5114" title="Nawabs of Murshidabad" label="Nawabs of Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="5149" end="5156" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223517" start="5526" end="5536" title="Ahmednagar" label="Ahmednagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q88667786" start="5660" end="5670" title="Daulatabad, Maharashtra" label="Daulatabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21244903" start="5860" end="5875" title="Battle of Jajau" label="Battle of Jajau"/>
<link wikidata="Q544228" start="5920" end="5949" title="Bahadur Shah I" label="Prince Muhammad Mu&amp;#x27;azzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="5985" end="5991" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639699" start="6190" end="6196" title="dargah" label="dargah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064860" start="6220" end="6236" title="Zainuddin Shirazi" label="Sheikh Zainuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025625" start="6241" end="6250" title="Khuldabad" label="Khuldabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="6256" end="6266" title="Aurangabad, Maharashtra" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19802110" start="6290" end="6307" title="tomb of Aurangzeb" label="tomb of Aurangzeb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772287" wikidata="Q1507452" url="?curid=772287" title="George Gregan">
<text>George Musarurwa Gregan AM (born 19 April 1973) is a former rugby union player who played at scrum-half. Born in Lusaka, Zambia, Gregan represented Australia at international level, and is Australia&#x27;s second most capped player.

He played Super 12 (now Super Rugby) for the Brumbies from the inception of that competition in 1996 through 2007, helping to lead them to overall victories in 2001 and 2004. He is a foundation Brumbies player and one of the few players whose career spans both the amateur and professional eras. His appearances as Australian captain include a Bledisloe Cup win in 2002 and an extra-time loss to England in the 2003 Rugby World Cup final. As a member of the Wallabies team, Gregan has attained the zenith of the rugby world, winning the Rugby World Cup in 1999. Gregan and his longtime Wallabies teammate, fly-half Stephen Larkham, also hold the all-time record for Test appearances by a halfback partnership with 79.

==Early and personal life==
Gregan was born in Zambia to an Australian father and a Zimbabwean mother, coincidentally in the same hospital where Corné Krige, who would grow up to be the South Africa captain during Gregan&#x27;s Wallabies captaincy, would be born two years later. His family moved to Australia when he was two years old, and he grew up in Canberra where he was educated at St Edmund&#x27;s College and graduated with a Bachelor of Education (Physical Education) from the University of Canberra.

Gregan and his wife Erica have three children, Max, Charlie and Jazz. Max was diagnosed with epilepsy in 2004; after spending time with Max in hospital and &quot;[experiencing] firsthand the needs of many sick children and their parents&quot; they set up the George Gregan Foundation in 2005. After building playgrounds in NSW, ACT and Qld hospitals and supporting the work of 18 neurology fellows, it is slated to close down in 2021.

==Rugby career==
Gregan represented Australia at under-19 and under-21 level.

===1994 to 1999===
Gregan made his first appearance for the Wallabies in 1994 in a match against Italy in Brisbane, which the Wallabies won 23 to 20. He was subsequently capped in the victories over Italy again, and Western Samoa.

Later in 1994, Gregan made a famous try-saving tackle on All Black Jeff Wilson that directly led to Australia winning the Bledisloe Cup that year and is much remembered as one of the greatest moments in the Wallabies-All Blacks rivalry. After two caps against Argentina the following season, Gregan had so far been on the winning side in all of his international games as Australia entered the 1995 World Cup in South Africa as defending champions. However, Australia made their exit at the quarter finals, losing 25 to 22 to England at Newlands in Cape Town.

The game went professional post-1995 World Cup, and one outcome of this was the formation of the Super 12, of which Gregan became a foundation player for the ACT Brumbies franchise. That season Gregan appeared eight times for the Wallabies, including solid wins over both Wales and Canada in Brisbane, scoring a try in the Canadian clash. Another outcome of professionalism was the formation of the Tri Nations Series between Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. Gregan played in three of Australia&#x27;s four fixtures at the first ever tournament, scoring a try in the 25 to 32 loss to the All Blacks in Brisbane.

During the mid-1990s&#x27; Super League war, Gregan was approached to be the starting halfback for the new Adelaide rugby league team for &quot;seriously more money&quot; than he would earn playing rugby union, but he opted to remain in the 15-man code.

Gregan was elevated to the vice-captaincy of the Wallabies in 1997. In the 1997 Tri Nations Series, Gregan scored a try in the opening game against the All Blacks, which was eventually lost 18 to 33, and the Wallabies won only one game, against South Africa, finishing at the bottom of the table. By the end of the year, Gregan was capped another four times.

After winning in two matches against the Irish, and one against England in the winter of 1999 at home, the Wallabies ended up finishing in the middle of the table for the 1999 Tri Nations Series (with Gregan having played in every match), though they were still favourable entering the 1999 World Cup held in Wales. Australia finished at the top of Pool E, winning all their games, with Gregan playing in the matches against Romania and Ireland, though he was rested in the final pool game against the USA. The Wallabies went on to defeat hosts Wales in the quarter finals at the new Millennium Stadium with Gregan scoring a try, putting Joe Roff into space and then taking the scoring pass, and enter the final after defeating defending champions South Africa in the semi-finals. The Wallabies became two-time World Champions after defeating France 35 to 12 in the final.

===2001 to 2005===
After the international retirement of John Eales in 2001, Gregan became the Wallabies captain. He was an obvious choice to fill the role, as it would be a natural progression from his position as vice-captain, as well as the fact that Gregan was a virtual automatic selection for the national team.

Gregan played in all of Australia&#x27;s 6 matches at the 2003 Rugby World Cup. He landed an early drop goal in the 17 to 16 victory over Ireland in the pool stages. He also scored a try in the 33 to 16 win over Scotland in the quarter-finals. Gregan led the Wallabies in defeating the All Blacks in the semi-final. This contest led to a controversy for Gregan when he taunted his opponents after defeating them with the comment, &quot;Four more years boys, four more years&quot; i.e. New Zealand would have to wait another 4 years for an attempt at winning the World Cup. Australia lost to England in the final.

Following Australia&#x27;s loss to the English in the World Cup, Gregan led the Wallabies on a massive winning campaign during the 2004 season. After defeating Scotland twice at home, the Wallabies faced the English in a World Cup replay in Brisbane, where they got their revenge, defeating England 51 to 15. Under Gregan, Australia lost just three matches in 2004, one against South Africa, one against New Zealand 16–7 in New Zealand and then against France in Paris.
In July during the 2004 Tri Nations Series, Gregan ran out at Subiaco Oval in Perth against South Africa for his 100th Wallaby test. In October 2004, Gregan announced that his four-year-old son had epilepsy and has launched an epilepsy awareness campaign in Australia with the slogan &#x27;Get on the Team&#x27;. He also took up the role of patron of Brainwave Australia.

Gregan missed a lot of the 2005 Super 12 season after breaking his leg during a game against the New South Wales Waratahs in Canberra. Gregan returned for the match against Italy in Melbourne, which the Wallabies won 61 to 29. Though after a win over the French and one over the Springboks, the Wallabies fell to the bottom of the 2005 Tri Nations Series table, losing all of their games. With his start in the final match of the 2005 Tri Nations at Eden Park in Auckland against the All Blacks, Gregan equalled England&#x27;s Jason Leonard as the most-capped player for a national team in Test rugby, with 114 (Leonard also has five Lions caps). Appropriately, when Australia made their entrance for that match, Gregan went out on the field by himself before any of his teammates entered the pitch.

On 5 November 2005, he earned his 115th cap, surpassing Leonard, when he led out the Wallabies at Stade Vélodrome in Marseille against France. The Wallabies lost the match 16 to 26. The French loss was followed by a meeting with the English at Twickenham, where England&#x27;s superior scrummaging saw them also win 26 to 16.

===2006===
In June 2006, the Wallabies, under new coach John Connolly, completed a solid win over England. Gregan came off the bench in the second half of the second Test in Melbourne as he earned his 120th international cap - setting a new world record.

After the matches against the English and Irish the Wallabies entered the 2006 Tri Nations Series. Two weeks later the All Blacks came to Brisbane for the Bledisloe Cup clash, in which Gregan equalled John Eales&#x27; record for most caps as captain of Australia, which is 55. In the subsequent match against South Africa in Sydney, Gregan passed Eales&#x27; record, becoming the most capped Australian captain of all time. The Wallabies managed to scrape home 20 to 18. For the 2006 European Tour, Gregan was rested and Matt Giteau was given a chance at halfback.

===2007===
On 22 March 2007, the French Top 14 club Toulon announced that it had signed Gregan to a contract for the 2007–08 season. He arrived in France after the 2007 Rugby World Cup, and was reportedly paid €400,000 for the season.

Gregan played his last home game with the Brumbies on 28 April 2007; leading his team to a victory over the Canterbury Crusaders. Fittingly, this was also the last home game for his teammate Stephen Larkham. The two were farewelled with the announcement that a stand at Canberra Stadium would be named after them.

Gregan was again selected as part of the Wallabies squad for the 2007 home tests against Wales and Fiji and the Tri-Nations Series, although he was no longer the Captain of the team and was on the reserves bench behind Matt Giteau for the Tests against Wales. Gregan did regain his starting spot for the first Tri-Nations game against South Africa, showing his class and longevity. The Wallabies&#x27; co-Captains were Phil Waugh and Stirling Mortlock but Waugh was dropped to the bench during the Tri-Nations in place of Gregan&#x27;s Brumbies teammate George Smith, elevating Mortlock to the captaincy.

In June 2007, Greg Growden, Chief Rugby Correspondent for the Sydney Morning Herald said that &quot;several high-ranking Australian Rugby Union sources told the Herald that Gregan was the &quot;raging hot favourite&quot; to be Australia&#x27;s World Cup captain&quot; However, when the World Cup squad was announced, Mortlock was named Captain, whilst Waugh and Gregan were named vice captains.

In the 2007 Rugby World Cup - Pool B match against Fiji he equalled Will Carling&#x27;s record of captaining an international side for 59 times and in the 2009 Tri Nations Series Springbok John Smit equalled and beaten his (as well as Carling) record in tests between New Zealand in Bloemfontein and Durban respectively.

===Post-Australia===
On 18 June 2008 it was announced that he had joined Suntory Sungoliath in Japan, following a season at RC Toulonnais in the French Top 14.

==Post-playing retirement==
In 2012, Gregan was assistant coach at the Brumbies. In 2014, Gregan joined the Fox-Sports Rugby commentator team, along with his former Wallabies teammate John Eales.

Pitch-side at the Hong Kong Sevens in March 2014, former Ireland and British and Irish Lions captain Brian O&#x27;Driscoll and former Australia captain Stephen Larkham demonstrated their skills to Bloomberg TV Anchor John Dawson.

===GG&#x27;s Espresso/Gregan Group===
In the late 1990s, Gregan and his wife had started planning for his post-playing career. Formulating plans for a coffee shop business, in 1998 he counted and then surveyed commuters at Wynyard station. The first GG&#x27;s Espresso shop opened in 1999, and presently there are 9 GG&#x27;s Espresso cafes across Sydney and Brisbane. These form the basis of a wider food and hospitality business, The Gregan Group, which turned over Aus$10M and employs 280 people.

==Honours==
;Brumbies
*Super Rugby: 2001, 2004

;Toulon
*Rugby Pro D2: 2007–08

;Suntory Sungoliath
*All-Japan Rugby Football Championship: 2010–11

;Australia
*World Cup: 1999
*Tri-Nations: 2000, 2001
*Bledisloe Cup: 1994, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002
;General
*Appointed as a member of the Order of Australia in June 2004 for his services to Rugby Union Football and in particular as the Captain of the Wallabies.
*Inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 2009.
* Inducted into the World Rugby Hall of Fame (then known as the IRB Hall of Fame) in 2013.
* Inaugural inductee to University of Canberra Sport Walk of Fame.

==See also==
*List of rugby union Test caps leaders
*Top League Japan rugby
*Wallaby Team of the Decade

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* George Gregan &#x27;Get on the Team&#x27; website.
* George Gregan on Sporting Heroes
* Piece about Gregan at BBC
* Another recent piece about Gregan at BBC
* Article on Gregan as a great footballer, not just a great halfback</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1507452" start="0" end="23" title="George Gregan" label="George Musarurwa Gregan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="24" end="26" title="Order of Australia" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="60" end="71" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="93" end="103" title="Scrum-half (rugby union)" label="scrum-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="113" end="119" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="121" end="127" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="148" end="157" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="258" end="269" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q605245" start="279" end="287" title="Brumbies Rugby" label="Brumbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="630" end="637" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="645" end="665" title="2003 Rugby World Cup" label="2003 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="840" end="848" title="Fly-half (rugby union)" label="fly-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q925097" start="849" end="864" title="Stephen Larkham" label="Stephen Larkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="1000" end="1006" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="1013" end="1023" title="Australians" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667564" start="1037" end="1047" title="Demographics of Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwean"/>
<link wikidata="Q768777" start="1098" end="1109" title="Corné Krige" label="Corné Krige"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="1139" end="1151" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="1308" end="1316" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592993" start="1342" end="1366" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Canberra" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640648" start="1440" end="1462" title="University of Canberra" label="University of Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="1558" end="1566" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507452" start="1724" end="1748" title="George Gregan Foundation" label="George Gregan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="2040" end="2049" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="2077" end="2082" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138539" start="2196" end="2209" title="Samoa national rugby union team" label="Western Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="2269" end="2278" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="All Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q366237" start="2279" end="2290" title="Jeff Wilson (sportsman)" label="Jeff Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q641010" start="2334" end="2347" title="Bledisloe Cup" label="Bledisloe Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="2472" end="2481" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="2606" end="2620" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="2738" end="2745" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368280" start="2749" end="2757" title="Newlands Stadium" label="Newlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="2761" end="2770" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="2870" end="2878" title="Super 12" label="Super 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q605245" start="2931" end="2943" title="Brumbies Rugby" label="ACT Brumbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="3045" end="3050" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q774221" start="3055" end="3061" title="Canada national rugby union team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q58344" start="3172" end="3190" title="Tri Nations Series" label="Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300827" start="3304" end="3325" title="1996 Tri Nations Series" label="first ever tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119021" start="3421" end="3437" title="Super League war" label="Super League war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824194" start="3501" end="3527" title="Adelaide Rams" label="Adelaide rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300786" start="3724" end="3747" title="1997 Tri Nations Series" label="1997 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673913" start="4180" end="4203" title="1999 Tri Nations Series" label="1999 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="4295" end="4309" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q967505" start="4434" end="4441" title="Romania national rugby union team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143805" start="4511" end="4514" title="United States national rugby union team" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="4593" end="4611" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="4852" end="4858" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q926351" start="4940" end="4950" title="John Eales" label="John Eales"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="5260" end="5280" title="2003 rugby world cup" label="2003 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="5340" end="5347" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="5414" end="5422" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="5488" end="5498" title="All Blacks" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5808" end="5813" title="2003 rugby world cup#Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410113" start="6305" end="6328" title="2004 Tri Nations Series" label="2004 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q585927" start="6348" end="6360" title="Subiaco Oval" label="Subiaco Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="6364" end="6369" title="Perth, Western Australia" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856503" start="6686" end="6706" title="2005 Super 12 season" label="2005 Super 12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q534417" start="6756" end="6780" title="New South Wales Waratahs" label="New South Wales Waratahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300849" start="6990" end="7013" title="2005 Tri Nations Series" label="2005 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q312411" start="7109" end="7118" title="Eden Park" label="Eden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="7122" end="7130" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="7143" end="7153" title="All Blacks" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683939" start="7186" end="7199" title="Jason Leonard" label="Jason Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="7212" end="7218" title="Cap (sport)" label="capped"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="7293" end="7298" title="British and Irish Lions" label="Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="7500" end="7503" title="Cap (sport)" label="cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q202150" start="7558" end="7573" title="Stade Vélodrome" label="Stade Vélodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="7577" end="7586" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="7595" end="7601" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181263" start="7843" end="7856" title="John Connolly (rugby)" label="John Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="7961" end="7970" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063242" start="8117" end="8140" title="2006 Tri Nations Series" label="2006 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="8181" end="8189" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q641010" start="8198" end="8211" title="Bledisloe Cup" label="Bledisloe Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q922170" start="8564" end="8575" title="Matt Giteau" label="Matt Giteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857064" start="8661" end="8667" title="RC Toulonnais" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="8773" end="8793" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q959847" start="8953" end="8973" title="Crusaders (rugby)" label="Canterbury Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q925097" start="9036" end="9051" title="Stephen Larkham" label="Stephen Larkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q922170" start="9379" end="9390" title="Matt Giteau" label="Matt Giteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378838" start="9579" end="9589" title="Phil Waugh" label="Phil Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q737072" start="9594" end="9611" title="Stirling Mortlock" label="Stirling Mortlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q78096480" start="9780" end="9792" title="Greg Growden" label="Greg Growden"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="9828" end="9849" title="Sydney Morning Herald" label="Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q782703" start="9887" end="9909" title="Australian Rugby Union" label="Australian Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174866" start="10169" end="10198" title="2007 Rugby World Cup - Pool B" label="2007 Rugby World Cup - Pool B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134669" start="10213" end="10217" title="Fiji national rugby union team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568280" start="10230" end="10242" title="Will Carling" label="Will Carling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179218" start="10317" end="10340" title="2009 Tri Nations Series" label="2009 Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="10341" end="10350" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="Springbok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396771" start="10351" end="10360" title="John Smit" label="John Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="10445" end="10457" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="10462" end="10468" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503997" start="10557" end="10575" title="Suntory Sungoliath" label="Suntory Sungoliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857064" start="10608" end="10621" title="RC Toulonnais" label="RC Toulonnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798" start="10636" end="10642" title="Top 14" label="Top 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q926351" start="10829" end="10839" title="John Eales" label="John Eales"/>
<link wikidata="Q925097" start="10994" end="11009" title="Stephen Larkham" label="Stephen Larkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="11224" end="11235" title="Coffeehouse" label="coffee shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040272" start="11296" end="11311" title="Wynyard railway station, Sydney" label="Wynyard station"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="11432" end="11440" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q605245" start="11587" end="11595" title="Brumbies" label="Brumbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="11597" end="11608" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576519" start="11610" end="11614" title="2001 Super 12 season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512897" start="11616" end="11620" title="2004 Super 12 season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857064" start="11623" end="11629" title="RC Toulonnais" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904" start="11631" end="11643" title="Rugby Pro D2" label="Rugby Pro D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951349" start="11645" end="11652" title="2007–08 Rugby Pro D2 season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503997" start="11655" end="11673" title="Suntory Sungoliath" label="Suntory Sungoliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728290" start="11675" end="11712" title="All-Japan Rugby Football Championship" label="All-Japan Rugby Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638662" start="11714" end="11721" title="48th All Japan Rugby Football Championship" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="11724" end="11733" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="11735" end="11744" title="Rugby World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="11746" end="11750" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q58344" start="11752" end="11763" title="Tri Nations (rugby union)" label="Tri-Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029206" start="11765" end="11769" title="2000 Tri Nations Series" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665628" start="11771" end="11775" title="2001 Tri Nations Series" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q641010" start="11777" end="11790" title="Bledisloe Cup" label="Bledisloe Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="11866" end="11884" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="12009" end="12037" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502630" start="12067" end="12091" title="World Rugby Hall of Fame" label="World Rugby Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671401" start="12220" end="12257" title="List of rugby union Test caps leaders" label="List of rugby union Test caps leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q866287" start="12259" end="12269" title="Top League" label="Top League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412026" start="12283" end="12309" title="Wallaby Team of the Decade" label="Wallaby Team of the Decade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772289" wikidata="Q722270" url="?curid=772289" title="José Baptista Pinheiro de Azevedo">
<text>José Baptista Pinheiro de Azevedo (; 5 June 1917 – 10 August 1983) was a Portuguese political figure, reformer and revolutionary. He helped overthrow Marcelo Caetano in 1974. He served as the 104th prime minister of Portugal between 19 September 1975 and 23 June 1976. He ran for president in 1976, and lost.

Pinheiro de Azevedo was born on 5 June 1917 in Luanda, but moved to Portugal several years later. In the 1960s, he joined the Movement for Democratic Unity and was a supporter of the Presidential candidacies of José Norton de Matos, Manuel Quintão Meireles and Humberto Delgado.

Pinheiro de Azevedo served in the Portuguese Colonial War, as an admiral in charge of the maritime defense of Portuguese Angola.

After the Revolution of 25 April 1974, he was appointed to the National Salvation Junta, and was committed to the cause of democratization in Portugal.

On 29 August 1975 he became Prime Minister of the Sixth Provisional Government replacing ousted prime minister Vasco Gonçalves.

At the end of his tenure as prime minister, he was replaced for the final 30 days by Vasco Almeida e Costa, Minister of Internal Administration. Pinheiro had suffered a heart attack on 23 June while campaigning in Oporto for the Portuguese presidency as one of the independent candidates in the 27 June presidential election. He was taken to a hospital and was still recovering when President António Ramalho Eanes appointed Mario Soares as the new premier.

== Electoral history ==
=== Presidential election, 1976===
|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; |Candidate
! Votes
! align=&quot;center&quot; style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|%
| style=&quot;background:;&quot;|
| align=left |António Ramalho Eanes || 2,967,137 || 61.6
| style=&quot;background:#810000;&quot;|
| align=left |Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho || 792,760 || 16.5
| style=&quot;background:;&quot;|
| align=left |José Pinheiro de Azevedo || 692,147 || 14.4
| style=&quot;background:;&quot;|
| align=left |Octávio Pato || 365,586 || 7.6
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; align=&quot;left&quot;| Blank/Invalid ballots 
| 63,495 || – 
|- style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9&quot;
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; align=&quot;left&quot;| Turnout
| 4,881,125 || 75.47
| colspan=&quot;4&quot; align=left|Source: Comissão Nacional de Eleições

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q722270" start="0" end="33" title="José Baptista Pinheiro de Azevedo" label="José Baptista Pinheiro de Azevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="84" end="100" title="political figure" label="political figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q310870" start="150" end="165" title="Marcelo Caetano" label="Marcelo Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723031" start="198" end="224" title="Prime Minister of Portugal" label="prime minister of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="357" end="363" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q177745" start="521" end="541" title="José Norton de Matos" label="José Norton de Matos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557545" start="543" end="566" title="Manuel Quintão Meireles" label="Manuel Quintão Meireles"/>
<link wikidata="Q551999" start="571" end="587" title="Humberto Delgado" label="Humberto Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="624" end="647" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="700" end="717" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Portuguese Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="730" end="757" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Revolution of 25 April 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701778" start="783" end="807" title="National Salvation Junta" label="National Salvation Junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q712532" start="984" end="999" title="Vasco Gonçalves" label="Vasco Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="1216" end="1222" title="Oporto" label="Oporto"/>
<link wikidata="Q60114" start="1395" end="1416" title="António Ramalho Eanes" label="António Ramalho Eanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156781" start="1427" end="1439" title="Mario Soares" label="Mario Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q60114" start="1673" end="1694" title="António Ramalho Eanes" label="António Ramalho Eanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353499" start="1771" end="1796" title="Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho" label="Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891285" start="1956" end="1968" title="Octávio Pato" label="Octávio Pato"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772296" wikidata="Q1821382" url="?curid=772296" title="Orbicular batfish">
<text>The orbicular batfish (Platax orbicularis), also known as the cooper batfish, circular batfish, orbiculate batfish, round batfish, narrow-banded batfish or orbic batfish is a species of marine ray-finned fish belonging to the family Ephippidae, the spadefishes and batfishes. This species is found in the Indo-Pacific but has been recorded outside its native range in the western Atlantic Ocean.

== Taxonomy ==
The orbicular batfish was first formally described as &quot;Chaetodon orbicularis&quot; by the Swedish-speaking Finnish explorer, orientalist, naturalist Peter Forsskål with its type locality given as Jeddah in Saudi Arabia. This species is classified within the genus &quot;Platax&quot; which belongs to the family Ephippidae in the order Moroniformes. The specific name &quot;orbicularis&quot; means &quot;circular&quot; or &quot;disc-like&quot;, a reference to the round body.

== Description ==
Orbicular batfish adults have orbicular, i.e. round bodies. The body is very deep and is highly compressed. In larger adults, i.e. those with a total length in excess of have a indented snout with a bony intraorbital protuberance. There are five pores on each side of the lower jaw. Both jaws have bands of thin, flattened, tricuspid teeth with the central cusp being around two times as long as the lateral cusps. There are no teeth on the roof of the mouth. The dorsal fin is supported by 5 spines and between 34 and 39 soft rays while the anal fin contains 3 spines and 25 to 29 soft rays. The colour of adults is silvery grey with black vertical bars running through the pectoral fin and eye. The anal and dorsal fins are yellowish with black margins. There is sometimes a scattering of small black spots on the flanks. The small juveniles are reddish brown in colour, marked with irregular black spots and blotches as well as small, white, black margined ocelli on the body. There is a small black spot at base of last 3 rays on both the dorsal and anal fin and the caudal fin is transparent except for its reddish brown base. The orbicular batfish has a maximum published total length of .
== Distribution and habitat ==
Orbicular batfish are native to the Indo-Pacific from eastern Africa from South Africa, Madagascar, the Mascarenes and Seychelles, north into the Red Sea east through the Persian Gulf, and on into Micronesia as far as the Tuamotu Archipelago, north to southern Japan and south to northern Australia. In Australia they are found at the Ashmore Reef in the Timor Sea as well as at Christmas Island and Cocos (Keeling) Islands in the eastern Indian Ocean. On the mainland they occur from Shark Bay in Western Australia around the northern tropical coast and south on the east coast almost to Sydney. They are found in shallow, protected coastal waters including mangroves, coral reefs and deeper areas with silt substrates. The juveniles typically hide among in mangroves and in protected lagoons, frequently amongst flotsam where they mimic dead leaves floating in the water column.

=== Introduced range ===
Orbicular batfish have been recorded in the Western Atlantic off southern Florida, most likely as a result of deliberate release from aquariums.

== Biology ==
Orbicular batfish adults may be found singly, in small schools, or occasionally in large aggregations. Juveniles are either solitary or in small groups. They lay pelagic eggs and females attain sexual maturity at a length of around . They are omnivorous, feeding on algae, small fishes and invertebrates.

== Utilisation ==
The orbicular batfish is mainly caught in subsistence and small scale commercial fisheries using handlines and nets. In French Polynesia, particularly Tahiti, this species is being increasingly used in fish farms to provide food. The juveniles are popular in the aquarium trade with most of the fish in the trade originating in Indonesia and the Philippines.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="4" end="21" title="Orbicular batfish" label="orbicular batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="62" end="76" title="Orbicular batfish" label="cooper batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="78" end="94" title="Orbicular batfish" label="circular batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="96" end="114" title="Orbicular batfish" label="orbiculate batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="116" end="129" title="Orbicular batfish" label="round batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="131" end="152" title="Orbicular batfish" label="narrow-banded batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821382" start="156" end="169" title="Orbicular batfish" label="orbic batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="193" end="208" title="ray-finned fish" label="ray-finned fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="226" end="232" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q637670" start="233" end="243" title="Ephippidae" label="Ephippidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="305" end="317" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="453" end="462" title="Species description" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="507" end="531" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Swedish-speaking Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="532" end="540" title="exploration" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="542" end="553" title="oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="555" end="565" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27684" start="566" end="580" title="Peter Forsskål" label="Peter Forsskål"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="590" end="603" title="Type locality (biology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="613" end="619" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="675" end="680" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425409" start="687" end="693" title="Platax" label="Platax"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="746" end="751" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q117528917" start="752" end="764" title="Moroniformes" label="Moroniformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="770" end="783" title="Specific name (zoology)" label="specific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847935" start="1055" end="1067" title="total length" label="total length"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="1612" end="1616" title="anal fin" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568355" start="1621" end="1631" title="dorsal fin" label="dorsal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q760306" start="1871" end="1877" title="Eyespot (mimicry)" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="1982" end="1992" title="caudal fin" label="caudal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847935" start="2089" end="2101" title="total length" label="total length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="2174" end="2186" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="2242" end="2252" title="Mascarenes" label="Mascarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="2284" end="2291" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="2335" end="2345" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="2360" end="2379" title="Tuamotu Archipelago" label="Tuamotu Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q133888" start="2473" end="2485" title="Ashmore and Cartier Islands" label="Ashmore Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q131418" start="2493" end="2502" title="Timor Sea" label="Timor Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="2517" end="2533" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="2538" end="2561" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q217487" start="2623" end="2632" title="Shark Bay" label="Shark Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="2636" end="2653" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="2727" end="2733" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="3119" end="3126" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="3649" end="3665" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="3680" end="3686" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="3731" end="3741" title="Fish farming" label="fish farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q96443" start="3792" end="3800" title="Fish keeping" label="aquarium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772300" wikidata="Q255545" url="?curid=772300" title="Ismail al-Azhari">
<text>Ismail al-Azhari (; October 20, 1900 – August 26, 1969) was a Sudanese nationalist and political figure. He served as the first Prime Minister of Sudan between 1954 and 1956, and as Head of State of Sudan from 1965 until he was overthrown by Gaafar Nimeiry in 1969.

He was president of the National Unionist Party (now the Democratic Unionist Party) when the unionist parties united under his leadership. In 1954 he was elected prime minister from within the parliament and under the influence of the growing sense of the need for independence of Sudan and before the union discussion with Egypt. With the support of the independent movement, he submitted the proposal to declare independence to parliament. He assumed the post of president of the Council of Sovereignty after the revolution of October 1964 during the second period of democracy. He was arrested during the May 1969 coup and imprisoned in Cooper prison and when his health declined, he was admitted to hospital, where he remained until his death.

==Early life==
Ismail al-Azhari was born in Omdurman. The son of a religious notable, he received his early education in Wad Madani. He joined the Gordon College in 1917 but he did not complete his education there. He worked at Atbara and Omdurman primary schools, then he went on to study at the American University of Beirut and he returned there in 1930. He was appointed by the Gordon College and he founded the Association of Arts and Correspondence. When the Graduates Conference was established he was elected as Secretary-General in 1937. He led several parties and civil rights movements.

==Entry into politics==
Al-Azhari and other educated Sudanese demanded greater participation in the administration of the country, and to promote their objectives they formed the Graduates&#x27; General Congress in 1938. Al-Azhari&#x27;s election as secretary to the congress launched him into a career in politics.

Although the congress at first had no political aspirations, in 1942 it asserted its claim to act as the spokesman for all Sudanese nationalists. When the wartime British administration rejected this claim, the congress split into two groups: the moderates, who were prepared to work with the British toward full independence, and a more extreme group, led by al-Azhari, which distrusted the British and sought unity with Egypt in the post-colonial period.

==Political formation==
In 1943 al-Azhari and his supporters from the congress formed the Ashiqqa (Brothers&#x27;) party, the first true political party in the Sudan. His main support came from the Khatmiyya Sufi order, one of the two main Muslim groups in the country. When the more moderate nationalists formed the Umma Party in 1945, its principal support came from the chief rival of the Khatmiyya, the anti-Egyptian Mahdist sect.

Between 1944 and 1953 al-Azhari, as the leading advocate for uniting the Sudan with Egypt, fought tenaciously against any act which appeared to weaken the &quot;unity of the Nile Valley&quot;. Thus, in 1948 he boycotted the elections to establish a legislative assembly in Sudan, and his propaganda and demonstrations led to his arrest and imprisonment for subversion in 1948–1949.

The Egyptian Revolution of 1952, which ended the regime of King Farouk I, dramatically changed the situation in Sudan. Farouk&#x27;s government had exerted all its influence to unite Egypt and Sudan and block Sudanese independence. Egypt&#x27;s new leaders, Muhammad Naguib, who was half-Sudanese, and later Gamal Abdel Nasser, were more willing to permit the Sudan to achieve independence.

On 12 February 1953, an agreement was reached between Egypt, Britain and the Sudanese, for a transition from condominium rule to self-government within three years, followed by an election to determine the future relationship between Egypt and Sudan. Although his imprisonment and the quarrels within his own party had for a time undermined al-Azhari&#x27;s power and prestige, he was able to reunite his followers under the banner of the National Unionist Party (NUP) in time to campaign vigorously for the combined parliament and constitutional assembly which was to rule the Sudan for the next two years. Throughout the campaign al-Azhari emphasized his hostility to the British and his support for Egypt so that when the NUP won a victory in the elections of 1953, it was widely regarded as a victory for al-Azhari&#x27;s efforts to link the Sudan to Egypt.

==Prime minister==
In 1954 al-Azhari became the Sudan&#x27;s first prime minister. His government faced three major problems. The first was the critical constitutional question of Sudan&#x27;s relationship with Egypt. It soon became clear that the Sudanese people did not want to be tied closely to Egypt, and in his greatest act of statesmanship al-Azhari dramatically reversed the position which he had long advocated and, with the support of the principal political leaders, declared Sudan independent on January 1, 1956.

Then al-Azhari was faced with the second problem, the task of organizing a permanent government. His principal opponent, the Umma Party, wanted a strong presidential system. Al-Azhari advocated for a British parliamentary form of government, but he never resolved the issue during his tenure and the problem remained into the 1970s.

The third problem which confronted al-Azhari&#x27;s government was the uniting of the black, non-Muslim southern Sudanese with peoples and traditions very different if not opposed to the Arab, Muslim north. Neither by his background nor by his political convictions was al-Azhari sympathetic to the aspirations of the southern Sudanese, and he sought to control southern Sudan by a combination of military and police repression on the one hand and negotiations and discussion on the other. The failure of the policy became apparent in August 1955, when a mutiny in the Equatoria Corps precipitated disturbances throughout many of the districts in the south. Thereafter, relations between northern and southern Sudan remained the principal problem facing successive Sudanese governments. Their failure to meet southern aspirations undermined their authority, just as it had drained al-Azhari&#x27;s political strength.

These and other problems began to weaken al-Azhari&#x27;s coalition. His reversal on unity with Egypt undermined the political strength of the NUP by depriving it of its principal ideology. The mutiny in the south damaged al-Azhari&#x27;s prestige. More importantly, the fragile alliance between the Khatmiyya sect and the NUP began to disintegrate, leaving the prime minister without the popular support he needed to rule effectively. As a result, he reformed his coalition into a &quot;government of all talents&quot; in February 1956, but then his former Khatmiyya supporters deserted to form the People&#x27;s Democratic Party in June. In July he lost a vote of confidence in parliament and resigned.

==Later life==
Al-Azhari opposed the government led by Abdullah Khalil, who replaced him, and also the succeeding military regime of Ibrahim Abboud. In 1961 al-Azhari was arrested and exiled to Juba in southern Sudan for several months.

In 1964 the military regime resigned in the face of student-led demonstrations, and party politics reemerged in Sudan. Al-Azhari sought to regain power, but without a strong political base even his skill as a politician was insufficient to lead a government in Sudan. In March 1965 he became President of Sudan, but this was primarily an honorary position with little real power. He remained president until May 1969, when a military coup d&#x27;état led by Col. Gaafar Nimeiry ended his political life.

Known as a skilled if not crafty politician, al-Azhari was respected and loved. His tenacity to survive the many vicissitudes of Sudanese political life was even admired. His most statesmanlike decision – not to press for unity with Egypt – destroyed the principles upon which his political life had been constructed, leaving only manipulation to achieve political power. He died on August 26, 1969.

==See also==
*History of Sudan (1956–1969)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q255545" start="0" end="16" title="Ismail al-Azhari" label="Ismail al-Azhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="62" end="67" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="87" end="103" title="political figure" label="political figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q741259" start="128" end="151" title="Prime Minister of Sudan" label="Prime Minister of Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740395" start="182" end="204" title="List of heads of state of Sudan" label="Head of State of Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311798" start="242" end="256" title="Gaafar Nimeiry" label="Gaafar Nimeiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255850" start="324" end="349" title="Democratic Unionist Party (Sudan)" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="591" end="596" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515053" start="875" end="888" title="1969 Sudanese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="May 1969 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79468429" start="907" end="920" title="Kobar Prison" label="Cooper prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q180921" start="1060" end="1068" title="Omdurman" label="Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q852528" start="1137" end="1147" title="Wad Madani" label="Wad Madani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585565" start="1163" end="1177" title="Gordon Memorial College" label="Gordon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q753906" start="1244" end="1250" title="Atbara" label="Atbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q180921" start="1255" end="1263" title="Omdurman" label="Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q469482" start="1313" end="1342" title="American University of Beirut" label="American University of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237968" start="1481" end="1501" title="Graduates&amp;#x27; General Congress" label="Graduates Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740599" start="2588" end="2597" title="Khatmiyya" label="Khatmiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="2598" end="2602" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116138" start="2707" end="2717" title="Umma Party (Sudan)" label="Umma Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="3000" end="3011" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="3213" end="3240" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="Egyptian Revolution of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="3268" end="3281" title="Farouk of Egypt" label="King Farouk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q104392" start="3467" end="3482" title="Muhammad Naguib" label="Muhammad Naguib"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="3517" end="3535" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255850" start="4040" end="4063" title="Democratic Unionist Party (Sudan)" label="National Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4675" end="4680" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="5190" end="5230" title="Westminster system" label="British parliamentary form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5511" end="5515" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5517" end="5523" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q118967607" start="5879" end="5885" title="Torit mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q255572" start="5893" end="5908" title="Equatoria Corps" label="Equatoria Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949247" start="6843" end="6873" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party (Sudan)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q317595" start="7004" end="7019" title="Abdullah Khalil" label="Abdullah Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319216" start="7082" end="7096" title="Ibrahim Abboud" label="Ibrahim Abboud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="7143" end="7147" title="Juba, Southern Sudan" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q740395" start="7479" end="7497" title="List of heads of state of Sudan" label="President of Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515053" start="7612" end="7664" title="1969 Sudanese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup d&amp;#x27;état led by Col. Gaafar Nimeiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486796" start="8107" end="8135" title="History of Sudan (1956–1969)" label="History of Sudan (1956–1969)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772301" wikidata="Q402561" url="?curid=772301" title="Super-iron battery">
<text>The Super-iron battery is a moniker for a proposed class of rechargeable electric battery. Such batteries feature cathodes composed of ferrate salts, commonly potassium ferrate () or barium ferrate (). One attraction to the proposed device is that the spent cathode would consist of a rust-like material, which is preferable to batteries based on toxic cadmium, manganese and nickel. Another attraction is potentially higher energy capacity. 

==See also==
===Other iron-based batteries===
* Lithium iron phosphate battery
* Lithium iron disulfide battery
* Nickel–iron battery
===Other battery technologies===
* List of battery types
* Lithium-ion battery
* Nanotechnology
* Nickel–cadmium battery
* Nickel–metal hydride battery

==References==
==Further reading==
*Super Battery.
*&quot;Battery Bimonthly&quot;, Vol. 34 No. Pp. 247–249. 2004
*Energetic Iron(VI) Chemistry: The Super-Iron Battery, &quot;Science&quot;, Volume 285, p. 1039, 13 August 1999. &quot;Super-Iron&quot; Comes to the Rescue of Batteries, &quot;Science&quot;, Volume 285, p. 995, 13 August 1999.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q402561" start="4" end="22" title="Super-iron battery" label="Super-iron battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="73" end="89" title="battery (electricity)" label="electric battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q958387" start="135" end="142" title="ferrate" label="ferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418315" start="159" end="176" title="potassium ferrate" label="potassium ferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q413900" start="183" end="197" title="barium ferrate" label="barium ferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="285" end="289" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="353" end="360" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="362" end="371" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="376" end="382" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q901551" start="492" end="522" title="Lithium iron phosphate battery" label="Lithium iron phosphate battery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="525" end="555" title="Lithium metal battery#Chemistries" label="Lithium iron disulfide battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80722" start="558" end="577" title="Nickel–iron battery" label="Nickel–iron battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607341" start="613" end="634" title="List of battery types" label="List of battery types"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="637" end="656" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="Lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="659" end="673" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q898377" start="676" end="698" title="Nickel–cadmium battery" label="Nickel–cadmium battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="701" end="729" title="Nickel–metal hydride battery" label="Nickel–metal hydride battery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772310" wikidata="Q981342" url="?curid=772310" title="Salvatore Ferragamo">
<text>Salvatore Ferragamo (5 June 1898 – 7 August 1960) was an Italian shoe designer and the founder of luxury goods high-end retailer Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A. An innovative shoe designer, Salvatore Ferragamo established a reputation in the 1930s. In addition to experimenting with alternative materials such as fish skin, Ferragamo drew on historic inspiration for his shoes.

==Early life==
Salvatore (registered as &quot;Salvadore&quot;) Ferragamo was born in 1898 to a poor family in Bonito, in the Campania region of Italy, near Avellino, the eleventh of fourteen children of Antonio Ferragamo and Mariantonia Ferragamo (both had the same surname, which often happened in smaller Italian towns). After making his first pair of shoes for himself, a pair of high heels, at age nine (and his sisters to wear at their confirmation), young Salvatore decided that he had found his calling.
==Career==
After studying shoemaking in Naples for a year, fourteen year old Ferragamo opened a small store based in his parents&#x27; home. In 1915, he emigrated to Boston, Massachusetts, where one of his brothers worked in a cowboy boot factory. After a brief stint at the factory, Ferragamo convinced his brothers to move to California, first Santa Barbara then Hollywood. It was there that Ferragamo found success, initially opening a shop for repair and made-to-measure shoes, leading to a long period of designing footwear for the cinema.

Reluctant to accept that his shoes could be beautiful but uncomfortable to wear, he studied anatomy at the University of Southern California.

After spending thirteen years in the US, Ferragamo, now thirty-three returned to Italy in 1927, settling in Florence. He began to fashion shoes for prominent women, including the Maharani of Cooch Behar, Eva Perón and Marilyn Monroe. He opened a workshop in the Via Mannelli, experimenting with design, while applying for patents for his innovations. He filed for bankruptcy in 1933 due to bad management and economic pressure, but was able to expand his operations in the 1950s, including a workforce of 700 artisans who made 350 pairs of shoes per day, by hand.

&quot;The Rainbow&quot; was created by Salvatore Ferragamo in 1938 and was the first instance of the platform shoe returning in modern days in the West. The platform sandal was designed for American singer and actress Judy Garland. The shoe was a tribute to Garland&#x27;s signature song &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot; performed in &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1939) feature film. The shoe was crafted using shaped slabs of cork covered in suede with gold kidskin straps. He was inspired to experiment with new materials to find those not rationed during World War II.

==Death and legacy==
Salvatore Ferragamo died in 1960 at the age of 62, but his name lives on as an international company, which has expanded its operations to include luxury shoes, bags, eyewear, silk accessories, watches, perfumes and a ready-to-wear clothing line. At his death, his wife Wanda and later their six children (Fiamma, Giovanna, Fulvia, Ferruccio, Massimo and Leonardo) ran the company. 

His most famous invention is arguably the &quot;Cage heel&quot;. Fiamma (Salvatore&#x27;s eldest daughter who died in 1998) came up with the &quot;Vara pumps&quot; in 1978.

A museum dedicated to Ferragamo&#x27;s life and work opened in the Palazzo Spini Feroni in 1995. The palazzo had been bought by Ferragamo in the 1930s.

In March 2013, Ferragamo&#x27;s fashion house, Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A., established the Ferragamo Foundation in Florence. The foundation was formed to cultivate young fashion designers, based on the ideas of Salvatore Ferragamo.

==Present day==
The company is owned by the Ferragamo family, which in November 2006 included Salvatore&#x27;s widow Wanda, five children, 23 grandchildren and other relatives. There is a rule that only three members of the family can work at the company, prompting fierce competition.

==Family==
* Wanda Ferragamo Miletti led the group since 1960, when her husband and founder of the company, Salvatore, died. She was honorary chairman until her death in 2018.
* Ferruccio Ferragamo, chairman of the company
* Giovanna Gentile-Ferragamo, vice president of Salvatore Ferragamo SpA
* Leonardo Ferragamo, since 2000, has been the Director of Salvatore Ferragamo SpA, Ferragamo Finanziaria; Executive Vice President of the Fondazione Ferragamo and owner of Finnish luxury yacht builder OY Nautor Swan.
* Massimo Ferragamo, Chairman of Ferragamo USA.
* Fulvia Visconti-Ferragamo, who died in March 2018, ran the fashion label&#x27;s silk accessories division beginning in the 1970s. She was the Deputy Chairwoman of Ferragamo Finanziaria SpA.
* Fiamma Ferragamo di San Giuliano, who died in 1998, was involved in the creation of some of the brand&#x27;s products, such as Vara shoe and the Gancino.
* James Ferragamo, Women&#x27;s and Men&#x27;s Shoes and Leather Goods Division Director for the Salvatore Ferragamo Group
* Angelica Visconti Ruspoli, South Europe Director
* Diego Paternò di San Giuliano coordinates the digital activities of the brand.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Official website of the Salvatore Ferragamo Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981342" start="0" end="19" title="Salvatore Ferragamo" label="Salvatore Ferragamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="70" end="78" title="fashion designer" label="designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="98" end="110" title="luxury goods" label="luxury goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946053" start="129" end="155" title="Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A." label="Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q55008" start="484" end="490" title="Bonito, Italy" label="Bonito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="499" end="507" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="518" end="523" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13433" start="530" end="538" title="Avellino" label="Avellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="815" end="827" title="confirmation (sacrament)" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915560" start="911" end="921" title="shoemaking" label="shoemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="925" end="931" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1051" end="1057" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1059" end="1072" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1213" end="1223" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="1231" end="1244" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="1250" end="1259" title="Hollywood, California" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q993308" start="1344" end="1359" title="made-to-measure" label="made-to-measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="1523" end="1530" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1538" end="1571" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1682" end="1690" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006406" start="1753" end="1776" title="Indira of Baroda" label="Maharani of Cooch Behar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40933" start="1778" end="1787" title="Eva Perón" label="Eva Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="1792" end="1806" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="1938" end="1948" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q582151" start="2240" end="2253" title="platform shoe" label="platform shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="2357" end="2369" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="2433" end="2449" title="Over the Rainbow" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="2475" end="2491" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="2562" end="2566" title="Cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071417" start="2578" end="2583" title="suede" label="suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070958" start="2594" end="2601" title="kidskin" label="kidskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2693" end="2705" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q67900168" start="3035" end="3041" title="Fiamma Ferragamo" label="Fiamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406653" start="3289" end="3339" title="Salvatore Ferragamo Museum" label="museum dedicated to Ferragamo&amp;#x27;s life and work"/>
<link wikidata="Q281532" start="3354" end="3374" title="Palazzo Spini Feroni" label="Palazzo Spini Feroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946053" start="3487" end="3513" title="Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A." label="Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="3610" end="3626" title="fashion designer" label="fashion designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q69762802" start="3973" end="3996" title="Wanda Ferragamo" label="Wanda Ferragamo Miletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430766" start="4457" end="4471" title="Nautor Swan" label="OY Nautor Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418839" start="4871" end="4886" title="James Ferragamo" label="James Ferragamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646333" start="5012" end="5019" title="Francesco Ruspoli, 10th Prince of Cerveteri" label="Ruspoli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772315" wikidata="Q54529" url="?curid=772315" title="Jack Kramer">
<text>John Albert Kramer (August 1, 1921 – September 12, 2009) was an American tennis player of the 1940s and 1950s, and a pioneer promoter who helped drive the sport towards professionalism at the elite level. Kramer also ushered in the serve-and-volley era in tennis, a playing style with which he won three Grand Slam tournaments (the U.S. Championships in 1946 and 1947, Wimbledon in 1947). He also led the U.S. Davis Cup tennis team to victory in the 1946 and 1947 Davis Cup finals.

Kramer won the U.S. Pro Championship at Forest Hills in 1948 and the Wembley Pro Championships in 1949. He won world professional championship 2-man tours in 1948 (against Bobby Riggs), 1949/50 (against Pancho Gonzales), 1950/51 (against Pancho Segura), and 1953 (against Frank Sedgman).

Kramer was ranked world no. 1 amateur player for 1946 by Pierre Gillou, Harry Hopman and Ned Potter. He was ranked world no. 1 amateur player for 1947 by John Olliff, Pierre Gillou and Ned Potter. In 1948 he was ranked the U.S. no. 1 professional in the USPLTA contemporary rankings for U.S. pro tennis play. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be the world no. 1 player from 1946 to 1953, spanning his last amateur years and early pro years.

He was the leading promoter of professional tennis tours in the 1950s and 1960s, signing many of the most accomplished tennis players of the era to professional contracts. Kramer played an important role in the establishment of modern men&#x27;s Open-era tennis.

==Tennis career==

=== Amateur player ===
Kramer began his tennis career by taking lessons from renowned teaching professional, Dick Skeen. Within a year, he was playing junior tournaments. He played on the Montebello High School tennis team with George Richards. Because of his obvious ability and his family&#x27;s lack of money, he came under the guidance of Perry T. Jones. at the Los Angeles Tennis Club (LATC). Jones was the President of the Southern California Tennis Association (SCTA). Kramer traveled many hours each day from his home in Montebello, California, to play tennis at the LATC and the Beverly Hills Tennis Club. He was able to play against such great players as Ellsworth Vines, Bobby Riggs, and Bill Tilden. Kramer was the National Boys&#x27; Champion in 1936, and the winner of the 1938 National Juniors Interscholastics. He competed occasionally in men&#x27;s tournaments on grass courts in the East. He won matches against nationally ranked men such as Elwood Cooke. Kramer also played with high school teammate George Richards, who later was nationally ranked.

Kramer competed at the U.S. National Championships seven times from 1938 through 1947. He lost his first match in 1938 in straight sets, winning only two games. At the 1939 U.S. Championships he was beaten in the second round by 11th-seeded and fellow Californian Joe Hunt. In 1940 Kramer defeated fourth-seeded Frank Parker in a five-set quarterfinal but lost to second-seeded and eventual champion Don McNeill in the semifinal. At the 1941 Championships, he was seeded for the first time, at no. 11, and reached the quarterfinal where third-seeded Frank Kovacs proved too strong. In 1942, Kramer won the men&#x27;s singles in the Ojai Tennis Tournament. Kramer received a leave from his duties in the United States Coast Guard to compete at the 1943 Championships. Seeded second, he reached the final, despite being weakened by food poisoning, but lost it to Joe Hunt in four sets. During World War II, he continued to win prizes in the United States as the war had effectively put an end to international tennis, but did not compete in the U.S. Championships in 1944 and 1945.

The first Grand Slam tournament Kramer entered after the war was the 1946 Wimbledon Championships where he was seeded second but was upset in by Jaroslav Drobný in a five-set fourth round match. At the 1946 U.S. Championships, he was seeded third but managed to win his first Major singles title after a straight-set victory in the final against Tom Brown, losing just a single set in the tournament. He was ranked world no. 1 amateur in 1946 by Pierre Gillou, Harry Hopman and Ned Potter.

At the 1947 Wimbledon Championships, Kramer was seeded first and justified it by winning the title after another straight-sets win against Brown in a final that lasted only 48 minutes. At 1947 U.S. Championships, number one seed Kramer faced Frank Parker in the final. Parker won the first two sets as Kramer struggled to find form. Then, Kramer &quot;changed suddenly from a stumbling novice to a raging perfectionist&quot; and went on to win in five sets to retain his title. Kramer was ranked world no. 1 amateur in 1947 by John Olliff, Pierre Gillou and Ned Potter.

Kramer made his debut for the US Davis Cup team in 1939 in the final of the World Group against Australia. He and Joe Hunt lost the doubles match against John Bromwich and Adrian Quist. In 1946 and 1947 he was part of the winning US team, defeating Australia in both finals and winning all four of his singles matches. After 1947 he became ineligible to play for the Davis Cup on account of becoming a professional player. He compiled a Davis Cup match record of seven wins and two losses.

=== Professional player ===
;1947
Kramer turned professional in November 1947, signing a $50,000 per year contract with promoter Jack Harris, the largest pro contract offer ever made to that point in the history of tennis. He made his pro debut against Bobby Riggs on December 26, 1947, at Madison Square Garden. 15,114 people showed up for the match in one of the worst snow storms in New York history to watch Riggs win.

;1948
Kramer trailed Riggs on January 16 by an 8 to 6 edge, however Kramer had already begun to win more often by adopting a net-rushing style of play. The two players were tied at 14 to 14, and then Kramer took control as Riggs weakened, going on to win the tour against Riggs 69 to 20. Kramer beat Riggs in the final of the US Professional Championships at Forest Hills NY in June 1948 in four sets. Riggs &quot;blew a 5-3 lead in that all-telling opening set, and after that he was licked, showing obvious fatigue even though he did manage to rally to win the third set&quot;. Kramer was awarded $1,450 for winning the singles, and $412 for winning the doubles. Kramer also won tours of South America and Australasia in 1948.

Kramer was ranked the no. 1 pro in the U.S. for 1948 by the USPLTA. The USPLTA no. 1 professional ranking was described as encompassing official recognition as the best professional player &quot;in the United States&quot;, rather than a world no. 1 ranking. The professional rankings of the USPLTA and later of the PTPA were based on major professional tournament play in the United States. Those rankings apparently did not include consideration of the world pro tours, which were not inclusive events but restricted to a small group of usually two players. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1948 period with the observation on that period in one article that &quot;in those days ranking systems were less organized and credible than today&#x27;s computer-driven listings.&quot; Kramer was referred to as &quot;world professional tennis champion&quot; after the tour with Riggs was concluded.

;1949
In early June 1949, Kramer won the Wembley Professional Championships in London, England, edging Segura in a close five-set semifinal, and defeating Riggs in the final. &quot;Riggs set a fast pace in the first set, but he appeared to burn himself out in the early stages of the match&quot;. Kramer did not defend his U.S. Pro Championships title at Forest Hills N.Y., where Riggs defeated Budge in the final. However, Kramer won the Slazenger Pro at Scarborough, England in July 1949 beating Segura in the semifinal and Budge in the final. In early 1950, Kramer was described as &quot;world champion in 1949&quot;. Kramer was not ranked by the USPLTA for 1949 due to insufficient play within the United States. Kramer did not play at Forest Hills or at the Philadelphia Indoor. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1949 period.

;1950
In 1949–50, Kramer beat Pancho Gonzales 94 matches to 29 in the World Series. Kramer lost the final of the U.S. Pro Indoor at Philadelphia to Gonzales. At the U.S. Pro in June 1950 played at Cleveland on clay, Kramer lost a close five-set semifinal to Segura. Kramer was ranked U.S. no. 2 professional behind Segura for 1950 by the USPLTA. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1950 period. Kramer was described as &quot;world professional champion&quot; throughout 1950.

;1951
In the 1950–51 World Series, Kramer beat Pancho Segura 64 matches to 28. Kramer won the Philadelphia U.S. Pro Indoor round robin event in March 1951, defeating Gonzales in the final.

At the Philadelphia U.S. Pro Indoor, the service &quot;drives&quot; (not &quot;forehand drives&quot; as sometimes reported) of a number of players were electronically measured and compared to Tilden&#x27;s reported service &quot;drive&quot; speed of 151 mph made by stopwatch and film in 1931. The service speeds were measured at the net, and not at the racquet face, as is currently the standard practice. Gonzales was recorded as hitting the fastest serve, 112.88 mph, followed by Kramer at 107.8, and Van Horn at 104. Kovacs, who possessed a big serve, played in the Philadelphia tournament but did not participate in the service speed measurements. Segura and Riggs participated in the test, but their results were not reported.

Kramer did not play in the Cleveland International Pro (Cleveland U.S. Pro according to PTPA). At the USPLTA U.S. Pro at Forest Hills N.Y., in 1951, Kramer withdrew with back trouble after a five-set win over Parker. Kramer was not ranked in the USPLTA professional ranking due to insufficient U.S. tournament play (having withdrawn from the Forest Hills U.S. Pro and having been absent from the Cleveland U.S. Pro). Kramer was ranked U.S. no. 4 professional for 1951 behind Kovacs, Segura, and Gonzales by the PTPA. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1951 period. Kramer was described as &quot;world champion&quot; or &quot;world&#x27;s professional champion&quot; throughout 1951.

;1952
At the Philadelphia Masters Indoor, Kramer lost both of his matches to Gonzales, who won the tournament. At the Roland Garros Round Robin Professional event in Paris, Kramer defeated Gonzales but lost to Segura, who won the tournament. At the 1952 Wembley Professional Championships, Kramer lost a close five-set final to Gonzales, regarded as one of the classic all-time matches. Kramer was not ranked in the 1952 U.S. professional rankings by the USPLTA or the PTPA, both of which ranked Segura professional no. 1 followed by Gonzales at no. 2. Kramer did not play at the U. S. Pro (billed title Cleveland International Pro), which was won by Segura. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1952 period.

;1953
Kramer beat Frank Sedgman, 54–41, in the 1953 World Series and was referred to as &quot;world champion&quot; again. Kramer did not play in any of the larger tournaments in 1953. Kramer was ranked no. 3 professional for 1953 by the Players&#x27; Committee of the Cleveland World Pro in June behind Gonzales and Segura. Kramer was given a world no. 1 professional tennis player reference by The Sacramento Bee newspaper for 1953. He was ranked world no. 1 pro by Frank Sedgman in October 1953. Kramer was ranked behind the World no. 1 ranked Sedgman in the 1953 Tennis de France full season rankings, which included the results from Europe, published by Philippe Chatrier. Some recent tennis writers have considered Kramer to be world no. 1 for the 1953 period. Kramer retired from competitive tennis in 1954 due to arthritic back problems and went on to promote his Pro Tour.

;1954 &amp; 1956
Kramer played matches during an Asia tour in September and October 1954 with Pancho Gonzales, Frank Sedgman and Pancho Segura. In 1956, Kramer played a few undercard matches against Segura on the main tour (Gonzales and Trabert were the feature match). Kramer also played a South American tour in late June and early July 1956 with Gonzales, Sedgman and Trabert. Kramer played in the Masters at Los Angeles in July–August 1956, losing all of his matches.

;1957–1959
Kramer made a comeback on a four-man world tour with Hoad, Rosewall, Segura, and Sedgman in the fall of 1957. Kramer led Hoad for most of the tour, before being slightly edged by the new recruit 16 to 14. Hoad claimed that he had great trouble learning to read Kramer&#x27;s service motion, which he found very deceptive.

Kramer beat Hoad at the Wembley tournament. &quot;Kramer, as accurate as ever, seldom hit a loose shot and Hoad, closely confined by so much admirable lawn tennis, did not seem to have patience enough to fight his way out of his difficulties.&quot; Kramer lost his next match in the semifinals to Rosewall, but beat Gonzales in the third place match.

Gonzales and Hoad were the headliners for Kramer&#x27;s upcoming world championship tour in 1958, in which Kramer substituted for some of the undercard matches in the New Zealand portion of the tour. Following his tour loss to Gonzales in 1957, Rosewall had requested to Kramer to be included in the 1958 championship tour, and Rosewall rejected Kramer&#x27;s offer of an undercard position against Trabert. Kramer fared poorly against Rosewall in the 1957 series, and he lost again to Rosewall in the quarterfinals of the 1958 French Professional Championships. Trabert beat Kramer in the quarter-finals of the Wembley tournament in 1958. Kramer lost in the first round at the Wembley tournament in 1959 to Rosewall.

===Assessment===
Tall and slim, he was the first world-class player to play &quot;the Big Game&quot;, a consistent serve-and-volley game, in which he came to the net behind all of his serves, including the second serve. He was particularly known for his powerful serve and forehand, as well as his ability to play &quot;percentage tennis&quot;, which he learned from Cliff Roche, a retired automotive engineer, at the Los Angeles Tennis Club (LATC). This strategy maximized his efforts on certain points and in certain games during the course of a match to increase his chances of winning. The key was to hold serve at all costs, which was one of many things that made up Kramer&#x27;s mature game.

Kramer was regarded by some tennis historians as one of the greatest players ever.

In 1975, Don Budge ranked his top five players of all time and rated Kramer number two behind Vines. He also said Kramer had the best forehand.

In 1978, Ellsworth Vines ranked his all-time top 10 in &quot;Tennis Myth and Method&quot; and rated Kramer number two, behind Budge.

In the Tennis Channel series &quot;100 Greatest of All Time&quot; in 2012, Kramer was ranked the 21st greatest male tennis player of all time, just ahead of longtime rival Pancho Gonzales at 22nd, and close behind his former pro recruit Lew Hoad at 19th.

In the early years of the 21st century, Sidney Wood compiled his list of the Greatest Players of All Time (later published posthumously in a memoir &quot;The Wimbledon final that never was and other tennis tales from a bygone era&quot;). Wood first entered Wimbledon in 1927 and won the title in 1931. &quot;From that time on, through to the late 1970s (doubles only towards the end), I was privileged to compete against virtually every top player in the world&quot; said Wood. Wood ranked Kramer number two, behind Budge.

In 2014, Frank Sedgman ranked Kramer number one in his greatest male tennis players of all-time list in his autobiography &#x27;Game, Sedge and Match&#x27;.

===Promoter===
Kramer was involved in the 1948 agreement between the touring professionals and the USPLTA, which represented the teaching professionals and tennis professionals not under contract for the pro tours. The agreement established cooperation between the contract professionals and the USPLTA over the holding of the U.S. Pro at Forest Hills, and the touring pros agreed to become members of the USPLTA and to refrain from establishing a separate contract player&#x27;s organization. The issue emerged again in 1951 when a group of touring pros established the Professional Tennis Players Association, which supported the Cleveland event as the U.S. Pro. The PTPA included the important pros who were no longer involved in the major professional tours, namely Kovacs, Segura, and Gonzales, and there was discussion of the PTPA creating an alternative pro tour. The PTPA apparently did not continue beyond 1952. Kramer remained on good terms with the USPLTA into the 1960s.

Kramer incorporated his company World Tennis Inc. Tours in 1952 to manage the major professional world tours. He signed Frank Sedgman and Ken McGregor to contracts for the 1953 world tour, which cemented Kramer&#x27;s position as the foremost promoter in the professional game. He subsequently signed a succession of amateur players to professional contracts: Tony Trabert and Rex Hartwig in 1955, Ken Rosewall in 1956, Lew Hoad in 1957, Ashley Cooper, Mal Anderson and Mervyn Rose in 1958, Alex Olmedo in 1959, Mike Davies, Andrés Gimeno, Robert Haillet, Kurt Nielsen, Barry MacKay and Butch Buchholz in 1960 and Luis Ayala in 1961. Some of these amateurs were pitted against Pancho Gonzales in marathon head-to-head match series for the title of World Professional Champion, which were played primarily in the U.S.. Gonzales won a four-man tour over Segura and Sedgman in 1954, a world series marathon against Trabert in 1956, another long tour against Rosewall in 1957, and against Hoad in 1958.

In 1959 and 1960 Kramer arranged four-man tours for the World Championship title. Gonzales frequently complained about the financial arrangements which guaranteed much more money to the new pro recruits than to himself. However, Hoad stated &quot;I never had a problem with Jack Kramer&quot;. It was said that Kramer never had a signed contract with Pancho Segura, but operated entirely on a handshake basis with the Ecuadorian star. During the heyday of the Kramer pro tours in the late 1950s, with 11 Hall of Fame tennis players under contract, Kramer&#x27;s troupe of players were reported to be among the best paid athletes in the world of professional sports, comparable to the best paid baseball players. Laver later stated &quot;He was a huge figure in tennis. We all needed money and he helped a lot of players get some.&quot;

During the years of Kramer&#x27;s management, the major professional tours gradually transformed from the traditional two-man head-to-head marathon series to a more inclusive arrangement of tournaments linked by points systems which included all of the contract professionals. This transition was necessitated by the growing number of prominent players under contract to Kramer. In 1959, Kramer organized a year-long series of 15 tournaments in Australia, North America, and Europe linked by a points system to create a ranking of all the 12 professionals under contract to his World Tennis Inc. Tours, with a significant bonus money award to the number one finisher. Kramer also arranged a tournament points series for 1960, although both Gonzales and Hoad withdrew and there were no announced final results. In 1964, Kramer advised and helped arrange a five-month series of 17 tournaments in the United States and Europe with a points system to determine the rankings of the touring pros. These points series of tournaments paved the way for more recent and current professional rankings and tours.

Kramer had planned an important women&#x27;s professional tour for 1955 between Maureen Connolly and defending world professional champion Pauline Betz, but it failed to materialize due to Connolly&#x27;s career-ending injury. It was expected that Connolly would earn about $75,000 from her contract. Kramer apparently gave testimony at Connolly&#x27;s trial for damages.

Kramer terminated his own company World Tennis Inc. Tours in early 1960, but remained as promoter and manager of the new International Professional Tennis Players Association, which was owned by the players themselves and assumed responsibility for the pro player contracts.

Ramanathan Krishnan rejected a record three-year $150,000 guarantee offer from Kramer in 1959. Neale Fraser rejected a $50,000 two-year contract from Kramer in 1960. Both Rod Laver and Roy Emerson rejected contract offers from Kramer in 1961, and Kramer was not able to field a world tour in 1962, retiring as promoter and manager that year, being succeeded by Tony Trabert. Kramer continued to assist in the pro tour occasionally thereafter, and helped to arrange an $80,000 offer to Emerson in 1964, which Emerson rejected.

Kramer was a relentless advocate for the establishment of Open Tennis between amateur and professional players. An International Tennis Federation (ITF) proposal to introduce Open tennis lost by five votes in 1960, but became a reality in 1968. In 1970, he created the Men&#x27;s Grand Prix points system. In 1972, he was the first executive director of the ATP. He was unpaid at his request. In this role, he was a key figure in an ATP boycott of Wimbledon in 1973, for the banning of Nikola Pilić from the tournament.

=== Author ===
In his 1979 autobiography &quot;The Game: My 40 Years in Tennis&quot;, Kramer calls Helen Wills Moody the best women&#x27;s tennis player that he ever saw. &quot;She was the champion of the world, when I was 15 and played her. – she won Seven Forest Hills and Eight Wimbledons...I beat her, but Helen played a very good game.&quot;

Kramer ranked the best possessors of tennis shots as of 1979:

* First serve: Ellsworth Vines had the finest serve, but Pancho Gonzales was &quot;more consistent with his in the tightest spots. Tilden, too, must be ranked, for speed and deception&quot;.
* Second serve: John Newcombe by far.
* Forehand: Pancho Segura was best, then Fred Perry, followed by Bill Tilden and Ellsworth Vines.
* Backhand: Donald Budge was the best, with Frank Kovacs, Ken Rosewall and Jimmy Connors in the next rank.
* Return of serve: Don Budge was the best, followed by Connors.
* Forehand volley: Wilmer Allison, followed by Budge Patty, then Newcombe.
* Backhand volley: Close among Frank Sedgman, Don Budge and Ken Rosewall, with Sedgman having the edge.
* Overhead: Ted Schroeder was the best, ahead of Vines, Rosewall and Newcombe.
* Lob: Bobby Riggs was the best, &quot;but Segura, Bitsy Grant and Rosewall were almost as effective&quot;.
* Half volley: Pancho Gonzales and Ken Rosewall.
Kramer&#x27;s serve and forehand were equal to the best players in the game, but he would not talk about his own strokes.

Kramer attended Rollins College in Winter Park, Florida, and he played on the tennis team in the 1941 and 1942 seasons. Pauline Betz was there at the same time.

=== Commentator ===
Kramer started working for the BBC as a commentator on the Wimbledon Championships in 1960, a role in which he was very popular because of his intimate off-court knowledge of most of the players. He was paired with Dan Maskell in the commentators booth. However, he was dropped by the BBC in 1973 because of his role in the ATP boycott of Wimbledon that year, which saw 81 players, including defending champion Stan Smith, stay away from the tournament. Kramer returned to the BBC to commentate on the 1976 Wimbledon championships and the 1996 Australian Open men&#x27;s singles final. Kramer was the first host of BBC TV&#x27;s Wimbledon evening highlights programme from 1964 to 1970. He also commentated for NBC from 1954 to 1962, ABC from 1965 to 1973 and CBS from 1968 to 1973.

===Thoroughbred racing===
A fan of Thoroughbred racing, Kramer owned and raced a number of Thoroughbred horses.

==Early and personal life==

Kramer was the son of a blue-collar railroad worker for the Union Pacific railroad. As a boy he was a fine all-round athlete, particularly in basketball and tennis. When he was 13, the family moved to San Bernardino, California, and after seeing Ellsworth Vines, then the world&#x27;s best player, play a match, Kramer decided to concentrate on tennis.

In 1944, he married Gloria, and they had five sons: Bob, David, John, Michael and Ron. They lived in Bel Air, California. He invested in the Professional Tennis Tour, the Jack Kramer Tennis Club in Palos Verdes, California., two Golf courses at the Los Serranos Country Club in Chino Hills, California, and racehorses. Starting in 1948, the Jack Kramer Autograph tennis racket from Wilson Sporting Goods became the most popular selling racket of all time for over 35 years (Wilson Sporting Goods-1984).

== Death ==
Jack Kramer died from a soft tissue cancer on September 12, 2009, at his home in the Bel Air neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.

==Awards and honors==
Kramer was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, Rhode Island in 1968. From 1979 until 1981 the Los Angeles Tennis Open, a tournament he was involved with since the 1950s, was known as the &quot;Jack Kramer Open&quot;. He was portrayed by actor Bill Pullman in the 2017 movie &quot;Battle of the Sexes&quot;.

==Grand Slam finals==
===Singles (3 titles, 1 runner-up)===

===Doubles (6 titles)===

==Pro Slam finals==
===Singles (2 titles, 1 runner-up)===
==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;Tennis is my Racket&quot; (1949), Bobby Riggs
* &quot;Man with a Racket&quot; (1959), Pancho Gonzales
* &quot;Big Bill Tilden, The Triumph and the Tragedy&quot; (1979), Frank Deford
* &quot;Tennis Players are Made, not Born&quot; (1976), Dick Skeen
* &quot;Little Pancho&quot; (2009), Caroline Seebohm
* &quot;The Factory System&quot; (August 1950), Perry T. Jones in Life Magazine
* &quot;Mental Tennis&quot; (1994), Vic Braden
* &quot;As It Was&quot; (2009), Gardnar Mulloy
* &quot;Never Make the First Offer&quot; (2009), Donald Dell

==External links==
* 
* 
* Excerpts from The Game</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="0" end="18" title="Jack Kramer" label="John Albert Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q915012" start="232" end="248" title="serve-and-volley" label="serve-and-volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="369" end="378" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="410" end="419" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q54539" start="655" end="666" title="Bobby Riggs" label="Bobby Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="686" end="701" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="721" end="734" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="755" end="768" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="790" end="801" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="world no. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="1479" end="1487" title="Open era" label="Open-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026627" start="1625" end="1635" title="Dick Skeen" label="Dick Skeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101863" start="1744" end="1759" title="George E. Richards" label="George Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660141" start="1859" end="1873" title="Perry T. Jones" label="Perry T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682353" start="1882" end="1905" title="Los Angeles Tennis Club" label="Los Angeles Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q106624242" start="1945" end="1983" title="USTA Southern California" label="Southern California Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q664503" start="2045" end="2067" title="Montebello, California" label="Montebello, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="2181" end="2196" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Ellsworth Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q54539" start="2198" end="2209" title="Bobby Riggs" label="Bobby Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54684" start="2215" end="2226" title="Bill Tilden" label="Bill Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739842" start="2476" end="2488" title="Elwood Cooke" label="Elwood Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101863" start="2535" end="2550" title="George E. Richards" label="George Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="2609" end="2636" title="US Open (tennis)" label="U.S. National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410814" start="2754" end="2777" title="1939 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="1939 U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q373538" start="2850" end="2858" title="Joe Hunt" label="Joe Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q963755" start="2898" end="2910" title="Frank Parker (tennis)" label="Frank Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q491358" start="2986" end="2997" title="Don McNeill (tennis)" label="Don McNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409886" start="3023" end="3041" title="1941 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="1941 Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740954" start="3136" end="3148" title="Frank Kovacs" label="Frank Kovacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848643" start="3218" end="3240" title="Ojai Tennis Tournament" label="Ojai Tennis Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410624" start="3333" end="3351" title="1943 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="1943 Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q501879" start="3736" end="3764" title="1946 Wimbledon Championships" label="1946 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q365518" start="3812" end="3827" title="Jaroslav Drobný" label="Jaroslav Drobný"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409989" start="3869" end="3892" title="1946 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="1946 U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q500029" start="4013" end="4022" title="Tom Brown (tennis)" label="Tom Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q501884" start="4165" end="4193" title="1947 Wimbledon Championships" label="1947 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410607" start="4346" end="4369" title="1947 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="1947 U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15060494" start="4685" end="4696" title="John Olliff" label="John Olliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="4762" end="4771" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q373538" start="4843" end="4851" title="Joe Hunt (tennis)" label="Joe Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q928386" start="4883" end="4896" title="John Bromwich" label="John Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q374047" start="4901" end="4913" title="Adrian Quist" label="Adrian Quist"/>
<link wikidata="Q54539" start="5473" end="5484" title="Bobby Riggs" label="Bobby Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728098" start="5510" end="5531" title="Madison Square Garden (1925)" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17114507" start="5585" end="5622" title="North American blizzard of 1947" label="worst snow storms in New York history"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="8215" end="8230" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="8749" end="8762" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="11118" end="11131" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="11920" end="11929" title="arthritis" label="arthritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q915012" start="13975" end="13991" title="serve-and-volley" label="serve-and-volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682353" start="14278" end="14301" title="Los Angeles Tennis Club" label="Los Angeles Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q54693" start="15219" end="15230" title="Sidney Wood" label="Sidney Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q712779" start="16983" end="16995" title="Ken McGregor" label="Ken McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54686" start="17205" end="17217" title="Tony Trabert" label="Tony Trabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q285405" start="17222" end="17233" title="Rex Hartwig" label="Rex Hartwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="17243" end="17255" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="17265" end="17273" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q712208" start="17283" end="17296" title="Ashley Cooper (tennis)" label="Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="17298" end="17310" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q913948" start="17315" end="17326" title="Mervyn Rose" label="Mervyn Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q734544" start="17336" end="17347" title="Alex Olmedo" label="Alex Olmedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933109" start="17357" end="17368" title="Mike Davies (tennis)" label="Mike Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q315958" start="17370" end="17383" title="Andrés Gimeno" label="Andrés Gimeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435334" start="17385" end="17399" title="Robert Haillet" label="Robert Haillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q552261" start="17401" end="17413" title="Kurt Nielsen" label="Kurt Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258939" start="17415" end="17427" title="Barry MacKay (tennis)" label="Barry MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q195386" start="17432" end="17446" title="Butch Buchholz" label="Butch Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275397" start="17459" end="17469" title="Luis Ayala (tennis)" label="Luis Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="18195" end="18208" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q53390" start="19863" end="19879" title="Maureen Connolly" label="Maureen Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q53331" start="19922" end="19934" title="Pauline Betz" label="Pauline Betz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559952" start="20432" end="20451" title="Ramanathan Krishnan" label="Ramanathan Krishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715173" start="20527" end="20539" title="Neale Fraser" label="Neale Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="20603" end="20612" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="20617" end="20628" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21017" end="21028" title="History of tennis#Open era" label="Open Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223041" start="21074" end="21105" title="International Tennis Federation" label="International Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775082" start="21228" end="21263" title="Grand Prix tennis circuit" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Grand Prix points system"/>
<link wikidata="Q452365" start="21445" end="21457" title="Nikola Pilić" label="Nikola Pilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q54543" start="21579" end="21596" title="Helen Wills Moody" label="Helen Wills Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="21738" end="21750" title="US Open (tennis)" label="Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="21761" end="21771" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="21906" end="21921" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Ellsworth Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="21948" end="21963" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q312464" start="22098" end="22111" title="John Newcombe" label="John Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="22132" end="22145" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="22201" end="22216" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Ellsworth Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="22230" end="22242" title="Donald Budge" label="Donald Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740954" start="22262" end="22274" title="Frank Kovacs" label="Frank Kovacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="22276" end="22288" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="22293" end="22306" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="22344" end="22353" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q521302" start="22408" end="22422" title="Wilmer Allison" label="Wilmer Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q54549" start="22436" end="22447" title="Budge Patty" label="Budge Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="22495" end="22508" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="22510" end="22519" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="22524" end="22536" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54580" start="22580" end="22593" title="Ted Schroeder" label="Ted Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q54539" start="22654" end="22665" title="Bobby Riggs" label="Bobby Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502409" start="22757" end="22768" title="Half volley" label="Half volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="22770" end="22785" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="22790" end="22802" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q53331" start="23047" end="23059" title="Pauline Betz" label="Pauline Betz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="23168" end="23191" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q935011" start="23324" end="23335" title="Dan Maskell" label="Dan Maskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="23433" end="23436" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q54657" start="23520" end="23530" title="Stan Smith" label="Stan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214425" start="23928" end="23947" title="Thoroughbred racing" label="Thoroughbred racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="24095" end="24108" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="24281" end="24296" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Ellsworth Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="25091" end="25124" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="25184" end="25207" title="LA Tennis Open" label="Los Angeles Tennis Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q315763" start="25333" end="25345" title="Bill Pullman" label="Bill Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24067722" start="25370" end="25389" title="Battle of the Sexes (2017 film)" label="Battle of the Sexes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772318" wikidata="Q2475854" url="?curid=772318" title="Georges Boillot">
<text>Georges Louis Frédéric Boillot (3 August 1884 – 19 May 1916) was a French racing driver and World War I fighter pilot.

== Biography ==

Born in Valentigney, Doubs, Boillot was a mechanic by training who began automobile racing in 1908. He went on to join drivers Paul Zuccarelli and Jules Goux to help create a novel range of racing cars as part of the Peugeot team. He debuted with them in 1909 in the &quot;Coupe de l&#x27;Auto&quot; at Rambouillet and in 1910, went to Italy to compete in the Targa Florio.

At Dieppe, France, on 26 June 1912, Boillot won the French Grand Prix, in his Peugeot L76, a vehicle designed by a group consisting of the young Swiss engineer, Ernest Henry in association with Zuccarelli, Goux and Boillot. This was the first motorcar in the world to have an engine with two overhead camshafts and four valves per cylinder. Boillot won the &quot;Coupe de l&#x27;Auto&quot; in 1913 and became the darling of French racing fans when he won his second straight French Grand Prix at Amiens, becoming the first driver to win the French Grand Prix twice.

That same year Boillot&#x27;s Peugeot teammate, Goux, became the first Frenchman to win the Indianapolis 500. The following year, France again sent a number of competitors to the Indiana speedway where on 27 May, during qualifying, Boillot came tantalizingly close to breaking the 100 mile-an-hour (161 km/h) barrier when he set a new speed record of 99.86 mph (160.70 km/h). During the race, Boillot suffered repeated tire trouble. He ended up finishing 14th.

In what would turn out to be his last race, the 1914 French Grand Prix at Lyon, Boillot&#x27;s Peugeot was literally falling apart at the end. After demonstrating his tremendous skills by keeping the vehicle running and near the lead, it finally overheated on the last lap and he was forced to retire.

With the outbreak of World War I, Boillot joined the new French Air Force, but was initially given the task of being a driver for the commander-in-chief, General Joseph Joffre, who used Boillot&#x27;s fast driving to maintain personal oversight of French armies. Frustrated at his duties away from the front lines he requested to join a fighting unit and promptly embarked on becoming an Ace flyer. During his time as a flyer, he won the Croix de Guerre and the Legion d&#x27;Honneur. On 21 April 1916 his plane was shot down in a dogfight with five German Fokkers, of which he was able to shoot one down before he himself was downed, crashing near Bar-le-Duc. Severely injured, he died in a military hospital at Vadelaincourt, Meuse.

== Legacy ==

In his honor, several places in France named a street for Boillot and there is a George Boillot School in Montlhéry in the Essonne &quot;département&quot; near Paris.

His brother André was also a race driver and at war&#x27;s end, won the 1919 Targa Florio. Georges&#x27; son, Jean, became &quot;director-general&quot; of Peugeot Talbot Sport cars and in 1981 was responsible for involving Peugeot in rallying.

== Motorsports career results ==

=== Indianapolis 500 results ===


== References ==


== External links ==

* Grand Prix History - Hall of Fame , Georges Boillot</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2475854" start="0" end="30" title="Georges Boillot" label="Georges Louis Frédéric Boillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="74" end="87" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="92" end="103" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q138544" start="145" end="156" title="Valentigney" label="Valentigney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361" start="158" end="163" title="Doubs (department)" label="Doubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362676" start="264" end="279" title="Paul Zuccarelli" label="Paul Zuccarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q259951" start="284" end="294" title="Jules Goux" label="Jules Goux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="354" end="361" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191119" start="440" end="451" title="Rambouillet" label="Rambouillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="497" end="509" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="515" end="529" title="Dieppe, France" label="Dieppe, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475827" start="564" end="581" title="1912 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="590" end="601" title="Peugeot L76" label="Peugeot L76"/>
<link wikidata="Q13707" start="813" end="822" title="camshafts" label="camshafts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="827" end="837" title="four valve" label="four valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805416" start="987" end="1004" title="1913 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="1008" end="1014" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997" start="1053" end="1070" title="French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="1171" end="1187" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="1258" end="1265" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8541468" start="1589" end="1611" title="1914 French Grand Prix" label="1914 French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1615" end="1619" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1865" end="1876" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207958" start="2006" end="2019" title="Joseph Joffre" label="Joseph Joffre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="2282" end="2297" title="Croix de guerre 1914-1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2306" end="2327" title="Legion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Legion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="2493" end="2503" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q59322" start="2557" end="2570" title="Vadelaincourt" label="Vadelaincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631" start="2572" end="2577" title="Meuse (department)" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q250024" start="2700" end="2709" title="Montlhéry" label="Montlhéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368" start="2717" end="2724" title="Essonne" label="Essonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="2731" end="2742" title="département" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2754" end="2759" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847329" start="2774" end="2779" title="André Boillot" label="André"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="2839" end="2851" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055791" start="2917" end="2937" title="Peugeot Talbot Sport" label="Peugeot Talbot Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="2996" end="3004" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772320" wikidata="Q4925919" url="?curid=772320" title="Bleeding heart">
<text>Bleeding heart may refer to:

==Flowering plants==
* Bleeding-heart, perennial herbaceous plants of the family Papaveraceae, including:
** &quot;Lamprocapnos spectabilis&quot; (formerly &quot;Dicentra spectabilis&quot;), a popular garden plant with arching sprays of pendent red and white (or pure white) flowers
** &quot;Dicentra&quot;, a genus native to eastern Asia and North America
** &quot;Ehrendorferia&quot;, also known as eardrops
** &quot;Dactylicapnos&quot;, herbaceous climbers
* Bleeding-heart, flowering shrubs, lianas, or small trees of the mint family Lamiaceae, in the genus &quot;Clerodendrum&quot; (also called glorybowers or bagflowers)
* Bleeding heart tree (&quot;Homalanthus populifolius&quot;), of the family Euphorbiaceae, an Australian rainforest plant, also known as Queensland poplar

==Music==
* &quot;A Bleeding Heart&quot;, a 2003 EP by New Zealand band the Bleeders
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot; (album), a 1994 posthumous live album by Jimi Hendrix
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot; (song), a 1965 Elmore James song
* &quot;Bleeding Heart Disease&quot; (song), a song by NOFX from the 1996 album &quot;Heavy Petting Zoo&quot;
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot;, a song by the Brazilian metal band Angra, from the EP &quot;Hunters and Prey&quot;
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot;, a song by the German power metal band Freedom Call from the album &quot;Eternity&quot;
* The Bleeding Heart Band, the backing band for Roger Waters for a brief period of his post-Pink Floyd solo career

==Other uses==
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot; (film), a 2015 American film
* Bleeding-hearts, doves in the genus &quot;Gallicolumba&quot;
* Bleeding heart tetra, &quot;Hyphessobrycon erythrostigma&quot;
* Bleeding Heart Yard, a courtyard in London, England
* &quot;Bleeding Hearts&quot;, a 1994 crime novel by Ian Rankin, under the pseudonym Jack Harvey
* &quot;Bleeding Heart&quot;, an episode of season 2 of &quot;The Mentalist&quot;

==See also==
* Bleeding-heart libertarianism (or liberalism)
* Catholic iconography:
** Sacred heart of Christ, often depicted bleeding
** Heart of the virgin Mary, often depicted bleeding
* Heartbleed (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4925919" start="0" end="14" title="Bleeding heart" label="Bleeding heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q144723" start="111" end="123" title="Papaveraceae" label="Papaveraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161171" start="145" end="169" title="Lamprocapnos spectabilis" label="Lamprocapnos spectabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157857" start="322" end="330" title="Dicentra" label="Dicentra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784712" start="396" end="409" title="Ehrendorferia" label="Ehrendorferia"/>
<link wikidata="Q938909" start="449" end="462" title="Dactylicapnos" label="Dactylicapnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q546906" start="598" end="610" title="Clerodendrum" label="Clerodendrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089502" start="686" end="710" title="Homalanthus populifolius" label="Homalanthus populifolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655511" start="831" end="847" title="A Bleeding Heart" label="A Bleeding Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906370" start="900" end="934" title="Bleeding Heart (album)" label="&amp;quot;Bleeding Heart&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925904" start="983" end="1016" title="Bleeding Heart (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bleeding Heart&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1045" end="1086" title="Bleeding Heart Disease (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bleeding Heart Disease&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289536" start="1129" end="1146" title="Heavy Petting Zoo" label="Heavy Petting Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q542745" start="1243" end="1259" title="Hunters and Prey" label="Hunters and Prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q599992" start="1368" end="1376" title="Eternity (Freedom Call album)" label="Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718571" start="1385" end="1408" title="The Bleeding Heart Band" label="The Bleeding Heart Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080509" start="1516" end="1549" title="Bleeding Heart (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bleeding Heart&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q920895" start="1616" end="1628" title="Gallicolumba" label="Gallicolumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q927123" start="1637" end="1657" title="Bleeding heart tetra" label="Bleeding heart tetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925905" start="1702" end="1721" title="Bleeding Heart Yard" label="Bleeding Heart Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925907" start="1762" end="1777" title="Bleeding Hearts" label="Bleeding Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648443" start="1895" end="1932" title="The Mentalist (season 2)" label="season 2 of &amp;quot;The Mentalist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925897" start="1949" end="1994" title="Bleeding-heart libertarianism" label="Bleeding-heart libertarianism (or liberalism)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2022" end="2044" title="Sacred Heart#Description" label="Sacred heart of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196075" start="2073" end="2097" title="Our Lady of Sorrows" label="Heart of the virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196356" start="2125" end="2152" title="Heartbleed (disambiguation)" label="Heartbleed (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772324" wikidata="Q7783970" url="?curid=772324" title="Thief (arcade game)">
<text>Thief is a 1981 arcade video game that is extremely similar to &quot;Pac-Man&quot;.

The player operates a car being pursued by several blue police cars, in a maze that is supposed to represent city streets. There are eight mazes in all, which change every level in a set order, then repeat starting with the ninth screen. The ninth through sixteenth levels are identical to the first through eighth, except the cars all move faster and the dollar signs (see next paragraph) don&#x27;t last as long. After that, the game loops back to Level 9, even identifying it as such (i.e., the seventeenth stage says &quot;Level 9 completed!&quot; when cleared). Mazes can have up to three side tunnels that the cars can use to go from one side of the screen to the other, but a few have no tunnels at all.

==Gameplay==
Each maze is littered with dollar bills which the player collects by running over them. There are also several (usually four, but the first maze configuration has five) golden dollar signs placed throughout the mazes (the equivalent of Pac-Man&#x27;s energizers); hitting one of these causes the police cars to temporarily turn red. While the police cars are red the player can crash into them and score extra points (100 for the first, 500 for the second, 1000 for the third, and 2000 for the fourth); if contact with the police cars occurs at any other time the player loses a life. When all the dollar bills on one screen have been collected, the player advances to the next level.

As the player clears screens, he receives a new title. There are sixteen titles in all:

*Loitering
*Joyriding
*Disturbing The Peace
*Display of Speed
*Petty Thief
*Car Theft
*Grand Theft Auto
*Amateur Thief
*Professional Thief
*Highway Robber
*Safe Cracker
*Con Artist
*Jewel Thief
*The Thief
*The Boss
*Public Enemy #1

==Audio==
&quot;Thief&quot; was notable for using tape-recorded sounds (on an actual tape player in the machine) masquerading as police radio communications as part of its sound effects (in addition to game-generated sound effects), which ran in a continuous loop while the game was played. As the chatter goes on, the voices ham it up more and more as well as directly taunting the player. According to various street names that are mentioned in the audio, such as Hollywood and Vine, the game is set in Los Angeles. Similar tape loops were used in some of Pacific Novelty&#x27;s other games: &quot;NATO Defense&quot; and &quot;Shark Attack&quot;.
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="16" end="33" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="69" end="76" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="89" end="95" title="player (game)" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="141" end="147" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058210" start="837" end="848" title="United States one-dollar bill" label="dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11110" start="986" end="997" title="dollar sign" label="dollar sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1954" end="1959" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139430" start="2284" end="2302" title="Hollywood and Vine" label="Hollywood and Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2323" end="2334" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772331" wikidata="Q3113276" url="?curid=772331" title="Graham Rowntree">
<text>Graham Christopher Rowntree (born 18 April 1971) is an English rugby union former player and former head coach of Irish club Munster. He played loosehead prop for Leicester Tigers and England. He was capped 54 times for England, despite having to compete for his position with one of the world&#x27;s most capped forwards, Jason Leonard. Rowntree was born in Stockton-on-Tees. He was educated at John Cleveland College, Hinckley, Leicestershire, which has also produced other rugby union players.

==Career==
In 1988 he joined Leicester Tigers from Nuneaton and made his first-team debut against Oxford University in 1990. He was given the nickname Fruit Pastille Man early in his career, owing to sharing a surname with the confectionery brand that manufactures the well known sweet. For much of that time he was in harness with the famous ‘ABC club’ alongside Richard Cockerill and Darren Garforth. At Leicester Rowntree enjoyed great domestic success, and started both the 2001 and 2002 Heineken Cup finals.

In 1993 he made his England A, Barbarians and Midlands debuts, and on 18 March 1995 he gained his first full England cap against Scotland in the 1995 Five Nations Championship as a temporary replacement for Jason Leonard. He subsequently played in the 1995 Rugby World Cup. He also made the 1997 British Lions tour to South Africa, playing 6 games and the 1999 Rugby World Cup.

After the 1999 World Cup Graham was not capped for almost 2 years until a series of fine performances for his club forced him back into international contention. He was prominent throughout the pre-2003 Rugby World Cup years. He was selected for the England squad to tour Canada and the US in 2001, participated in all that season&#x27;s Autumn internationals — being named as man of the match in England&#x27;s 21–15 Cook Cup victory over Australia — and started in each of the 2002 Six Nations games. He started in England&#x27;s 15–13 win over New Zealand in Wellington in 2003 and put in a particularly memorable performance against the All Blacks when England&#x27;s pack was reduced to just 6 men. Despite playing in the 2003 pre-World Cup trial match in France, Rowntree was omitted from Clive Woodward&#x27;s squad, which won the tournament. Clive Woodward admitted that leaving Rowntree behind was one of the hardest decisions he had to make in his time as England head coach.

Rowntree returned to the England side in the 2004 Six Nations and was the first-choice loosehead prop for the 2004 Autumn Internationals.

==Coaching==
Rowntree retired from rugby in 2007 after 17 years playing the game, and he joined the Tigers coaching team where he made a rapid rise up the coaching ranks, becoming the forwards/scrum coach for the English national team ahead of the 2008 Six Nations Championship. He toured South Africa with the British &amp; Irish Lions in 2009, acting as scrum coach, before being named forwards coach for the winning test series against Australia in 2013 and scrum coach for the drawn series with New Zealand in 2017.

Following the resignation of head coach Stuart Lancaster on 11 November 2015, newly appointed head coach Eddie Jones sacked the whole coaching team, with Rowntree leaving his post with England after eight years in December 2015. At the end of the 2015–16 English Premiership season, it was announced that Harlequins had appointed Rowntree as their new forwards coach. Rowntree joined the Georgian national team in 2018, but left after the 2019 Rugby World Cup to join Irish province Munster as their new forwards coach.

Rowntree signed a two-year contract extension with Munster in January 2022, and, in April 2022, the province confirmed that Rowntree would replace Johann van Graan as head coach from the 2022–23 season. Munster won silverware in Rowntree&#x27;s first season as head coach, ending a twelve year trophy drought when they defeated South African side the Stormers 19–14 away from home in the final of the 2022–23 United Rugby Championship on 27 May 2023. Munster confirmed a two-year contract extension with Rowntree in September 2023.

On 29 October 2024, Munster announced the departure of Rowntree by mutual agreement after four losses in six games in the 2024-25 United Rugby Championship.

==Notes==
==External links==
* England profile
* Rowntree @ Planet Rugby Player stats from Planet Rugby
* Sporting heroes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3113276" start="0" end="27" title="Graham Rowntree" label="Graham Christopher Rowntree"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="55" end="62" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="63" end="74" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140373" start="125" end="132" title="Munster Rugby" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="144" end="158" title="Prop (rugby union)" label="loosehead prop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="163" end="179" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="184" end="191" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683939" start="323" end="336" title="Jason Leonard" label="Jason Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q989418" start="359" end="375" title="Stockton-on-Tees" label="Stockton-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226366" start="396" end="418" title="John Cleveland College" label="John Cleveland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020362" start="420" end="428" title="Hinckley" label="Hinckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="430" end="444" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="527" end="543" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069804" start="549" end="557" title="Nuneaton R.F.C." label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430647" start="862" end="879" title="Richard Cockerill" label="Richard Cockerill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016509" start="884" end="899" title="Darren Garforth" label="Darren Garforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598750" start="976" end="980" title="2001 Heineken Cup Final" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600136" start="985" end="989" title="2002 Heineken Cup Final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q807749" start="1043" end="1053" title="Barbarian F.C." label="Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="1141" end="1149" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q543552" start="1157" end="1187" title="1995 Five Nations Championship" label="1995 Five Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683939" start="1219" end="1232" title="Jason Leonard" label="Jason Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="1264" end="1284" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535480" start="1303" end="1342" title="1997 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1997 British Lions tour to South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="1368" end="1388" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="1589" end="1609" title="2003 Rugby World Cup" label="2003 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996424" start="1684" end="1688" title="2001 England rugby union tour of North America" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259369" start="1870" end="1886" title="2002 Six Nations" label="2002 Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996430" start="1967" end="1971" title="2003 England rugby union tour of the Southern Hemisphere" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="2032" end="2042" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q921680" start="2186" end="2200" title="Clive Woodward" label="Clive Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q921680" start="2241" end="2255" title="Clive Woodward" label="Clive Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374328" start="2423" end="2439" title="2004 Six Nations" label="2004 Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985095" start="2488" end="2514" title="2004 end-of-year rugby union internationals" label="2004 Autumn Internationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q605429" start="2765" end="2794" title="2008 Six Nations Championship" label="2008 Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="2828" end="2853" title="British &amp;amp; Irish Lions" label="British &amp;amp; Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q920429" start="2857" end="2861" title="2009 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629141" start="2969" end="2973" title="2013 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to Australia" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711939" start="3031" end="3035" title="2017 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to New Zealand" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q743099" start="3078" end="3094" title="Stuart Lancaster (rugby union)" label="Stuart Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773628" start="3143" end="3154" title="Eddie Jones (rugby union)" label="Eddie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311124" start="3285" end="3319" title="2015–16 English Premiership (rugby union)" label="2015–16 English Premiership season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="3343" end="3353" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q609885" start="3426" end="3448" title="Georgia national rugby union team" label="Georgian national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724176" start="3477" end="3497" title="2019 Rugby World Cup" label="2019 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140373" start="3521" end="3528" title="Munster Rugby" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41799619" start="3706" end="3722" title="Johann van Graan" label="Johann van Graan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794910" start="3910" end="3918" title="Stormers" label="Stormers"/>
<link wikidata="Q118613795" start="3947" end="3952" title="2023 United Rugby Championship final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q112227121" start="3960" end="3993" title="2022–23 United Rugby Championship" label="2022–23 United Rugby Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q127040080" start="4214" end="4247" title="2024-25 United Rugby Championship" label="2024-25 United Rugby Championship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772334" wikidata="Q458322" url="?curid=772334" title="Lindy Boggs">
<text>Marie Corinne Morrison Claiborne Boggs (March 13, 1916 – July 27, 2013) was a politician who served as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives and later as United States Ambassador to the Holy See. She was the first woman elected to Congress from Louisiana. She was also a permanent chairwoman of the 1976 Democratic National Convention, which met in New York City to nominate the Carter-Mondale ticket. She was the first woman to preside over a major party convention.

Boggs was the widow of former Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives Hale Boggs. She is one of three female U.S. Representatives from Louisiana, the others being Catherine Small Long and Julia Letlow, each of whom took office in special elections after the death of their husbands.

==Early life and education==
Boggs was born as Marie Corinne Morrison Claiborne on March 13, 1916, on the Brunswick Plantation near New Roads in Pointe Coupee Parish in South Louisiana, the daughter of Corinne Morrison and Roland Philemon Claiborne, a prominent lawyer. Claiborne&#x27;s father died when she was just two, but her resemblance to her father earned her the nickname &quot;Lindy,&quot; short for the female version of Roland, &quot;Rolinde.&quot;

She graduated from Newcomb College, the women&#x27;s college at Tulane University in New Orleans in 1935. In 1934, Lindy Claiborne met Thomas Hale Boggs at Tulane where the pair worked as editors for the school newspaper, &quot;The Hullabaloo&quot;. Boggs attended Tulane Law School and earned his law degree in 1937 while Claiborne worked as a school teacher after the pair graduated from Tulane. Claiborne and Boggs were married on January 22, 1938 in New Roads, Louisiana. They had four children: Cokie Roberts (a television journalist); Thomas Hale Boggs, Jr. (a lobbyist); Barbara Boggs Sigmund, a mayor of Princeton, New Jersey, and an unsuccessful candidate in the 1982 New Jersey Democratic senatorial primary election (won by Frank Lautenberg); and William Robertson Boggs, who died as an infant on December 28, 1946.

== Career ==

In 1940, Hale Boggs won a seat in the House of Representatives and the Boggs family relocated to Washington, D.C. Boggs lost his 1942 re-election bid, but subsequently returned to win a seat as the representative of Jefferson Parish in 1947 where he served until his death.

On October 16, 1972, Representative Hale Boggs&#x27; twin-engine Cessna plane disappeared over Alaska. Boggs was helping a colleague, Nicholas Begich, father of future U.S. Senator Mark Begich of Alaska, to campaign for reelection. The first bill that the House passed in 1973, House Resolution 1, officially recognized Hale Boggs&#x27; death and created the need for a special election. Lindy Boggs ran successfully as a Democrat for her husband&#x27;s vacated seat in Louisiana&#x27;s 2nd congressional district, in New Orleans.
Boggs was elected to a full term in 1974 with 82 percent of the vote and was re-elected seven times thereafter until she vacated her office in January 1991. Otherwise, Boggs polled more than 80 percent in her contested races. After her district was redrawn in 1984 in response to a federal court order mandating Louisiana&#x27;s first majority-African-American district, she became the only white member of Congress representing a majority-African-American constituency. She announced her retirement from public office in 1990. She was succeeded by William J. Jefferson.

===Accomplishments===
She was influential in composing the Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974. When the Banking committee marked up the ECOA, she added the provision banning discrimination due to sex or marital status without informing the other members of the committee beforehand, personally inserting the language on her own and photocopying new versions of the bill. She then told the other committee members, &quot;Knowing the members composing this committee as well as I do, I&#x27;m sure it was just an oversight that we didn&#x27;t have &#x27;sex&#x27; or &#x27;marital status&#x27; included. I&#x27;ve taken care of that, and I trust it meets with the committee&#x27;s approval.&quot; The committee unanimously approved the bill.

Boggs was the first woman to preside over a national political convention, specifically the 1976 Democratic National Convention. In the 1980 Presidential election Bogg was on the Vice-Presidential shortlist for Senator Ted Kennedy during his primary challenge of President Carter.

She always remained an anti-abortion advocate. She believed that that was one of the main reasons why she wasn&#x27;t chosen as running mate for Walter Mondale for the 1984 U.S. presidential election, despite being briefly considered.
In 1991, she was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame, the oldest and most prestigious award for American Catholics.

In 1994, Boggs was inducted into the Louisiana Political Museum and Hall of Fame in Winnfield, one year after her husband had been among the original thirteen inductees.

In 1997, President Bill Clinton appointed her official U.S. ambassador to the Holy See, a position she held until 2001.

In 2005, Boggs&#x27;s home on Bourbon Street in New Orleans&#x27; French Quarter sustained moderate wind damage from Hurricane Katrina. In 2006, she was awarded the Congressional Distinguished Service Award for her time in the House of Representatives.

Boggs was a member of Sigma Gamma Rho, one of the four traditionally African-American sororities in the United States.

The Boggs Center for Energy and Biotechnology Building at Tulane is named in her honor.

Boggs and her daughter, Cokie Roberts, received the Foremother Award from the National Center for Health Research in 2013.

== Death ==
Boggs died of natural causes at her home in Chevy Chase, Maryland on July 27, 2013, at age 97. A funeral Mass was held on August 1, 2013 at St. Louis Cathedral at 615 Pere Antoine Alley in New Orleans. Interment followed later in the day at St. Mary&#x27;s Cemetery in New Roads, Louisiana. Governor Bobby Jindal ordered all U.S. and state flags in Louisiana to fly at half staff until August 2 in Mrs. Boggs&#x27; memory.

==See also==

* Women in the United States House of Representatives

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boggs, Lindy, with Katherine Hatch. &quot;Washington Through a Purple Veil: Memoirs of a Southern Woman&quot;. New York: Harcourt Brace and Co., 1994
*Ferrell, Thomas H., and Judith Haydel. &quot;Hale and Lindy Boggs: Louisiana&#x27;s National Democrats.&quot; Louisiana History 35 (Fall 1994): 389–402.
*Tyler, Pamela. &quot;Silk Stockings &amp; Ballot Boxes: Women &amp; Politics in New Orleans, 1920 - 1965&quot;. University of Georgia Press, 1996.
*Carrick, Bess. &quot;Lindy Boggs: Steel and Velvet&quot;. Documentary film chronicles Mrs. Boggs&#x27; career in politics and features Cokie &amp; Steve Roberts, Rep. Nancy Pelosi, Rep. John Lewis, former House Speaker Tom Foley, and scholars, Dr. Patrick Maney, &amp; Dr. Pamela Tyler. Produced by Bess Carrick with Louisiana Public Broadcasting, 2006. Airdate 2006–present, nationwide via PBS-Plus.
* Maney, Patrick J. &quot;Hale Boggs: The Southerner as National Democrat&quot; in Raymond W Smock and Susan W Hammond, eds. Masters of the House: Congressional Leadership Over Two Centuries (1998) pp 33–62.

==External links==
*Louisiana Political Museum and Hall of Fame
*Oral History Interview with Lindy Boggs from Oral Histories of the American South


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q458322" start="0" end="38" title="Lindy Boggs" label="Marie Corinne Morrison Claiborne Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="119" end="148" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837627" start="162" end="202" title="United States Ambassador to the Holy See" label="United States Ambassador to the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="253" end="262" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152917" start="307" end="342" title="1976 Democratic National Convention" label="1976 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="387" end="393" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="394" end="401" title="Walter Mondale" label="Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="507" end="568" title="Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives" label="Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567156" start="569" end="579" title="Hale Boggs" label="Hale Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q518515" start="662" end="682" title="Catherine Small Long" label="Catherine Small Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q106089241" start="687" end="699" title="Julia Letlow" label="Julia Letlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276773" start="915" end="924" title="New Roads, Louisiana" label="New Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q506951" start="928" end="948" title="Pointe Coupee Parish" label="Pointe Coupee Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="958" end="967" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628567" start="1263" end="1278" title="Newcomb College" label="Newcomb College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="1308" end="1325" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1329" end="1340" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567156" start="1379" end="1396" title="Hale Boggs" label="Thomas Hale Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691855" start="1509" end="1526" title="Tulane University Law School" label="Tulane Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276773" start="1698" end="1718" title="New Roads, Louisiana" label="New Roads, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395105" start="1744" end="1757" title="Cokie Roberts" label="Cokie Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790344" start="1785" end="1807" title="Thomas Hale Boggs, Jr." label="Thomas Hale Boggs, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="1811" end="1819" title="lobbyist" label="lobbyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858761" start="1822" end="1843" title="Barbara Boggs Sigmund" label="Barbara Boggs Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="1856" end="1865" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q508752" start="1979" end="1995" title="Frank Lautenberg" label="Frank Lautenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q498276" start="2302" end="2318" title="Jefferson Parish, Louisiana" label="Jefferson Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q308889" start="2426" end="2432" title="Cessna" label="Cessna"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="2456" end="2462" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619015" start="2495" end="2510" title="Nicholas Begich" label="Nicholas Begich"/>
<link wikidata="Q454133" start="2542" end="2553" title="Mark Begich" label="Mark Begich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="2731" end="2747" title="special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2783" end="2791" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689039" start="2831" end="2874" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q983443" start="3441" end="3461" title="William J. Jefferson" label="William J. Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384117" start="3523" end="3551" title="Equal Credit Opportunity Act" label="Equal Credit Opportunity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="4304" end="4334" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="4343" end="4369" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="4426" end="4437" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4480" end="4486" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="4512" end="4525" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="4634" end="4648" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="4657" end="4688" title="1984 U.S. presidential election" label="1984 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800135" start="4753" end="4766" title="Laetare Medal" label="Laetare Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="4774" end="4798" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="4842" end="4860" title="American Catholics" label="American Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689249" start="4900" end="4943" title="Louisiana Political Museum and Hall of Fame" label="Louisiana Political Museum and Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944471" start="4947" end="4956" title="Winnfield, Louisiana" label="Winnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5053" end="5065" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837627" start="5089" end="5120" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to the Holy See" label="U.S. ambassador to the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105882" start="5185" end="5199" title="Bourbon Street" label="Bourbon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="5272" end="5289" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512318" start="5431" end="5446" title="Sigma Gamma Rho" label="Sigma Gamma Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395105" start="5642" end="5655" title="Cokie Roberts" label="Cokie Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978044" start="5696" end="5731" title="National Center for Health Research" label="National Center for Health Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q754478" start="5798" end="5819" title="Chevy Chase, Maryland" label="Chevy Chase, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20766109" start="6045" end="6053" title="Governor of Louisiana" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q295492" start="6054" end="6066" title="Bobby Jindal" label="Bobby Jindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031572" start="6194" end="6245" title="Women in the United States House of Representatives" label="Women in the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q577751" start="6955" end="6964" title="Tom Foley" label="Tom Foley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772338" wikidata="Q1442809" url="?curid=772338" title="TD Place Stadium">
<text>TD Place Stadium (originally Lansdowne Park and formerly Frank Clair Stadium) is an outdoor stadium in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. It is located at Lansdowne Park, on the southern edge of The Glebe neighbourhood, where Bank Street crosses the Rideau Canal. It is the home of the Ottawa Redblacks of the Canadian Football League (CFL), Atlético Ottawa of the Canadian Premier League (CPL) and the Ottawa Gee-Gees football team of Ontario University Athletics (OUA), which represent the University of Ottawa.

The playing field has existed since the 1870s, and the complete stadium since 1908. The stadium has been host to FIFA tournaments, Summer Olympic Games, and seven Grey Cups.
==History==
The playing field, part of the Ottawa Exposition Grounds, was first cleared in the 1870s. It was used for equestrian events, lacrosse and rugby football. The first permanent grandstand was built on the north side of the playing field in 1908. It was demolished in 1967 to build a new set of stands with an integrated ice hockey arena underneath, then known as the Ottawa Civic Centre.

A small grandstand was built in the 1920s on the south-side of the field, and it was replaced in 1960. A second deck for the south-side was added during the 1970s. As of 2008, prior to lower south-side demolition, the overall stadium had a 30,927 capacity for football.

In 1984, the grass field which had been in place from 1908 to 1983 was replaced by Astroturf, which lasted though the 2000 season.

In the late 1990s, the stadium was threatened with demolition when then-city councillor (and future Ottawa mayor) Jim Watson led a drive by the municipal government to allow a private developer to reconfigure Lansdowne Park. The proposals submitted all called for residences to be built on the site of the football stadium. Massive public opposition and the realization that the end of the stadium would mean the end of hopes to return CFL football to the capital led the regional government to step in to end the scheme.

In 2001, one year before the Ottawa Renegades began play, the stadium was the first in the CFL to have a next-generation artificial playing surface (FieldTurf) installed.

For many years, the stadium was known as Lansdowne Park, after the fairgrounds in which it was located. It was renamed in 1993 to honour Frank Clair, coach and general manager for the Ottawa Rough Riders during the 1960s and 1970s.

===Revitalization and reconstruction===
In September 2007, the lower south side stands were closed because of cracks in the concrete structure. After the closure of the stands, then-Ottawa mayor Larry O&#x27;Brien was quoted saying that this was an opportunity to do a review of the usage and the facilities of Lansdowne Park. Subsequently, a process was started called &quot;Design Lansdowne&quot; to get public consultations on the park and the stadium. After an engineering study of the north-side and south-side grandstands, the south-side stands were condemned. The lower section of the stands was demolished by controlled implosion on July 20, 2008 at 8:03 am.

During the summer of 2008, a consortium of investors was formed to pursue a new CFL team in Ottawa. They bid successfully and received a conditional franchise from the CFL, with the condition that the stadium would need to be upgraded before the franchise could be activated. Jeff Hunt, one of the principal investors and owner of the Ottawa 67&#x27;s who play in the attached arena, stated that the venue and location are ideal, with over a million people in Ottawa. The organization had reportedly already pre-sold 5,000 season tickets.

In the fall of 2008, the consortium, known as Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group (OSEG), approached the City with a plan to redevelop Lansdowne Park and rebuild the stadium using the proceeds from turning a section of the park into commercial and retail space. The plan, entitled Lansdowne Live! was ambitious and included plans to redevelop all sections of the park. The City, which had received a competing stadium proposal located in Kanata, reviewed the plans and agreed to a conditional agreement with OSEG. OSEG would concentrate on the stadium and commercial/residential precinct, and Ottawa would return the rest of Lansdowne Park to green space. Faced with opposition to the plan, the City proceeded slowly with the proposal, seeking out legal opinions, traffic studies, and an urban park design competition for Lansdowne.

In June 2010 it was announced that Ottawa City Council had approved a redevelopment plan put forward by OSEG to renovate Frank Clair Stadium and build of commercial retail space, 250 housing units and an urban park on the site. The stadium, which was the catalyst to bring the CFL back to Ottawa is to be rent-free to developers for 30 years. Proceeds from the retail and commercial precinct would be shared, and the retail and commercial precinct brought under City control after 30 years. Completion of the overall development was scheduled for 2015.

The OSEG proposal for the stadium envisioned tearing down all of the south-side stands, replacing the stands with a new structure with private boxes and a unique wood-wrapping around the exterior. The north-side stands were to be renovated to current standards, and the north-side exterior expanded to include a retail component. In September 2010, the management group of what would become Ottawa Fury FC joined the plan to redevelop Lansdowne. On June 20, 2011, Ottawa was awarded a professional soccer franchise in the North American Soccer League (NASL) to start play in 2014.

In November 2011, demolition of the rest of the south side stands started. The contract to demolish the stands was awarded for million (equivalent to $million in ). Unlike the lower stands, the upper stands structure was demolished piece-by-piece rather than controlled implosion. The concrete and steel from the structure was recycled, and the seats re-used at a new skating and hockey rink at Ottawa City Hall. Demolition was completed by January 2012.

On January 7, 2014, Frank Clair Stadium and the Civic Centre Arena were renamed TD Place under a new sponsorship deal with the Toronto-Dominion Bank.

The stadium was completed for the first Ottawa Redblacks home game on July 18, 2014. The Ottawa Fury opened their fall season on the same weekend after playing their previous home games that year at Keith Harris Stadium at Carleton University.

On October 29, 2014, the press box and media centre at the stadium were named for Ernie Calcutt, a former broadcaster for the Ottawa Rough Riders.

===Tenants===

The Ottawa Rough Riders football team and its predecessors played at the field from their inception in 1876 until 1996, when the team ceased operations. A successor team, the Ottawa Renegades, played at the stadium from 2002 until 2005. Ottawa&#x27;s third CFL team, the Redblacks, have played at the stadium since 2014.

From the 1870s onward, the field was also home to University of Ottawa&#x27;s Gee-Gees football team. The stadium is home to the Panda Game, an annual game between the cross-city rivals, the Carleton University Ravens and the Gee-Gees. At the Panda Game in 1987, the game was marred by an accident when at least 25 students were injured when a section of railing collapsed and the result was forfeited.

The stadium has also been home to the Ottawa Junior Riders of the Quebec Junior Football League and the Ottawa Bootleggers of the Empire Football League.

The field was also the home of minor-league baseball. The stadium was the home venue of the Ottawa Giants and Ottawa Athletics minor-league baseball teams.

Ottawa Fury FC were the first professional soccer club to play in the renovated TD Place Stadium, playing from the start of the 2014 fall season of the North American Soccer League until the end of the 2019 fall season of the USL Championship. The top-tier Canadian professional club Atlético Ottawa joined the Canadian Premier League in the 2020 season. The women&#x27;s Northern Super League, set to begin play in 2025, will include Ottawa Rapid FC.

==Major events==

===Football===
The stadium has played host to seven Grey Cup games, the first occasion being in 1925 when Ottawa won its first Grey Cup title. It later held Grey Cup games in 1939, 1967, 1988, and 2004. On July 31, 2016, the CFL awarded Ottawa the 105th Grey Cup game, to be played at TD Place Stadium in 2017, as part of celebrations to mark 150 years of Confederation. The 55th Grey Cup in 1967 was similarly played at Lansdowne Park as part of celebrations to mark the Centennial of Confederation.

The stadium has hosted the Panda Game, a Canadian rivalry football game between the two OUA football teams in Ottawa, the University of Ottawa Gee-Gees and Carleton University Ravens, in the years the game has been played while the facility has had a CFL tenant. This is one of the oldest and richest rivalries in Canadian university football, and currently the most attended Canadian university football game. Because these universities are not beneficiaries of the naming rights agreement with the bank, some sources prefer to use the name &quot;Lansdowne Park&quot; for the Panda Game venue, although unlike for international soccer (see below) this is not official policy.

===Soccer===

During the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, the stadium hosted five soccer matches.

In mid-2007, the stadium was one of six hosts in the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup. Capacity was then listed at 28,826.

In 2014, Ottawa Fury FC joined the North American Soccer League (NASL) and made an agreement to use the stadium as its home grounds.

The stadium was one of six chosen to host matches for the 2015 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup; it hosted a total of six group stage matches, two Round of 16 matches, and one quarter-final match. Due to FIFA policy forbidding commercial sponsorship of stadium names, the stadium was known as &quot;Lansdowne Stadium&quot; during the tournament.

A portion of FieldTurf and some field-level stands set up for soccer matches suffered minor fire damage on July 18, 2018, during the Fury FC home leg of the 2018 Canadian Championship semifinal against Toronto FC. The cause was lit flares brought in by some members of a Toronto supporters&#x27; group, the &quot;Inebriatti&quot;, which ignited one of their banners. Also, at least one firework was detonated during the incident.

In 2019, Ottawa Fury ceased operations after it lost its sanctioning to play in the USL Championship and refused to join the Canadian Premier League (CPL). In 2020, Atlético Ottawa joined the Canadian Premier League representing Ottawa, using TD Place Stadium as its home grounds.

====2015 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup matches====

===Rugby union===
On 27 February 2024, it was announced that TD Place Stadium would host two Canadian international rugby union matches, against Scotland on 6 July 2024 and against Romania six days later.

===Hockey===
On March 17, 2017, the National Hockey League announced that it would hold an outdoor game at TD Place Stadium between the Ottawa Senators and Montreal Canadiens on December 16, 2017 to mark the 100th anniversary of their inaugural NHL game. Due to sponsorship issues (Scotiabank, a competitor in Canadian banking, was the title sponsor of the game itself), the venue was known as &quot;Lansdowne Stadium&quot; for the game.
===Concerts===
==Gallery==
==See also==

* List of stadiums in Canada
* List of Canadian Football League stadiums
* List of Canadian Premier League stadiums
* TD Place Arena

==References and notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1442809" start="0" end="16" title="TD Place Stadium" label="TD Place Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442809" start="29" end="43" title="TD Place Stadium" label="Lansdowne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442809" start="57" end="76" title="TD Place Stadium" label="Frank Clair Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="92" end="99" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="103" end="109" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="111" end="118" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363854" start="145" end="159" title="Lansdowne Park" label="Lansdowne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139711" start="185" end="194" title="The Glebe" label="The Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q778395" start="216" end="227" title="Bank Street (Ottawa)" label="Bank Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q651323" start="240" end="252" title="Rideau Canal" label="Rideau Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109151" start="276" end="292" title="Ottawa Redblacks" label="Ottawa Redblacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="300" end="324" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q84127265" start="332" end="347" title="Atlético Ottawa" label="Atlético Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000566" start="355" end="378" title="Canadian Premier League" label="Canadian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358670" start="393" end="417" title="Ottawa Gee-Gees football" label="Ottawa Gee-Gees football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494179" start="426" end="454" title="Ontario University Athletics" label="Ontario University Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="482" end="502" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="618" end="622" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="636" end="656" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="668" end="676" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="816" end="824" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="829" end="843" title="rugby football" label="rugby football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="1008" end="1018" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143666" start="1055" end="1074" title="TD Place Arena" label="Ottawa Civic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="1431" end="1440" title="Astroturf" label="Astroturf"/>
<link wikidata="Q505399" start="1594" end="1604" title="Jim Watson (Canadian politician)" label="Jim Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q471136" start="2032" end="2048" title="Ottawa Renegades" label="Ottawa Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="2152" end="2161" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389257" start="2312" end="2323" title="Frank Clair" label="Frank Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361518" start="2359" end="2378" title="Ottawa Rough Riders" label="Ottawa Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629087" start="2603" end="2621" title="Larry O&amp;#x27;Brien (Canadian politician)" label="Larry O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174114" start="3352" end="3361" title="Jeff Hunt" label="Jeff Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q281504" start="3411" end="3427" title="Ottawa 67&amp;#x27;s" label="Ottawa 67&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723642" start="4056" end="4062" title="Kanata, Ontario" label="Kanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197790" start="5528" end="5556" title="North American Soccer League (2011–2017)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19844866" start="5983" end="5999" title="Ottawa City Hall" label="Ottawa City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="6171" end="6192" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109151" start="6235" end="6251" title="Ottawa Redblacks" label="Ottawa Redblacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334727" start="6284" end="6295" title="Ottawa Fury FC" label="Ottawa Fury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6309" end="6320" title="2014 North American Soccer League season#Fall Championship" label="fall season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384461" start="6394" end="6414" title="Keith Harris Stadium" label="Keith Harris Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="6418" end="6437" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241635" start="6465" end="6474" title="press box" label="press box"/>
<link wikidata="Q104587828" start="6522" end="6535" title="Ernie Calcutt" label="Ernie Calcutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361518" start="6607" end="6626" title="Ottawa Rough Riders" label="Ottawa Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q471136" start="6778" end="6794" title="Ottawa Renegades" label="Ottawa Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="6975" end="6995" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109180" start="7003" end="7011" title="Ottawa Gee-Gees" label="Gee-Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513961" start="7054" end="7064" title="Panda Game" label="Panda Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="7116" end="7135" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041241" start="7136" end="7142" title="Carleton Ravens" label="Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109209" start="7367" end="7387" title="Ottawa Junior Riders" label="Ottawa Junior Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269778" start="7395" end="7424" title="Quebec Junior Football League" label="Quebec Junior Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109182" start="7576" end="7589" title="Ottawa Giants" label="Ottawa Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109140" start="7594" end="7610" title="Ottawa Athletics" label="Ottawa Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334727" start="7641" end="7655" title="Ottawa Fury FC" label="Ottawa Fury FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197790" start="7793" end="7821" title="North American Soccer League (2011–2017)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="7867" end="7883" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q84127265" start="7925" end="7940" title="Atlético Ottawa" label="Atlético Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000566" start="7952" end="7975" title="Canadian Premier League" label="Canadian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q121144555" start="8013" end="8034" title="Northern Super League" label="Northern Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q130131175" start="8076" end="8091" title="Ottawa Rapid FC" label="Ottawa Rapid FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="8164" end="8172" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549454" start="8208" end="8212" title="13th Grey Cup" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632607" start="8287" end="8291" title="27th Grey Cup" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640639" start="8293" end="8297" title="55th Grey Cup" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643514" start="8299" end="8303" title="76th Grey Cup" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645837" start="8309" end="8313" title="92nd Grey Cup" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128042" start="8360" end="8374" title="105th Grey Cup" label="105th Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730778" start="8434" end="8481" title="150th anniversary of Canada" label="celebrations to mark 150 years of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029815" start="8559" end="8611" title="Canadian Centennial" label="celebrations to mark the Centennial of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513961" start="8641" end="8651" title="Panda Game" label="Panda Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146910" start="8664" end="8671" title="college rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="8736" end="8756" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358670" start="8757" end="8765" title="Ottawa Gee-Gees football" label="Gee-Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="8770" end="8789" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163111" start="8790" end="8796" title="Carleton Ravens football" label="Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="9317" end="9337" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="9341" end="9349" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q582424" start="9375" end="9381" title="Football at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q831688" start="9445" end="9469" title="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334727" start="9517" end="9531" title="Ottawa Fury FC" label="Ottawa Fury FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197790" start="9543" end="9571" title="North American Soccer League (2011–2017)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q911847" start="9700" end="9732" title="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="9997" end="10006" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334727" start="10117" end="10124" title="Ottawa Fury FC" label="Fury FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47003988" start="10141" end="10167" title="2018 Canadian Championship" label="2018 Canadian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q327238" start="10186" end="10196" title="Toronto FC" label="Toronto FC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10263" end="10285" title="Supporters&amp;#x27; groups#United States and Canada" label="supporters&amp;#x27; group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10297" end="10307" title="Toronto FC fans#Inebriatti" label="Inebriatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="10499" end="10515" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000566" start="10540" end="10563" title="Canadian Premier League" label="Canadian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q84127265" start="10580" end="10595" title="Atlético Ottawa" label="Atlético Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q774221" start="10840" end="10848" title="Canada national rugby union team" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662532" start="10849" end="10862" title="International sport" label="international"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="10863" end="10874" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="10892" end="10900" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q967505" start="10928" end="10935" title="Romania national rugby union team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="10989" end="11011" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966303" start="11044" end="11056" title="NHL 100 Classic" label="outdoor game"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="11089" end="11104" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="11109" end="11127" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q786037" start="11434" end="11460" title="List of stadiums in Canada" label="List of stadiums in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565685" start="11463" end="11504" title="List of Canadian Football League stadiums" label="List of Canadian Football League stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275724" start="11507" end="11547" title="List of Canadian Premier League stadiums" label="List of Canadian Premier League stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143666" start="11550" end="11564" title="TD Place Arena" label="TD Place Arena"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772339" wikidata="Q437328" url="?curid=772339" title="Plaisance of Antioch">
<text>Plaisance of Antioch (1235/1236 or ca. 1235 – September 27/22, 1261) was Queen of Cyprus by marriage to King Henry I. She served as regent of the kingdoms of Cyprus and Jerusalem for their son, King Hugh II, in 1254–1261 and 1258–1261 respectively.

==Biography==
She was a daughter of Bohemund V of Antioch and his second spouse, the Italian noblewoman Lucienne of Segni, a relative of Pope Innocent III. 

She was firstly married in 1250 to King Henry I of Cyprus, who died in 1253. Their son, the infant Hugh II, became King of Cyprus with Plaisance as regent. Plaisance re-married to Balian of Arsuf, the son of John of Arsuf, but they divorced and had the marriage annulled in 1258.

The official King of Jerusalem at the time was the absentee Conrad of Hohenstaufen, who died in 1254, with his title passing to his son Conradin, also still in Germany. The position of regent belonged by birthright to the underage Hugh, who was Conradin&#x27;s immediate heir and hereditarily the next king if Conradin failed to have his own progeny. In 1258, Plaisance&#x27;s brother Bohemund VI of Antioch brought Hugh and Plaisance to Acre and demanded that they be recognized as King of Jerusalem and regent, respectively. John of Ibelin (count of Jaffa), the Knights Templar, and the Teutonic Knights agreed with this, against the opposition of the Knights Hospitaller and various jurists who still wished to recognize Conradin as king, even though he was not present in the kingdom.

Plaisance, supported by a majority of the nobles, was accepted as acting regent and then appointed her former father-in-law John of Arsuf to rule as bailiff in her place; he had already been bailiff before her arrival and both Bohemund and John of Jaffa had hoped the presence of Plaisance and Hugh would eliminate the need for another bailiff. The dispute, however, continued and Pope Alexander IV sent the Genoese to attempt to settle it; John of Jaffa convinced Bohemund and Plaisance to unite Jerusalem, Antioch, and Tripoli against them. In 1260 the high cleric (a future pope) Jacques Pantaleon arrived to take up the vacant patriarchate, hoping to solve the crisis. Around this time Plaisance apparently became John of Jaffa&#x27;s mistress, against the new patriarch&#x27;s wishes. Pope Urban may have issued a papal bull to Plaisance expressing his disapproval of her relationship, &quot;Audi filia et&quot;.

Plaisance died at Cyprus in 1261 and the regency of Hugh II passed to Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan, while the regency of Jerusalem passed to her sister-in-law Isabella, who was the sister of Plaisance&#x27;s late husband. However, Hugh II died in 1267 before reaching adulthood, and was succeeded by Hugh of Antioch who reigned until 1284.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q437328" start="0" end="20" title="Plaisance of Antioch" label="Plaisance of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q506087" start="104" end="116" title="Henry I of Cyprus" label="King Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="132" end="138" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="158" end="164" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="169" end="178" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q878554" start="194" end="206" title="Hugh II of Cyprus" label="King Hugh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q349102" start="286" end="307" title="Bohemund V of Antioch" label="Bohemund V of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265787" start="354" end="371" title="Lucienne of Segni" label="Lucienne of Segni"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="387" end="404" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q506087" start="448" end="465" title="Henry I of Cyprus" label="Henry I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q878554" start="507" end="514" title="Hugh II of Cyprus" label="Hugh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q503369" start="588" end="603" title="Balian of Arsuf" label="Balian of Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382019" start="616" end="629" title="John of Arsuf" label="John of Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="749" end="771" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad of Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="825" end="833" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q349074" start="1074" end="1096" title="Bohemund VI of Antioch" label="Bohemund VI of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="1127" end="1131" title="Akko" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q707909" start="1216" end="1230" title="John of Ibelin (jurist)" label="John of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="1232" end="1246" title="count of Jaffa" label="count of Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="1253" end="1268" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="1278" end="1294" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1343" end="1362" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q167334" start="1628" end="1635" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="1860" end="1877" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Pope Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="1887" end="1894" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q235030" start="1987" end="1994" title="Principality of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q272033" start="2000" end="2007" title="County of Tripoli" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="2062" end="2079" title="Pope Urban IV" label="Jacques Pantaleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q530906" start="2110" end="2122" title="Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="2298" end="2308" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819728" start="2376" end="2389" title="Audi filia et" label="Audi filia et"/>
<link wikidata="Q544496" start="2468" end="2492" title="Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan" label="Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772340" wikidata="Q54690" url="?curid=772340" title="Ellsworth Vines">
<text>Henry Ellsworth Vines Jr. (September 28, 1911 – March 17, 1994) was an American tennis champion of the 1930s, the World No. 1 player or the co-No. 1 in 1932 as an amateur, and in 1934, 1935, 1936 and 1937 as a professional. He won three Grand Slam titles, the U.S. National Championships in 1931 and 1932 and the Wimbledon Championships in 1932. Vines also was able to win Pro Slam titles on three different surfaces. He later became a professional golfer and reached the semifinals of the PGA Championship in 1951.
==Career==
===Amateur===
Vines attended the University of Southern California in Los Angeles, California, where he was a member of the Sigma Nu fraternity and played on the freshman basketball team. Many believe that Mercer Beasley started him on his tennis career at age 14 in Pasadena. He was mentored by Perry T. Jones through the Los Angeles Tennis Club and the Southern California Tennis Association.

;1927 
Vines, aged 15, reached the quarter-finals of the Pacific Northwest Championships in Tacoma in July, where he lost to Dick Stevens.

In September Vines lost in the last 16 of the California state championships to Bowie Dietrick. &quot;Vines had the first set, 5–3, on his own service, but was unable to sustain the pace against his able and more experienced opponent, and lost the first set, 8–10. He seemed pretty well tried out by that time, and Dietrick put the second set away at 6–2&quot;.

;1928
Vines reached the quarter-finals of the Pacific Southwest tournament in October, where he lost to Christian Boussus. &quot;Vines forced Boussus to the limit in their match. The young Pasadenan&#x27;s service was far better than that of Boussus, but the Frenchman&#x27;s marvelous placements and his steadiness brought him through victoriously. He usually was content to hit the ball back, without trying fancy shots, and forced Vines into errors in long rallies.&quot;

;1929
In July, Vines lost in the final of the Western Championships in Chicago to Keith Gledhill.
At the Wisconsin Championships in Milwaukee in August, Vines lost to Gledhill in the final.

;1930 
In February, Vines beat Lester Stoefen in the final of the Los Angeles championships.
In May, Vines won the Southern California championships beating Gledhill in the final. In June, Vines won the Pasadena championships, beating Stoefen in the final. In July, Vines beat Frank Hunter in the final of the New York Metropolitan championships. In September, Vines won the Pacific Southwest championships, beating Wilmer Allison in a long and close five sets in the quarters, Clifford Sutter in four sets in the semifinal and Gregory Mangin in the final.

;1931
Vines won his first title of the year in February, beating Stoefen in five sets to win the Los Angeles championships. Vines won the River Oaks tournament in Houston in April beating Bruce Barnes in the final. &quot;Vines&#x27;s service had so much pace that at times today it almost knocked the racquet from Barnes&#x27;s hand.&quot; Vines won the Ojai valley championships in April over Stoefen. In May, Vines won the Southern Californian championships beating Alan Herrington in the final. &quot;The flashiness of Vines&#x27;s playing is shown in the fact that he scored forty placement aces to Herrington&#x27;s three during the four sets. Vines also led in practically every other department of the game.&quot; Vines won the California State championships in June beating Ed Chandler in the final. In July, Vines won the U. S. clay court championships in St. Louis beating Gledhill in the final. and the same month won the Longwood Bowl in Brookline, Mass. over John Doeg. Then at the Seabright tournament, Vines came from two sets down to beat Doeg in the final. &quot;The turning point of the match came in the tenth game of the fourth set. At this stage Doeg was leading five to four in games and won the first two points from Vines&#x27; service in the tenth. Employing his powerful backhand stroke, the Pasadena youngster pulled the match out of the fire by winning the next four points to take the game.&quot; In August, Vines beat Fred Perry in the final of the Newport Casino tournament. Vines was still 19 when he won his first Grand Slam singles title, the U.S. Championships, beating George Lott in the final in four sets. Vines played &quot;erratically throughout the major part of match, but his brilliant placements and cannonball service were sufficient to overcome Lott&#x27;s steadier volleying and effective service&quot;, according to &quot;The Daily News (New York)&quot;. Trailing 5–2 in the fourth set, Vines won five consecutive games to close out the match. In September Vines beat Perry in the final of the Pacific Southwest championships in five sets. &quot;Vines served the almost unbelievable total of twenty-three double faults during the match. When he finally got going, he didn&#x27;t score many aces, but he was getting his first ball in regularly, and although the Englishman, who battled furiously to the finish, usually managed to get his racket on the ball, he couldn&#x27;t handle the serve at all. Perry covered the court brilliantly, making many seemingly impossible gets.&quot; In October, Vines beat Perry again in the final of the Pacific coast championships. Vines was ranked world No. 2 by Pierre Gillou and by Didier Poulain.

;1932
In April, Vines beat Allison in the final of the Mason-Dixon tournament at The Greenbrier resort in White Sulphur Springs. At Wimbledon Championships, Vines beat Bunny Austin easily in the final and the winning ace was hit so hard, Austin claimed he couldn&#x27;t see it. Vines beat Allison in the final of the Newport Casino event in August. At the U.S. Championships, Vines beat Cliff Sutter in the semi-finals in five long sets when he came very close to defeat. He then beat Henri Cochet in the final to retain his title. In November Vines beat Allison in five sets in the final of the New South Wales championships. Vines was ranked World No. 1 amateur by A. Wallis Myers, Bernard Brown, Pierre Gillou, F. Gordon Lowe and Jean Borotra.

;1933
1933 was a poor year for Vines. One of his most surprising losses was to young Australian player Vivian McGrath in the Australian championships quarter finals. Vines won the Ojai Valley championships in April beating Gledhill in the final. Vines reached the final of Wimbledon, but lost a classic five set battle to Jack Crawford. It was a &quot;Wimbledon final that produced some of the greatest tennis in the history of the world famous tournament&quot; and &quot;the crowd gave Crawford one of the longest, wildest cheers that ever has echoed through Wimbledon&quot;. At the US Championships, Vines lost in the fourth round to Bryan Grant.

===Professional===
;1934
Vines played his first professional tennis match on January 10, 1934, and then became the leading pro player until 1938 (and the World No. 1 or No. 2 in the combined amateur-professional rankings). In his first World Professional Championship tour, Vines overcame the 41 year old Bill Tilden. From May to June, Vines participated in the US tournament circuit. Vines won tournaments at New York, Philadelphia, Boston and Cleveland, beating Tilden in each of these events. Then Vines lost in the semi-finals at Detroit to Karel Kozeluh and didn&#x27;t play in the remaining events of the tour at Milwaukee and St. Louis. At the US Pro in Chicago, Vines lost surprisingly in the semi-finals to Hans Nusslein. At Wembley, Vines won the title in a round robin that also featured Nusslein, Tilden, Martin Plaa, Bruce Barnes and Dan Maskell. Then Vines won in the Parc de expositions tournament in Paris beating Nusslein in the final. In December, Vines beat Tilden in the final of the Roubaix tournament. Vines was ranked World No. 1 pro by Ray Bowers and was ranked No. 1 in combined pro/amateur lists by Pierre Gillou and &quot;Tennis&quot; (Italian newspaper).

;1935
Vines beat Lester Stoefen in the World series (after a disastrous start to the tour, Stoefen withdrew from the tour). At the French Pro at Roland Garros, Vines beat Nusslein in the final. Vines then won the tournament at Southport beating Tilden. Vines then won tournaments at Deauville and La Baule (also over Tilden). However, he surprisingly lost to Robert Ramillon at a tournament at Le Touquet. At Wembley, Vines trailed Stoefen 4–1 in the fifth set in the semi-finals but won in five sets and beat Tilden in five sets in the final. Vines was ranked World No. 1 pro by Bowers and no. 1 in a combined amateur/pro list by Henri Cochet.

;1936
Over the next three years, Vines concentrated on playing tours and did not enter tournaments. He beat Stoefen to win the 1936 World series. In November, he toured Asia with Tilden and won the tour easily. Vines was ranked World No. 1 pro by Bowers and Fred Perry. Vines was also ranked combined pro/amateur World No. 1 by Bill Tilden and Robert Murray(&quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;).

;1937
1937 featured the first of the Vines-Perry World Series tours. 1937 was a very successful tour, grossing $412,000. The result was still in doubt until the penultimate match, when Vines beat Perry at Hershey. Vines then won the final match of the series at Scranton to win the series 32–29. Touring UK and Ireland, Perry won a short series against Vines, including winning two of the three matches at Wembley, where they played for the King George VI Coronation Cup. Perry and Vines were ranked joint no. 1 pros by Bowers.

;1938
The 1938 World Series was another tough battle. After coming back from four match points down to win at Richmond on 8 May, Vines said &quot;I&#x27;ve got a good lead over that guy (Perry) and I&#x27;m going to keep it just to prove once and for all who&#x27;s No 1 man&quot; and &quot;if Budge turns pro next year I want to be the one to play against him because that&#x27;s where the money will be. After this tour ends there&#x27;ll be no doubt who&#x27;s the better man between me and Perry&quot;. Vines won the series 49–35. In November, Vines and Perry toured South and Central America and won four matches each. Vines was ranked World No. 1 pro by Bowers.

;1939
In 1939 Vines lost his world pro crown to Don Budge but narrowly: in the World Professional Championship tour against each other, Vines trailed Budge 17–22. The tour proved that at his best Vines was unbeatable, although Vines laboured with a shoulder problem and a pulled stomach muscle in the series, losing five straight matches while injured. Vines commented, “I thought I could beat Budge, and I think I would have,” Vines said. “I had to serve side-armed and he was just knocking the ball down my throat.”

Budge&#x27;s consistency prevailed a majority of the time. Touring Europe with Tilden and Stoefen in the summer, Budge won the tour and beat Vines more comfortably than he had done in the World Series.

In June, Vines won the Brussels Professional Spring Championships, defeating Budge and Tilden in close matches. Vines lost in the final at Roland Garros to Budge. In the Edinburgh professional tournament, Vines won the event with wins over Budge and Tilden. At the knock-out event at Southport, Vines lost in the semi-finals to Nusslein, who then defeated Tilden in the final.

His final title came at the U.S. Pro Tennis Championships in October at the Beverly Hills Tennis Club on cement, where he beat Perry in the final in a close and brilliantly played four sets (Budge declined to participate in the US Pro).

Vines was ranked world No. 2 professional by Alfred Chave and combined amateur/pro world No. 2 by Didier Poulain. 
Vines, by now, was losing interest in tennis and was turning his attention more and more to golf.

;1940
In April 1940 Vines, at 28 years old, played his last tennis competition at the West Coast professional tennis tournament in Los Angeles. His physical problems, his desire to enjoy family life, his loss of the world crown, and above all his increasing passion for golf drove him to retire from tennis.

Vines&#x27; career earnings as of May 1938 were reported to be $185,000.

==Abilities==
Comparing Vines and Fred Perry after the 1939 tours, Don Budge wrote,

In 1975, Budge ranked his top five players of all-time and rated Vines number one. He also said Vines had the best serve. Budge stated that &quot;[Vines] was the best hitter of a tennis ball I’ve ever seen. He hit the ball harder and better and closer to the line than anybody. When he was on, no one could beat him.”

In 1983, Fred Perry ranked the greatest male players of all time and put them in to two categories, before World War 2 and after. Perry&#x27;s pre-WWII nominees all below Tilden and excluding himself &quot;Budge, Cochet, Ellsworth Vines &#x27;so powerful!&#x27;, Gottfried von Cramm, Jack Crawford, Jari Sato, Jean Borotra, Bunny Austin, Roderick Menzel, Baron Umberto de Morpurgo&quot;.

In the opinion of Jack Kramer, Vines was, along with Don Budge, one of the two greatest players who ever lived. Budge was consistently the best, according to Kramer&#x27;s 1979 autobiography, but, at the very top of his game, Vines was unbeatable by anyone:

In 1990, Kramer opined that &quot;Nobody ever served better.” Kramer&#x27;s summation of Vines&#x27; stature in the game was “He was the best.”

Perry, who never beat Vines as an amateur, said Vines’ serve was one of the greatest weapons in the history of tennis. “He had the greatest serve I have ever seen anywhere by anybody,” Perry said. “In one of our pro exhibitions, in 1937, I believe, he had one clocked 118 m.p.h. from hitting to the landing. Nowadays, they use the radar gun to tell you the speed when it leaves the racket.&quot;

In 1935, another measuring device was used in Philadelphia to measure Vines&#x27; service speed, recording speeds averaging 130 mph for ten serves.

Tall and thin, Vines possessed a game with no noticeable weaknesses, except, according to Kramer, because of his great natural athletic ability, laziness. He was particularly known for his powerful forehand and his very fast serve, both of which he generally hit absolutely flat with no spin. Although he could play the serve-and-volley game, he generally played an all-court game, preferring to hit winners from the baseline. Playing in the white flannel trousers that were standard dress for the time, he greatly impressed the youthful Kramer in a 1935 match in Southern California:

Kramer made up his mind on the spot to concentrate on tennis. Vines had, according to Kramer,

 (NOTE: The school&#x27;s official all-time roster does not list him; however, this does not mean that Vines did not earn a basketball scholarship.)

In his chapter on 1932, Bud Collins writes in &quot;Total Tennis: The Ultimate Tennis Encyclopedia&quot; that Vines:

Collins goes on to say that:

After becoming bored with tennis while only in his late twenties, Vines became a professional golfer in 1942 and over the years had a number of high finishes in tournaments, including at least two professional victories (1946 Massachusetts Open, 1955 Utah Open) and a semifinal position in the prestigious 1951 PGA Championship when it was a match play tournament. Writes Kramer,

Kramer compared Vines to another great tennis player, Lew Hoad:

Vines was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, Rhode Island in 1962.

In &quot;100 Greatest of All Time&quot;, a 2012 television series broadcast by the Tennis Channel, Vines was ranked the 37th greatest male player, just behind Australian Lleyton Hewitt at 36th, and just ahead of Pancho Segura at 38th. Vines&#x27; contemporary rivals were also included in the list, Perry (a player whom Vines had beaten in two pro championship tours) was ranked at 15th, Cochet was ranked at 27th, and Crawford was ranked at 32nd.

==Tennis==
===Major finals===

====Grand Slam tournaments====

=====Singles (3 titles, 1 runner-up)=====
==== Doubles (2 titles) ====
====Pro Slam tournaments====

=====Singles (4 titles, 1 runner-up)=====
===Singles performance timeline===
Vines was banned from competing in the amateur Grand Slams when he joined the professional tennis circuit in 1934.


==Golf==

===Tournament wins===
*1946 Massachusetts Open
*1951 Southern California PGA Championship
*1955 Utah Open

===Results in major championships===
&quot;Note: Vines did not play in The Open Championship.&quot;&lt;br&gt;
NT = no tournament&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place&lt;br&gt;
R64, R32, R16, QF, SF = round in which player lost in match play

Source for The Masters: www.masters.com

Source for U.S. Open and U.S. Amateur: USGA Championship Database

Source for PGA Championship: PGA Championship Media Guide

Source for 1939 Amateur Championship: The Glasgow Herald, May 26, 1939, pg. 21.

==See also==

* Frank Conner and G. H. &quot;Pete&quot; Bostwick Jr. are the only other men to have competed in the U.S. Open in both tennis and golf
* List of male tennis players

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;The Game, My 40 Years in Tennis&quot; (1979), Jack Kramer with Frank Deford ()
* &quot;Total Tennis: The Ultimate Tennis Encyclopedia&quot; (2003), by Bud Collins ()
* &quot;How to Play Tennis&quot; (1933), by Mercer Beasley
* &quot;Tennis, Myth and Method&quot; (1978), by Ellesworth Vines
* &quot;Los Angeles Tennis Club&quot;

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="0" end="25" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Henry Ellsworth Vines Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="80" end="86" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="114" end="125" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="World No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="260" end="287" title="U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="U.S. National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="313" end="336" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="436" end="455" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="490" end="506" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="560" end="593" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="597" end="620" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483553" start="651" end="659" title="Sigma Nu" label="Sigma Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660141" start="823" end="837" title="Perry T. Jones" label="Perry T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682353" start="850" end="873" title="Los Angeles Tennis Club" label="Los Angeles Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965097" start="1530" end="1547" title="Christian Boussus" label="Christian Boussus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371312" start="1984" end="1998" title="Keith Gledhill" label="Keith Gledhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q764024" start="2124" end="2138" title="Lester Stoefen" label="Lester Stoefen"/>
<link wikidata="Q942895" start="2370" end="2382" title="Francis Hunter" label="Frank Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q521302" start="2509" end="2523" title="Wilmer Allison" label="Wilmer Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979069" start="2571" end="2586" title="Clifford Sutter" label="Clifford Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116379" start="2621" end="2635" title="Gregory Mangin" label="Gregory Mangin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926394" start="2839" end="2851" title="Bruce Barnes (tennis)" label="Bruce Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q53410" start="3623" end="3632" title="John Doeg" label="John Doeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="4099" end="4109" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="4228" end="4246" title="U.S. Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q473553" start="5415" end="5429" title="The Greenbrier" label="The Greenbrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="5466" end="5489" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="5690" end="5708" title="U.S. Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979069" start="5721" end="5733" title="Cliff Sutter" label="Cliff Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q371971" start="5819" end="5831" title="Henri Cochet" label="Henri Cochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q327268" start="6067" end="6079" title="Jean Borotra" label="Jean Borotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342349" start="6185" end="6199" title="Vivian McGrath" label="Vivian McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q376581" start="6404" end="6417" title="Jack Crawford (tennis)" label="Jack Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q723924" start="6718" end="6729" title="Bryan Grant" label="Bryan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="6886" end="6897" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="World No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001531" start="6968" end="6999" title="Tennis pro tours and tournament ranking series" label="World Professional Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q54684" start="7037" end="7048" title="Bill Tilden" label="Bill Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q697996" start="7277" end="7290" title="Karel Kozeluh" label="Karel Kozeluh"/>
<link wikidata="Q454106" start="7448" end="7461" title="Hans Nusslein" label="Hans Nusslein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295599" start="7549" end="7560" title="Martin Plaa" label="Martin Plaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926394" start="7562" end="7574" title="Bruce Barnes (tennis)" label="Bruce Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935011" start="7579" end="7590" title="Dan Maskell" label="Dan Maskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q764024" start="7933" end="7947" title="Lester Stoefen" label="Lester Stoefen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436146" start="8275" end="8290" title="Robert Ramillon" label="Robert Ramillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="8926" end="8944" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="8997" end="9002" title="Fred Perry" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="10200" end="10209" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001531" start="10231" end="10262" title="Tennis pro tours and tournament ranking series" label="World Professional Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q299198" start="11280" end="11309" title="U.S. Pro Tennis Championships" label="U.S. Pro Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="12121" end="12131" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="12898" end="12909" title="Jack Kramer (tennis player)" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="12933" end="12942" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="14394" end="14413" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000491" start="14685" end="14696" title="Bud Collins" label="Bud Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="14890" end="14909" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784324" start="15035" end="15053" title="Massachusetts Open" label="Massachusetts Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902386" start="15060" end="15069" title="Utah Open" label="Utah Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="15120" end="15136" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187356" start="15151" end="15161" title="match play" label="match play"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="15244" end="15252" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="15283" end="15316" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q129714" start="15361" end="15385" title="100 Greatest of All Time" label="100 Greatest of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784324" start="16197" end="16215" title="Massachusetts Open" label="Massachusetts Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128263" start="16222" end="16258" title="Southern California PGA Championship" label="Southern California PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902386" start="16265" end="16274" title="Utah Open" label="Utah Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="16347" end="16368" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485917" start="16797" end="16809" title="Frank Conner (golfer)" label="Frank Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q122374385" start="16933" end="16960" title="List of male tennis players" label="List of male tennis players"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772350" wikidata="Q3126455" url="?curid=772350" title="Hamilton Fish Armstrong">
<text>Hamilton Fish Armstrong (April 7, 1893 – April 24, 1973) was an American journalist who is known for editing &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; from 1928 to 1972.

==Early life==
Armstrong was a member of the Fish Family of American politicians. His father was an artist and gentleman farmer. Armstrong was named after his great uncle Hamilton Fish who was Secretary of State in the Ulysses Grant administration. He attended Princeton University, where he was undergraduate reporter for the &quot;Daily Princetonian&quot;. He graduated from Princeton in 1916.

Although he was raised in a Republican family, Armstrong campaigned for the Woodrow Wilson 1912 presidential campaign.

== Career ==
He began a career in journalism at the business department of &quot;The New Republic&quot;. During the First World War, he was a military attaché in Serbia, sparking a lifelong interest in American relations with foreign states. Armstrong retained an interest in the Balkans region throughout his career, publishing three books and upwards of ten &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; articles on the Balkans. He was also involved in American–Jugoslav societies. 

In 1922, at the request of editor Archibald Cary Coolidge, Armstrong became managing editor of &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, the journal of the newly formed Council on Foreign Relations. Armstrong changed the name of the magazine from the &quot;Journal of International Relations&quot;, which he found “unnecessarily dull” into &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;. Armstrong recruited his sisters, Helen and Margaret, to re-draw the logo. After Coolidge&#x27;s death in 1928, Armstrong became editor, retiring from the position only in 1972, the fiftieth year of publication of the journal. 

Armstrong was an internationalist and proponent of open markets. During the Great Depression, he criticized isolationists and argued for America&#x27;s engagement with the world. In the 1930s, Armstrong persistently warned about the rise of dictatorships in Europe, in particular Nazism. He authored six books condemning dictatorship, including the 1937 bestseller &quot;We or They&quot;. He argued against neutrality in the years leading up to World War II. Armstrong was a prominent supporter of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt&#x27;s 1936 presidential campaign. 

In 1933, Armstrong interviewed Adolf Hitler shortly after he was named Chancellor of Germany. It was one of Hitler&#x27;s first interviews with a foreign journalist. During his interview, Armstrong injected multiple times when Hitler was answering. After the interview, Armstrong expressed dissatisfaction about Hitler and concern about what Hitler boded for world politics. Armstrong wrote early of the repression of political opposition underway in Germany, as well as the persecution of Jews. 

Armstrong was executive director of the Council on Foreign Relations.

Armstrong wrote many books, including the early &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Reich: The First Phase&quot; (published in July, 1933, by The Macmillan Company).

He died after a long illness on April 24, 1973, at the age of 80.

==Personal life==
Armstrong married three times. Helen MacGregor Byrne became his wife in 1918; their only child, Helen MacGregor (later Mrs. Edwin Gamble), was born on September 3, 1923. Armstrong and Byrne divorced in 1938. Later that year, she married Walter Lippmann, ending the friendship between the two men.

He was born at 58 West 10th Street in New York City, and died at the same location.

Armstrong married author Carman Barnes in 1945, a marriage which ended in a 1951 divorce. In that same year, Armstrong married Christa von Tippelskirch.

==Awards and honors==
Hamilton Fish Armstrong was decorated by Serbia, Romania, Czechoslovakia, France, and the United Kingdom: 
* Order of the Serbian Red Cross (1918)
* Order of St. Sava Fifth Class (1918)
* Chevalier of Order of the White Eagle with Swords (1919)
* Order of the Crown (Rumania) (1924)
* Order of the White Lion of Czechoslovakia (1937)
* Officer of the Legion of Honor of France (1937; commander, 1947)
* Commander of the Order of the British Empire (1972)

He received honorary degrees from Brown (1942), Yale (1957), Basel (1960), Princeton (1961), Columbia (1963), and Harvard (1963) universities. He was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1940.

==Publications==
===Books===
* &quot;The New Balkans&quot; (1926)
* &quot;Where the East Begins&quot; (1929)
* &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Reich: The First Phase&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Europe Between Wars?&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Can We Be Neutral?&quot; (with Allen W. Dulles) (1936)
* &quot;&quot;We or They&quot;: Two Worlds in Conflict&quot; (1936)
* . New York: Macmillan (1939)
* &quot;Can America Stay Neutral?&quot; (with Allen W. Dulles) (1939)
* &quot;Chronology of Failure: The Last Days of the French Republic&quot;. New York: Macmillan (1940)
* &quot;The Calculated Risk&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Tito and Goliath&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Those Days&quot; (1963)
* New York: Harper &amp; Row (1971)

===Contributions===
* to by Dorothy Thompson. New York: Random House (1938), .

==References==
==Further reading==
* Suri, Jeremi (Spring 2002). &quot;Hamilton Fish Armstrong, the &#x27;American Establishment,&#x27; and Cosmopolitan Nationalism.&quot; &quot;Princeton University Library Chronicle&quot;, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 438–65. . .

==External links==
* Hamilton Fish Armstrong Papers at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3126455" start="0" end="23" title="Hamilton Fish Armstrong" label="Hamilton Fish Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="115" end="130" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454621" start="202" end="213" title="Fish family" label="Fish Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18412106" start="268" end="284" title="gentleman farmer" label="gentleman farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q685992" start="328" end="341" title="Hamilton Fish" label="Hamilton Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="418" end="438" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14476370" start="490" end="508" title="The Daily Princetonian" label="Daily Princetonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="630" end="644" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699289" start="645" end="671" title="1912 United States presidential election" label="1912 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="755" end="771" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="790" end="805" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="816" end="832" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="836" end="842" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786267" start="1176" end="1199" title="Archibald Cary Coolidge" label="Archibald Cary Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="1243" end="1258" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="1298" end="1326" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q316568" start="3333" end="3348" title="Walter Lippmann" label="Walter Lippmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278230" start="3412" end="3428" title="West 10th Street (Manhattan)" label="West 10th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043175" start="3504" end="3517" title="Carman Barnes" label="Carman Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3696" end="3702" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3704" end="3711" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="3713" end="3727" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3729" end="3735" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3745" end="3759" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="4285" end="4315" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="4574" end="4589" title="Allen W. Dulles" label="Allen W. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="4680" end="4689" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="4743" end="4758" title="Allen W. Dulles" label="Allen W. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="4852" end="4861" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="4992" end="5008" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q275545" start="5045" end="5061" title="Dorothy Thompson" label="Dorothy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="5073" end="5085" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q48472210" start="5134" end="5146" title="Jeremi Suri" label="Suri, Jeremi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297681" start="5275" end="5313" title="Princeton University Library Chronicle" label="Princeton University Library Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445830" start="5413" end="5446" title="Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library" label="Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="5448" end="5468" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772353" wikidata="Q7410782" url="?curid=772353" title="Samuel Armstrong">
<text>Samuel Armstrong may refer to:
*Samuel C. Armstrong (1839–1893), Hawaiian-born military officer and educator
*Samuel Turell Armstrong (1784–1850), Massachusetts politician
*Samuel Armstrong (Canadian politician) (1844–1921), politician in Ontario, Canada
*Samuel Henry Armstrong (1855–1916), Ontario farmer and political figure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7411029" start="32" end="51" title="Samuel C. Armstrong" label="Samuel C. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q661165" start="110" end="133" title="Samuel Turell Armstrong" label="Samuel Turell Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410783" start="173" end="211" title="Samuel Armstrong (Canadian politician)" label="Samuel Armstrong (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411667" start="256" end="278" title="Samuel Henry Armstrong" label="Samuel Henry Armstrong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772357" wikidata="Q661165" url="?curid=772357" title="Samuel Turell Armstrong">
<text>Samuel Turell Armstrong (April 29, 1784 – March 26, 1850) was a U.S. political figure. Born in 1784 in Dorchester, Massachusetts, he was a printer and bookseller in Boston, specializing in religious materials. Among his works were an early stereotype edition of Scott&#x27;s Family Bible, which was very popular, and &quot;The Panoplist&quot;, a religious magazine devoted to missionary interests.

Armstrong began to withdraw from the printing business in 1825, and focused instead on politics. He was active in Boston politics during the 1820s, twice winning a seat in the Massachusetts General Court (state legislature). In 1833 he was elected the lieutenant governor of Massachusetts as a Whig, and served three consecutive annual terms. For most of the last term he was acting governor after Governor John Davis resigned to take a seat in the United States Senate. He lost a bid to be elected governor in his own right in 1836, but was elected Mayor of Boston, a post he held for one year.

==Printer and bookseller==
Samuel Armstrong was born on April 29, 1784, in Dorchester, Massachusetts, to John Armstrong and Elizabeth (Williams) Armstrong. His father, a military man, died when he was ten, and his mother died three years later. He was apprenticed to Manning and Loring, bookbinders and printers who were described as &quot;the principal book-printers in the town&quot; of Boston. Following his apprenticeship he opened a print shop with a partner in Boston, but a few years later opened his own business in Charlestown.

In 1807 he was elected as a member of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of Massachusetts. He was elected as the first sergeant of the Company in 1811. He also served as the captain of the Warren Phalanx of Charlestown from 1811 to 1814.

In 1811 he returned the business to Boston, establishing a bookshop on Cornhill. His principal business was in the printing of religious tracts; his most notable work was in publishing &quot;The Panoplist&quot;, a religious magazine devoted to missionary matters. Another major success was his printing of the first stereotype edition of Scott&#x27;s Family Bible, a highly popular work that sold tens of thousands of copies. He also opened his bookshop for church-related activities, including fundraising for foreign missionary work.

After he moved to Boston Armstrong took on two apprentices, Uriel Crocker and Osmyn Brewster. In 1818, upon the end of their apprenticeship, Armstrong turned over operation of the printing business to them (which then became known as Crocker &amp; Brewster) and focused his activities on the bookshop. In 1825, he withdrew from the day-to-day operations of the business, but would retain a financial stake until 1840. He continued to maintain a personal interest in the business until his death. The business was a significant financial success, and made Armstrong fairly wealthy.

==Church and politics==
Armstrong was a member of the Old South Church. He served on its vestry (including as its secretary), and was chosen deacon in 1829. When the church was formally incorporated in 1844 Armstrong was named as one of its proprietors. In 1816 Armstrong discovered the original manuscript of the third volume of colonial Governor John Winthrop&#x27;s &quot;History of New England&quot; in the church&#x27;s tower; the volume was presented to the Massachusetts Historical Society. He was also in part responsible for the church&#x27;s loss of a perfect specimen of the 17th century Bay Psalm Book, one of five that had been willed to the church by Thomas Prince, an early minister of the congregation. Writer Robert Wallace suggests that Armstrong&#x27;s trade of two copies of the book in exchange for offers by the recipients, George Livermore and Edward Crowninshield, to rebind the other copies was naive, and was essentially a scam by Livermore and Crowninshield (both knowledgeable in the rare book trade) to acquire the valuable books for a bargain price.
Armstrong was involved in civic affairs as early as 1812, when he served in a Boston militia company during the War of 1812. He entered state politics as a representative in Massachusetts General Court (state legislature), serving in that body from 1822 to 1823 and from 1828 to 1829. From 1828 to 1830 he served on Boston&#x27;s board of aldermen. In 1833 Armstrong was offered the nomination for lieutenant governor by the state Anti-Masonic Party. Since he refused to subscribe to their view that Freemasonry should be abolished, he rejected the offer. He was, however, elected lieutenant governor on the Whig ticket, serving first under Levi Lincoln Jr. and then John Davis. Whig newspapers used his working-class roots to appeal to members of the Working Men&#x27;s Party, a third party founded on labor issues, describing him in the 1834 campaign as &quot;a Mechanic and Workingman&quot;.

When Davis resigned in March 1835 upon his election to the United States Senate, Armstrong served as the Acting Governor until 1836. In the 1836 campaign Armstrong sought the Whig nomination for governor, but it went instead to Edward Everett in a bid for support from the Anti-Masons. Armstrong ended up running that year without party support, and came in a distant third behind Everett and perennial Democratic candidate Marcus Morton.

After his defeat at the state level, Armstrong was elected Mayor of Boston in December 1835. The principal act of civic improvement during his one-year administration was the construction of iron fencing around the Boston Common and the widening of the promenade along Boylston Street. Although the contracts for the work had been drawn up by the preceding administration of Theodore Lyman, Armstrong oversaw the work, and also had the task of securing the relocation of remains in the Central Burying Ground that were affected by the work. This he accomplished, despite some resistance from several families, by offering at no cost several new granite tombs to the affected parties.

In 1839 Armstrong was elected to the Massachusetts Senate, where he served a single term. In 1845 he joined the New England Historical and Genealogical Society, in whose affairs he remained involved until his death. He died in 1850 in Boston, and is buried in Cambridge&#x27;s Mount Auburn Cemetery. He had married Abigail Walker of Charlestown in 1812; they had no children.

==See also==
* Timeline of Boston, 1830s

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
* (five volume history of Massachusetts until the early 20th century)
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661165" start="0" end="23" title="Samuel Turell Armstrong" label="Samuel Turell Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="64" end="68" title="United States of America" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="69" end="85" title="political figure" label="political figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024037" start="103" end="128" title="Dorchester, Massachusetts" label="Dorchester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="165" end="171" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q291202" start="240" end="250" title="stereotype (printing)" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793831" start="262" end="274" title="Thomas Scott (commentator)" label="Scott&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756000" start="323" end="336" title="The Panoplist" label="The Panoplist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="575" end="602" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274366" start="651" end="687" title="lieutenant governor of Massachusetts" label="lieutenant governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="693" end="697" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q880346" start="806" end="816" title="John Davis (Massachusetts governor)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="848" end="868" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837807" start="949" end="964" title="Mayor of Boston" label="Mayor of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024037" start="1071" end="1096" title="Dorchester, Massachusetts" label="Dorchester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1385" end="1391" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="1520" end="1531" title="Charlestown, Massachusetts" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752939" start="1576" end="1632" title="Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of Massachusetts" label="Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171732" start="1853" end="1861" title="Cornhill, Boston" label="Cornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756000" start="1973" end="1986" title="The Panoplist" label="The Panoplist"/>
<link wikidata="Q291202" start="2098" end="2108" title="stereotype (printing)" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793831" start="2120" end="2132" title="Thomas Scott (commentator)" label="Scott&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900588" start="2379" end="2392" title="Uriel Crocker" label="Uriel Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2397" end="2411" title="Osmyn Brewster" label="Osmyn Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988836" start="2553" end="2575" title="Crocker &amp;amp; Brewster" label="Crocker &amp;amp; Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q773752" start="2955" end="2971" title="Old South Meeting House" label="Old South Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="2990" end="2996" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="3249" end="3262" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784286" start="3365" end="3397" title="Massachusetts Historical Society" label="Massachusetts Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q812082" start="3500" end="3514" title="Bay Psalm Book" label="Bay Psalm Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793295" start="3566" end="3579" title="Thomas Prince (historian)" label="Thomas Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="4093" end="4104" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="4155" end="4182" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274366" start="4379" end="4398" title="Lieutenant governor of Massachusetts" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q574701" start="4412" end="4430" title="Anti-Masonic Party" label="Anti-Masonic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="4481" end="4492" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="4589" end="4593" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q736772" start="4622" end="4638" title="Levi Lincoln Jr." label="Levi Lincoln Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q880346" start="4648" end="4658" title="John Davis (Massachusetts Governor)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035002" start="4733" end="4757" title="Working Men&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Working Men&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4936" end="4956" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="4982" end="4997" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Acting Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q434905" start="5105" end="5119" title="Edward Everett" label="Edward Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5280" end="5290" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q880670" start="5301" end="5314" title="Marcus Morton" label="Marcus Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q117810651" start="5392" end="5408" title="1835 Boston mayoral election" label="in December 1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q49132" start="5532" end="5545" title="Boston Common" label="Boston Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q896007" start="5586" end="5601" title="Boylston Street" label="Boylston Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781899" start="5692" end="5706" title="Theodore Lyman (militiaman)" label="Theodore Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060485" start="5803" end="5825" title="Central Burying Ground (Boston, Massachusetts)" label="Central Burying Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="6039" end="6059" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077377" start="6114" end="6161" title="New England Historical and Genealogical Society" label="New England Historical and Genealogical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="6279" end="6300" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6394" end="6412" title="Timeline of Boston#1800s.E2.80.931840s" label="Timeline of Boston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772358" wikidata="Q1026487" url="?curid=772358" title="Għarb">
<text>Għarb () is an administrative unit of Malta, located at the westernmost point of the island of Gozo, with a population of 1,549 people (as of 2021).

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Għarb&quot; (غرب) comes from the Arabic word for &quot;West,&quot; referring to the village being at the westernmost point on Gozo and all of the Maltese archipelago.

==History==
Għarb started as a small hamlet which developed around the middle ages. One can see its ancient roots in the centre of the village where some houses have fine examples of decorated stone balconies. Għarb was created as a parish in 1679, a move which gave impetus for the building of a new, baroque parish church. Built between 1699 and 1729, it has a façade which has been compared to Francesco Borromini&#x27;s Church of Saint Agnes in Piazza Navona, Rome. On the square is a folklore museum housing memorabilia recounting the rural history of the Maltese islands.

== Landmarks ==
Għarb lies in some of Gozo&#x27;s most scenic countryside, particularly at Dbieġi, the highest hill on Gozo. Also at Dbieġi is a centre for Gozitan crafts. Within the limits of Għarb is the Chapel of San Dimitri. According to legend, the first chapel was built on the cliff side by a woman whose son was freed from captivity by St. Demetrius. Also nearby is the Basilica ta&#x27; Pinu, Malta&#x27;s pre-eminent shrine to Our Lady of Ta&#x27; Pinu. The parish church, also a basilica, is dedicated to the Visitation of Saint Mary to her cousin Saint Elizabeth.

==Zones in Għarb==

*Birbuba
*Ħodba
*Il-Wileġ
*San Katald
*Ta&#x27; Lamuta
*Ta&#x27; Pinu
*Ta&#x27; Santu Pietru
*Il-Fgura
*Taż-Żejt
*il-Wilġa
*Wied tal-Knisja
*Wied il-Mielaħ
*Ta&#x27; Ħries
*Fuq il-Blata
*Tat-Trux
*Il-Misraħ

== Notable people ==

* Frenċ tal-Għarb
* Karmni Grima
* Nikol Ġużeppi Cauchi
* Nazzareno Formosa
* Ġużepp Portelli

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Għarb is twinned with:
* Castrolibero, Italy
* Massafra, Italy
* Pace del Mela, Italy
* Tortona, Italy
* Torrent, Spain
* Cépet, France

==References==
==External links==

*Għarb Local Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1026487" start="0" end="5" title="Għarb" label="Għarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q719592" start="15" end="34" title="Local councils of Malta" label="administrative unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="38" end="43" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170488" start="95" end="99" title="Gozo" label="Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763897" start="327" end="346" title="Maltese archipelago" label="Maltese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q123150" start="746" end="765" title="Francesco Borromini" label="Francesco Borromini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192577" start="773" end="794" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agnese in Agone" label="Church of Saint Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q463400" start="798" end="811" title="Piazza Navona" label="Piazza Navona"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="813" end="817" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380580" start="889" end="902" title="rural history" label="rural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q310633" start="1272" end="1285" title="St. Demetrius" label="St. Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q248511" start="1306" end="1328" title="Basilica ta&amp;#x27; Pinu" label="Basilica ta&amp;#x27; Pinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926307" start="1365" end="1390" title="Our Lady of Ta&amp;#x27; Pinu" label="Our Lady of Ta&amp;#x27; Pinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="1418" end="1426" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="1448" end="1502" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="Visitation of Saint Mary to her cousin Saint Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q248511" start="1581" end="1594" title="Ta&amp;#x27; Pinu" label="Ta&amp;#x27; Pinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501651" start="1757" end="1772" title="Frenċ tal-Għarb" label="Frenċ tal-Għarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372772" start="1775" end="1787" title="Karmni Grima" label="Karmni Grima"/>
<link wikidata="Q578427" start="1790" end="1810" title="Nikol Ġużeppi Cauchi" label="Nikol Ġużeppi Cauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25983038" start="1813" end="1830" title="Nazzareno Formosa" label="Nazzareno Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065119" start="1833" end="1848" title="Ġużepp Portelli" label="Ġużepp Portelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="1890" end="1897" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q53855" start="1906" end="1918" title="Castrolibero" label="Castrolibero"/>
<link wikidata="Q52024" start="1928" end="1936" title="Massafra" label="Massafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q497371" start="1946" end="1959" title="Pace del Mela" label="Pace del Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q17686" start="1969" end="1976" title="Tortona" label="Tortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q161945" start="1986" end="1993" title="Torrent, Valencia" label="Torrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467095" start="2003" end="2008" title="Cépet" label="Cépet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772362" wikidata="Q5644834" url="?curid=772362" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds">
<text>The Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds (also known as Hamilton AAA Grounds or HAAA) is a park located on the north side of Charlton Avenue West, between Locke Street South and Queen Street South, in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. The park served as home to the Hamilton Tigers from 1872 to 1949. In 1950, the Tigers amalgamated with the Hamilton Wildcats to create the Hamilton Tiger-Cats. The new team became the permanent tenants of Civic Stadium (later Ivor Wynne Stadium), and played their home games there until 2012. The Tiger-Cats joined the Canadian Football League as an inaugural member in 1958. A plaque outlining much of the grounds&#x27; history (including information on the Grey Cup games played there) is located next to the main entrance on Charlton.

The grounds feature a full length soccer field with fixed goals, a clubhouse with bathrooms and a water fountain, and a 400m red clay track that is home to the Hamilton Track Dogs.

==Grey Cup at HAAA Grounds==
==External links==
*Timeline of Canadian football history
*Hamilton Track Dogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5644834" start="4" end="49" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds" label="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644834" start="65" end="85" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds" label="Hamilton AAA Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644834" start="89" end="93" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds" label="HAAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270515" start="187" end="205" title="Queen Street (Hamilton, Ontario)" label="Queen Street South"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="210" end="227" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645179" start="268" end="283" title="Hamilton Tigers (football)" label="Hamilton Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645251" start="344" end="361" title="Hamilton Wildcats (Canadian football)" label="Hamilton Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q44149" start="376" end="395" title="Hamilton Tiger-Cats" label="Hamilton Tiger-Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978036" start="442" end="455" title="Ivor Wynne Stadium" label="Civic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="556" end="580" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644834" start="936" end="955" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds" label="Hamilton Track Dogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772372" wikidata="Q949896" url="?curid=772372" title="Peter Arno">
<text>Curtis Arnoux Peters, Jr. (January 8, 1904 – February 22, 1968), known professionally as Peter Arno, was an American cartoonist. He contributed cartoons and 101 covers to &quot;The New Yorker&quot; from 1925, the magazine&#x27;s first year, until 1968, the year of his death. In 2015, &quot;New Yorker&quot; contributor Roger Angell described him as &quot;the magazine&#x27;s first genius&quot;.

==Biography==
Arno was born on January 8, 1904, in New York City. His father was Curtis Arnoux Peters, a New York State Supreme Court judge. He was educated at the Hotchkiss School and Yale University, where he contributed illustrations, covers and cartoons to &quot;The Yale Record&quot;, the campus humor magazine, as &quot;Peters&quot;. He also formed a jazz band called the Yale Collegians, in which he played piano, banjo, and accordion. Arno&#x27;s infatuation with show business later had him designing, writing, and/or producing for four Broadway shows, and appearing with fellow cartoonists
in the film Artists and Models. (Please see Role in Broadway Productions below)

After one year at Yale he moved home to Manhattan and worked as an illustrator for a silent film company (Chadwick Films) before joining the staff of the fledgling magazine &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. The iconic cartoons and covers he created there, from 1925 through 1968, helped establish the magazine&#x27;s reputation for sophisticated humor and fine illustration. His work often depicted a cross-section of New York City society, though he was also inspired by situations he encountered during his travels. Arno drew his cartoons in batches, usually over a two-day period each week. Arno often worked with gag writers, one of whom coined the popular expression in a famous March 1, 1941 cartoon.

In 1927 he married Lois Long, a popular &quot;New Yorker&quot; columnist and fashion editor who wrote under the pseudonym &quot;Lipstick.&quot; Their one daughter, Patricia, was born September 18, 1928, and the couple divorced in 1930. Arno later married debutante Mary Livingston Lansing in August 1935; they divorced in July 1939.

After his second divorce, Arno moved to a farm near Harrison, New York, where he lived in seclusion, enjoying music, guns, and sports cars.

Arno died of emphysema on February 22, 1968, at the age of 64. He is buried at Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, New York.

A biography, &quot;Peter Arno: The Mad Mad World of The New Yorker&#x27;s Greatest Cartoonist&quot; by &quot;New Yorker&quot; cartoonist, Michael Maslin was published in April 2016 by Regan Arts.

== Role in Broadway Productions ==

Note: Book is theatrical term for production script

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Whoops, Dearie!&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1927. (ghostwritten by Philip Wylie)
* &quot;Parade&quot;. New York: H. Liveright, 1929.
* &quot;Hullabaloo&quot;. New York: H. Liveright, 1930.
* &quot;Circus&quot;. New York: H. Liveright, 1931.
* &quot;Favorites&quot;. New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1932.
* &quot;For Members Only&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1935.
* &quot;Cartoon Revue&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1941.
* &quot;Man in the Shower&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1944.
* &quot;Sizzling Platter&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1949.
* &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1951.
* &quot;Hell of a Way to Run a Railroad&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1956.
* &quot;Lady in the Shower&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1967.
* &quot;Peter Arno&quot;. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1979.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Peter Arno on The New Yorker&#x27;s Cartoon Bank
* Peter Arno, An Appreciation, Searching for Laugh
*Billy Ireland Cartoon Library &amp; Museum Art Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949896" start="0" end="25" title="Peter Arno" label="Curtis Arnoux Peters, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q949896" start="89" end="99" title="Peter Arno" label="Peter Arno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="117" end="127" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="177" end="191" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15531308" start="320" end="332" title="Roger Angell" label="Roger Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="448" end="461" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661129" start="478" end="498" title="Curtis Arnoux Peters" label="Curtis Arnoux Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="502" end="530" title="New York State Supreme Court" label="New York State Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630782" start="561" end="577" title="Hotchkiss School" label="Hotchkiss School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="582" end="597" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776485" start="664" end="679" title="The Yale Record" label="The Yale Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q12298619" start="698" end="712" title="humor magazine" label="humor magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580557" start="1009" end="1027" title="Artists and Models (1937 film)" label="Artists and Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1257" end="1271" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23952" start="1799" end="1808" title="Lois Long" label="Lois Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476507" start="2166" end="2184" title="Harrison, New York" label="Harrison, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="2268" end="2277" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q10798873" start="2334" end="2350" title="Kensico Cemetery" label="Kensico Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q928675" start="2559" end="2569" title="Regan Arts" label="Regan Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q675396" start="2764" end="2776" title="Philip Wylie" label="Philip Wylie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772379" wikidata="Q124361977" url="?curid=772379" title="Disappearance of Dorothy Arnold">
<text>Dorothy Harriet Camille Arnold (July 1, 1885 – disappeared December 12, 1910) was an American socialite and heiress who disappeared under mysterious circumstances in New York City in December 1910.

The daughter of Francis R. Arnold, a fine goods importer, Arnold was born and raised in Manhattan in an affluent family. After graduating from Bryn Mawr College, she returned to her family home at 108 East 79th Street and attempted to begin a career as a writer. On December 12, 1910, Arnold left her home to go shopping for a dress and was seen by a cashier as well as a friend on Fifth Avenue. She told the friend that she had planned to walk through Central Park before returning home. That evening, when Arnold failed to appear for dinner, her family grew suspicious.

Arnold&#x27;s father initially wanted to avoid publicity over his daughter&#x27;s disappearance, and so sought the help of private investigators in locating her. After these attempts proved fruitless, the family filed a missing persons report with the New York City Police Department (NYPD) in January 1911. Various theories, sightings and rumors regarding Arnold&#x27;s disappearance circulated in the years and decades after she was last seen, but the circumstances have never been resolved and Arnold&#x27;s fate remains unknown.

==Timeline==
===Background===
Dorothy Harriet Camille Arnold was born in New York City on July 1, 1885, the second of four children to Francis Rose Arnold and his wife, Mary Martha Parks Arnold (&quot;née&quot; Samuels). Arnold had an older brother, John (born December 1884) and two younger siblings: Dan Hinckley (born February 1888) and Marjorie Brewster (born August 1891). Her father was a Harvard University graduate who was a senior partner of F.R. Arnold &amp; Co., a company that imported &quot;fancy goods&quot; such as perfumes. Her paternal aunt, Harriette Maria Arnold, was married to Supreme Court Justice Rufus W. Peckham. Arnold&#x27;s paternal family were descendants of English passengers who arrived in North America on the &quot;Mayflower&quot;, while her mother hailed from Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Due to their social standing, the family was listed in the &quot;Social Register&quot;.

Arnold was educated at New York&#x27;s Veltin School for Girls and attended Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, where she majored in literature and language. She graduated from Bryn Mawr in 1905. After her graduation, Arnold continued to live at the family home at 108 East 79th Street and attempted to begin a career as a writer. 

In spring 1910, Arnold submitted a short story to &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot; magazine which was rejected. Her friends and family, who were largely amused by her writing aspirations, teased her about the rejection, prompting Arnold to rent a post office box to receive correspondence from magazines and publishing houses. She submitted a second short story to &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;The Poinsettia and the Flame&quot;, in November 1910; that story was also rejected. According to Arnold&#x27;s friends, the second rejection left her dejected and embarrassed. Two months before she disappeared, Arnold asked her father Francis if she could take an apartment in Greenwich Village in order to write. Francis forbade his daughter to move out of the family home, telling her that, &quot;A good writer can write anywhere.&quot; Dorothy Arnold continued to pursue a writing career but found no success.

===Disappearance===

On the morning of December 12, 1910, Arnold informed her mother Mary that she intended to go shopping for a dress to wear for her younger sister Marjorie&#x27;s upcoming debutante party. Mary offered to go with her daughter, but Arnold declined the offer, telling her mother she would call her if she found a suitable dress. She then left the family home at around 11 a.m. According to the Arnold family, she had approximately $25–30 cash in her possession (approximately $ to $ today). She walked from her home on 79th Street to the Park &amp; Tilford store at the corner of Fifth Avenue and 59th Street.

Arnold charged a half pound box of chocolates to her account at approximately 12:00pm, placed it in her muff and then walked twenty-two blocks (1.4 miles) south to Brentano&#x27;s bookstore at 27th Street and Fifth Ave. While at Brentano&#x27;s, Arnold purchased &quot;Engaged Girl Sketches&quot;, a book of humorous essays by Emily Calvin Blake. The clerks who waited on Arnold in both stores later said that she was courteous and did not exhibit any unusual behavior.

Outside the bookstore, Arnold ran into a female friend named Gladys King. King recalled that the two spoke briefly about Marjorie&#x27;s upcoming debutante party and that Arnold seemed to be in good spirits. King then excused herself to meet her mother for lunch at the Waldorf-Astoria. She recalled that Arnold told her she was going to walk home through Central Park. King last saw Arnold on 27th Street shortly before 2 p.m. when she turned to wave goodbye for a second time.

There were no published reports of Arnold having shopped for the intended dress.

By the early evening, Arnold had failed to return home for dinner. As she never missed meals without informing her family, the Arnolds became worried. They began calling her friends to find her whereabouts, but no one had seen her. Shortly after midnight on December 13, Elsie Henry, one of Arnold&#x27;s friends, phoned the family home to see if she had returned. Henry later said Arnold&#x27;s mother answered the telephone and told her that she had returned home. When Henry asked to speak to Arnold, her mother hesitated and told Henry that Arnold had gone to bed with a headache.

===Investigation===
Fearing that their daughter&#x27;s disappearance would draw unwanted press attention and could become socially embarrassing, the Arnold family didn&#x27;t report her disappearance to the police for weeks. It is speculated that the family was influenced by the 1909 disappearance of Adele Boas, a 13-year-old girl who was reported missing from Central Park and later found to have run away to Boston. Adele later returned home. The Boas family, also prominent Upper East Siders, were scandalized and shamed in the newspapers after the incident.

In an attempt to keep the incident out of the papers, the Arnold family quietly contacted John S. Keith, a family friend and lawyer, the morning following Arnold&#x27;s disappearance. Keith arrived at the family home and searched Arnold&#x27;s bedroom. He discovered that except for the outfit she was wearing, all of her clothes and other personal belongings were accounted for. He also found personal letters with foreign postmarks and two folders for transatlantic ocean liners on Arnold&#x27;s desk, as well as burned papers in her fireplace. The burned papers were presumed to be the rejected manuscripts Arnold had submitted to &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot;. Over the following weeks, Keith visited jails, hospitals and morgues in New York, Boston and Philadelphia, but did not find any sign of Arnold. After his search proved fruitless, he suggested that the Arnold family hire Pinkerton detectives to investigate.

Pinkerton investigators searched area hospitals and other places that Arnold was known to frequent but found no trace of her. They also questioned Arnold&#x27;s friends and former college classmates about her whereabouts, but none had seen her. As Keith had found literature for transatlantic ocean liners in Arnold&#x27;s room the day after she disappeared, Pinkerton investigators theorized that she might have eloped with a man to Europe. The agents searched marriage records, but none was found bearing Arnold&#x27;s name. Agents were then dispatched overseas to search ocean liners arriving from New York. While several women matching Arnold&#x27;s physical description were found, Arnold herself was not.

After Keith and the Pinkerton investigators could not find Arnold, they persuaded her father to contact the New York City Police Department (NYPD). The police advised him to hold a press conference in order to get as much publicity as possible. Arnold&#x27;s father resisted the suggestion but eventually agreed. On January 25, 1911, reporters gathered at his New York City office, where he informed them of his daughter&#x27;s disappearance and offered a $1,000 reward (approximately $ today) for information leading to her whereabouts.

During the press conference, reporters asked Francis Arnold if it were possible that his daughter was still alive and had simply run away with a man, as he did not allow his daughter to date. Francis vehemently denied this stating, &quot;I would have been glad to see her associate more with young men than she did, especially some young men of brains and position: one whose profession or business would keep him occupied. I don’t approve of young men who have nothing to do.&quot; Reporters soon discovered that Francis&#x27; comment was in reference to George Griscom Jr., a man Arnold had met while attending Bryn Mawr and with whom she was romantically involved. Griscom was a 40-year-old engineer who came from a wealthy Pennsylvania family, with whom he still lived at the Kenmawr Hotel in Pittsburgh.

Reporters also discovered that, in September 1910, Arnold had lied to her parents and told them she was going to visit a former Bryn Mawr classmate in Boston. Instead, she spent a week in a hotel with Griscom. Arnold&#x27;s parents found out about the rendezvous after Arnold pawned $500 worth of jewels to finance their week-long stay. After returning home, Arnold&#x27;s parents forbade her to continue the relationship with Griscom because they found him unsuitable. Despite their disapproval, Arnold continued to correspond with Griscom. The two saw each other for a final time in early November, shortly before Griscom left on a vacation with his parents.

After Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, Griscom was found vacationing with his parents in Florence, Italy. The Arnold family sent him a telegram on December 16 asking for information about Dorothy&#x27;s disappearance. In a return telegram, Griscom denied any knowledge of her whereabouts and claimed to know nothing of her disappearance. In early January 1911, Arnold&#x27;s mother Mary and her brother John travelled to Italy by ship to forcibly interrogate Griscom. They met him in his room at the Anglo-American Hotel on January 16. Griscom continued to maintain that he knew nothing of the disappearance. Mary and John demanded that Griscom give them the letters that Dorothy had sent him. John later claimed the letters contained nothing of importance and said that he later destroyed them. Upon his return to the United States in February 1911, Griscom told the press that he intended to marry Arnold once she was found and on the condition that her mother approve of the marriage. Mary later told reporters she would never approve of the union.

That same month, the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; reported that clerks at the Anglo-American Hotel had seen a veiled woman they believed to be Arnold. According to staff, Griscom and the veiled woman had an &quot;earnest talk&quot; they could not hear and that the woman appeared &quot;greatly agitated&quot;. In the months following the announcement of Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, Griscom spent thousands of dollars for ads in major newspapers asking her to come home.

By the end of January 1911, the NYPD said they still believed that Arnold was alive and would return on her own accord. Her family, however, said they had come to believe that she was dead. Around this time, Francis Arnold told the press that he believed from the start that his daughter had been attacked and killed while walking home through Central Park and that her body had been thrown into the Central Park Reservoir. He cited two clues, which he would not publicly disclose, that he claimed confirmed his suspicions. Police dismissed his theory because in the days leading up to Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, the temperature in New York City had dropped to 21 °F and the reservoir had frozen solid. Despite this, a search of Central Park was conducted anyway; no trace of Arnold was found. When the reservoir thawed that spring, police searched the water but did not find a body.

===Alleged sightings and letters===
In the days following the announcement of Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, the NYPD distributed circulars with her picture, physical description and information about the reward throughout the U.S., Canada and Mexico. &quot;The New York Times&quot; continued to cover the story on a near daily basis. The publicity led to investigators receiving calls from people across the U.S. who claimed to have seen Arnold. These calls were investigated but proved to be false. The Arnold family also received two ransom notes from alleged kidnappers who demanded upwards of $5,000 for Arnold&#x27;s return. The kidnapping claims proved to be hoaxes.

In early February 1911, Arnold&#x27;s father received a postcard signed &quot;Dorothy&quot; bearing a New York City postmark that read, &quot;I am safe.&quot; While the writing matched his daughter&#x27;s, Francis said he believed that someone had copied her handwriting from samples that were featured in the newspaper and that the postcard was nothing more than a cruel joke. Around the same time, a jeweler in San Francisco claimed a woman he recognized as Arnold had him engrave a diamond wedding ring for her on January 7, with the inscription &quot;To A.J.A. from E.R.B., December 10, 1910.&quot;

Shortly after this, the NYPD announced that they had decided to stop investigating Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, saying they believed she was dead. Deputy police commissioner William J. Flynn stated, &quot;That now seems the only reasonable way of looking at the case. [...] The girl has now been missing for 75 days and in all that time not a single clue has been found that was worth the name. [...] We have no evidence that a crime has been committed and the case is now one of a missing person and nothing more.&quot; Police continued to investigate reports of sightings, but none led to Arnold.

===Rumors and theories===
Numerous theories and rumors regarding Arnold&#x27;s disappearance continued to arise. One theory was that she had slipped on an icy sidewalk, struck her head and was in a hospital with total amnesia. This theory did not pan out as there were no women matching her description in area hospitals who had sustained a concussion. Other theories arose that Arnold had been drugged and abducted, but that theory was considered unlikely as she was last seen on a busy street in mid-afternoon. Griscom, for his part, theorized that she had died by suicide because she was despondent over her writing career. After her second short story was rejected, Arnold wrote a letter to Griscom expressing her disappointment over her lack of progress as a writer and alluded to suicide, stating, &quot;Well, it [the short story] has come back. &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot; has turned me down. Failure stares me in the face. All I can see ahead is a long road with no turning. Mother will always think an accident has happened.&quot;

Some of Arnold&#x27;s family members and friends also said they believed that Arnold had died by suicide, but felt she killed herself because her relationship with Griscom was faltering. The &quot;New York World&quot; also supported this reasoning after they discovered that Griscom&#x27;s cousin, Andrew, had jumped to his death from an ocean liner after he had been forbidden to marry an English governess.

One of the more widespread rumors was that Arnold had become pregnant, had sought an abortion, had died during or after the botched procedure and had been secretly buried or cremated. This rumor gained some credibility when, in April 1916, an illegal abortion clinic operating out of the basement of a home in Bellevue, Pennsylvania, was raided by police. The clinic was run by Dr. C.C. Meredith and became notoriously known as &quot;The House of Mystery,&quot; after numerous women from the area went missing after visiting the clinic. One of the doctors who worked at the clinic, Dr. H.E. Lutz, testified to the New York County District Attorney that Dr. Meredith told him that Arnold had died there after experiencing complications from an abortion. Lutz claimed that, like many of the women who had undergone abortions at the clinic and died, her body was burned in a furnace.

While the district attorney said he believed that Arnold had died at the clinic, her father said he thought the story was &quot;...ridiculous and absolutely untrue.&quot; Keith later told the media that two months after Arnold disappeared, he got a tip from an attorney in Pittsburgh that she was in a local sanatorium. Keith claimed that he and two detectives traveled to Pittsburgh but discovered that the woman was not Arnold.

====Edward Glennoris====
Over five years after Arnold&#x27;s disappearance, in April 1916, a convicted felon in Rhode Island named Edward Glennoris (spelled Glenoris in some reports), who was then imprisoned for attempted extortion, claimed that he was paid $250 to bury the body of a young woman in December 1910. Glennoris claimed that an acquaintance known only as &quot;Little Louie&quot; hired him to drive the woman from a home in New Rochelle to West Point, New York. In New Rochelle, Glennoris said that he and Little Louie were met by two men: one of whom was named &quot;Doc&quot; and another whom Glennoris described &quot;wealthy and well dressed,&quot; which matched Griscom&#x27;s physical description. Glennoris and Little Louie then loaded the unconscious woman in the car and drove her to a house in Weehawken, New Jersey.

During the drive, Glennoris said that Little Louie told him that the woman was Dorothy Arnold. Glennoris also said that he recognized Arnold and was able to identify a signet ring on the index finger of her left hand that matched a ring she owned. The next day, Little Louie contacted Glennoris to &quot;finish the job.&quot; Upon returning to Weehawken, &quot;Doc&quot; informed the men that the woman had died at the home during an operation. Glennoris said that he and Little Louie then drove the woman&#x27;s body back to the home in New Rochelle, wrapped the body in a sheet and buried it in the cellar.

Glennoris initially told this story to a prison warden, who then reported it to authorities. However, upon subsequent interviews with law enforcement, Glennoris acted confused and claimed he knew nothing about Arnold&#x27;s whereabouts. Police followed up on Glennoris&#x27; initial claim and excavated the cellars of several homes in the area, but did not locate any human remains. Arnold&#x27;s father vehemently denied Glennoris&#x27; claims, telling reporters, &quot;So far it appears on the face of the man&#x27;s story, he is talking utter nonsense.&quot;

===Aftermath===
Years after Arnold disappeared, numerous alleged sightings from all over the U.S. were still being reported. Police continued to investigate these reports, but all proved to be false. The Arnold family also continued to receive letters from women claiming to be Arnold. These were also investigated and also proved to be false. One such letter came from an attorney in California who claimed that Arnold was living as &quot;Ella Nevins&quot; in Los Angeles, a claim that her father disputed.

The case gained attention again on April 8, 1921, when &quot;during a lecture in New York, Captain John H. Ayers of the Bureau of Missing Persons claimed that Dorothy Arnold&#x27;s fate had been known to the Bureau and her family for some time. Ayers refused to elaborate and would not say if Arnold was alive or dead.&quot; The following day, Ayers claimed that he was misquoted and denied that Arnold&#x27;s fate was known.

In the weeks following his daughter&#x27;s disappearance, Francis Arnold spent approximately $250,000 trying to find his daughter. He continued to maintain that he believed she had been kidnapped and murdered on the day she disappeared or shortly thereafter. Francis died on April 6, 1922. In his will, he intentionally made no provisions for Arnold, stating that he was &quot;satisfied that she is not alive.&quot;

According to Keith, Dorothy&#x27;s mother Mary did not share her husband&#x27;s opinion that their daughter had been murdered and remained hopeful that she was still alive. She died on December 29, 1928. Shortly after her death, Keith publicly stated he believed that Arnold had died by suicide because of her failed writing career. In an obituary for Mary Arnold, United Press Associations (now UPI) referenced the hunt for Dorothy Arnold as &quot;the really great search of the age, and one that did much to develop modern newspaper &#x27;police&#x27; coverage.&quot;

==In popular culture==
It inspired the television and radio play &quot;The Thin Air&quot; by Sumner Locke Elliott.

In her young adult novel &quot;Lost&quot; (2009), author Jacqueline Davies combines the story of Arnold&#x27;s disappearance with that of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire.

The short horror novel &quot;The Lurker at the Threshold&quot; (1945), by August Derleth and H.P. Lovecraft, mentions the disappearance of Dorothy Arnold near the end, in a list of disappearances and Fortean phenomena.

In 2019, the case was covered by &quot;BuzzFeed Unsolved&quot;.

==See also==
*List of people who disappeared

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*

==External links==
*The Disappearance of Dorothy Arnold at &quot;historicmysteries.com&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q124361977" start="0" end="30" title="Disappearance of Dorothy Arnold" label="Dorothy Harriet Camille Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="94" end="103" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q388505" start="120" end="131" title="Missing person" label="disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="166" end="179" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="287" end="296" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="342" end="359" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818314" start="405" end="416" title="79th Street (Manhattan)" label="79th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="581" end="593" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="652" end="664" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="895" end="915" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1024" end="1055" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1379" end="1392" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="1507" end="1510" title="given name" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1701" end="1719" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="1836" end="1843" title="perfume" label="perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780882" start="1904" end="1925" title="Supreme Court Justice" label="Supreme Court Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174811" start="1926" end="1942" title="Rufus W. Peckham" label="Rufus W. Peckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="2055" end="2064" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2101" end="2109" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2111" end="2117" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550771" start="2192" end="2207" title="Social Register" label="Social Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093223" start="2255" end="2278" title="Veltin School for Girls" label="Veltin School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="2292" end="2309" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2313" end="2325" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818314" start="2489" end="2500" title="79th Street (Manhattan)" label="79th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800390" start="2598" end="2633" title="McClure&amp;#x27;s" label="&amp;quot;McClure&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162282" start="2789" end="2804" title="post office box" label="post office box"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="3218" end="3235" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780030" start="3646" end="3655" title="debutante" label="debutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="4052" end="4064" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q245364" start="4069" end="4080" title="59th Street (Manhattan)" label="59th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221373" start="4187" end="4191" title="muff (handwarmer)" label="muff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924503" start="4247" end="4262" title="Brentano&amp;#x27;s" label="Brentano&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="4824" end="4839" title="Waldorf-Astoria" label="Waldorf-Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="4910" end="4922" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6114" end="6120" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q455587" start="6181" end="6196" title="Upper East Side" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194406" start="6691" end="6699" title="postmark" label="postmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="6735" end="6746" title="ocean liner" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7022" end="7034" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321823" start="7149" end="7158" title="Pinkerton (detective agency)" label="Pinkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812388" start="7600" end="7606" title="elopement" label="eloped"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="8007" end="8038" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q272281" start="8080" end="8096" title="press conference" label="press conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="9235" end="9245" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q176637" start="9524" end="9530" title="pawnshop" label="pawned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9995" end="10003" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10005" end="10010" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="10041" end="10049" title="telegram" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="10986" end="11009" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190219" start="11838" end="11860" title="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir" label="Central Park Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167720" start="12453" end="12462" title="circulaire" label="circulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12581" end="12599" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="12860" end="12871" title="ransom note" label="ransom note"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="13411" end="13424" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="14420" end="14427" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="14543" end="14553" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="14769" end="14776" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="15439" end="15453" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="15640" end="15649" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="15737" end="15745" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130899" start="15962" end="15984" title="Bellevue, Pennsylvania" label="Bellevue, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013416" start="16266" end="16299" title="New York County District Attorney" label="New York County District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="16842" end="16852" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="17077" end="17089" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="17187" end="17196" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q744948" start="17402" end="17414" title="New Rochelle, New York" label="New Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="17418" end="17438" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q176410" start="17782" end="17791" title="Weehawken, New Jersey" label="Weehawken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="17793" end="17803" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="17974" end="17985" title="signet ring" label="signet ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="19440" end="19451" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="20212" end="20216" title="will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="20697" end="20722" title="United Press International" label="United Press Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q51591244" start="20974" end="20986" title="The Thin Air" label="The Thin Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637986" start="20996" end="21016" title="Sumner Locke Elliott" label="Sumner Locke Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120085" start="21076" end="21093" title="Jacqueline Davies" label="Jacqueline Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q867316" start="21161" end="21193" title="Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire" label="Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188339" start="21225" end="21252" title="The Lurker at the Threshold" label="The Lurker at the Threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q509002" start="21270" end="21284" title="August Derleth" label="August Derleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="21289" end="21303" title="H.P. Lovecraft" label="H.P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q443325" start="21396" end="21403" title="Fortean" label="Fortean"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966251" start="21455" end="21472" title="BuzzFeed Unsolved" label="BuzzFeed Unsolved"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21495" end="21525" title="List of people who disappeared mysteriously: 1910–1990" label="List of people who disappeared"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772390" wikidata="Q6694609" url="?curid=772390" title="Loyola University Chicago School of Law">
<text>Loyola University Chicago School of Law is the law school of Loyola University Chicago, a private Jesuit research university in Chicago. Established in 1908, Loyola University Chicago School of Law offers degrees and combined degree programs, including the Juris Doctor, Master of Laws, and Doctor of Juridical Science degrees.

==Administration==
Michèle Alexandre has served as dean of the law school since 2022. She is the 14th dean of the law school and previously was dean at Stetson University College of Law from 2019 to 2022. Alexandre replaced former dean Michael J. Kaufman, who assumed the role in 2016.

==Admissions==
The Fall 2022 entering class had a median GPA of 3.56 and a median LSAT of 159. The Fall 2022 entering class was 67% female and 34% students of color. 

==Academics==
There are fourteen major degree programs offered at the School of Law: juris doctor (JD); master of laws (LLM) in either business law, child and family law, health law or tax law. Specialized certificates are available in advocacy, child and family law, health law, international law and practice, public interest law, tax law, and transactional law. Students may pursue a master of jurisprudence (M.J.) in either business and compliance law, child and family law, health law, global competition, and rule of law for development. There are two major doctoral degrees: doctor of juridical sciences in health law and policy (S.J.D.) which is the highest degree any attorney may obtain in the United States and the doctor of laws (D.Law).

Dual degree programs are offered with the Loyola University Chicago School of Social Work (J.D./M.S.W. and M.J./M.S.W.), Department of Political Science (J.D./M.A.), Graduate School of Education (J.D./M.A. in International Comparative Law and Education) and the Graduate School of Business (J.D./M.B.A.). Loyola offers a master of laws and master of jurisprudence in rule of law for development at the University&#x27;s John Felice Rome Center in Italy. Loyola offers seven online degree programs and online certificate programs in school discipline reform and privacy law. Additionally, Loyola Chicago Law is known for a significant orientation in public interest and social justice. The school&#x27;s Curt and Linda Rodin Center for Social Justice Fellowship is widely recognized as one of the most prestigious public interest and social justice fellowships of its kind.

Loyola has a grading curve to uphold a 3.0 median GPA.

The total cost of attendance (tuition and fees) in the full-time JD Program for the 2023-2024 academic year is $55,838. The total cost of attendance (tuition and fees) in the weekend JD Program for the 2023–2024 academic year is $42,050.

==Rankings and reputation==
Loyola&#x27;s 2024 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; national ranking was tied for 78th for its full time program, and 11th for its part-time program. Loyola has been highly ranked in health law (4th nationally in 2024)

==Employment and bar passage==
According to the American Bar Association-required disclosures, 73.0% of the class of 2019 obtained bar passage-required employment (i.e. as attorneys) within ten months of graduation. An additional 13.7% of the class of 2019 obtained J.D. advantage employment within ten months of graduation.

According to the ABA-required disclosure of Bar Passage Results for 2022, in calendar year 2021, Loyola University Chicago School of Law had a total of 236 graduates. The school had a total of 207 graduates who sat for their first bar examination within any jurisdiction. Out of those who sat for their first bar examination in calendar year 2021, a total of 170, or 82.13%, passed on their first attempt.

==Student involvement==
Law students at Loyola participate in over fifty student organizations and advocacy programsand eight law journals and publications: &quot;Loyola University Chicago Law Journal,&quot; &quot;Annals of Health Law&quot; &quot;and Life Sciences&quot;, &quot;Children&#x27;s Legal Rights Journal&quot;, &quot;International Law Review, Journal of Regulatory Compliance, Journal on Rule of Law (PROLAW), Loyola Consumer Law Review&quot;, and the &quot;Public Interest Law Reporter.&quot;

==Notable alumni==

*Peg McDonnell Breslin, member of the Illinois House of Representatives from 1977–1991 and the first woman elected (outside of Cook County) to the Illinois Appellate Court
*James Milton Burns, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the District of Oregon
*Joseph Carroll, founding director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), and founding director of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI)
*David H. Coar, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Suzanne B. Conlon, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Philip H. Corboy Sr., personal injury and aviation litigation attorney, named in The National Law Journal&#x27;s &quot;Profiles in Power&quot; and &quot;The Best Lawyers in America&quot;
*A. L. Cronin, Illinois state legislator and lawyer 
*John Darrah, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Tom Dart (1987), Sheriff of Cook County, Illinois
*Joyce Karlin Fahey, former federal prosecutor, Los Angeles County Superior Court judge, and two-term mayor of Manhattan Beach, California
*John Phil Gilbert, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois
*John Harris, Rod Blagojevich Chief of Staff
*William Thomas Hart, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Neil Hartigan, former Illinois Attorney General, Lieutenant Governor, and a judge of the Illinois Appellate Court
*Donald L. Hollowell, civil rights attorney instrumental in winning the desegregation of the University of Georgia in 1961
*Henry Hyde, U.S. congressman (1975–2007)
*Daniel Hynes, former Comptroller of Illinois, 2010 candidate for Governor of Illinois
*Virginia Mary Kendall, United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Louis A. Lehr, Jr., of Arnstein &amp; Lehr, LLP, civil defense litigation attorney who has represented major corporations in 44 states, Puerto Rico and Mexico
*Lisa Madigan, former attorney general of Illinois
*Michael Madigan, former Speaker of the Illinois House of Representatives and former chairman of the Democratic Party of Illinois
*Howard Thomas Markey, first chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
*Frank James McGarr, former United States Federal Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
*Mary Ann G. McMorrow, former chief justice, Supreme Court of Illinois
*James Mulvaney, lawyer and investment banker, president of the United States National Bank of San Diego, president of the San Diego Padres (PCL)
*Dan Proft, political writer, radio talk show host and 2010 Illinois gubernatorial candidate.
*Michael Quigley, U.S. congressman from Illinois&#x27; 5th District
*William Quinlan, former Illinois state appellate court justice, former Chicago Corporation Counsel, and former parliamentarian for the Cook County Board of Commissioners
*Elizabeth Rochford, lawyer from Illinois who serves an assoc. judge of Illinois&#x27; 19th Judicial Circuit.
*Edith S. Sampson, alternate U.S. delegate to the United Nations, member of the UN&#x27;s Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural Committee, member of the U.S. Commission for UNESCO, U.S. representative to NATO, first black woman to be elected as a judge in Illinois
*Thomas P. Sullivan, United States Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois
*Robert R. Thomas, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Illinois
*Dan K. Webb, Chairman &amp; Partner, Winston &amp; Strawn LLP
*Corinne Wood, first female Lieutenant Governor of Illinois (1999–2003)

==See also==
==References==
==External links==
* Loyola University Chicago School of Law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6694609" start="0" end="39" title="Loyola University Chicago School of Law" label="Loyola University Chicago School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321960" start="47" end="57" title="law school" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="61" end="86" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="90" end="97" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="98" end="104" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="105" end="124" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="128" end="135" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="257" end="269" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="271" end="285" title="Master of Laws" label="Master of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033568" start="291" end="318" title="Doctor of Juridical Science" label="Doctor of Juridical Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611664" start="481" end="514" title="Stetson University College of Law" label="Stetson University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q109335721" start="565" end="583" title="Michael J. Kaufman" label="Michael J. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="869" end="881" title="juris doctor" label="juris doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="888" end="902" title="master of laws" label="master of laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878290" start="955" end="965" title="Beazley Institute for Health Law and Policy" label="health law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878290" start="1398" end="1428" title="Beazley Institute for Health Law and Policy" label="health law and policy (S.J.D.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232900" start="1955" end="1978" title="John Felice Rome Center" label="John Felice Rome Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="2757" end="2785" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="3008" end="3032" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694550" start="4114" end="4140" title="Loyola Consumer Law Review" label="Loyola Consumer Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q35929088" start="4220" end="4241" title="Peg McDonnell Breslin" label="Peg McDonnell Breslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999328" start="4366" end="4390" title="Illinois Appellate Court" label="Illinois Appellate Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138377" start="4392" end="4410" title="James M. Burns (judge)" label="James Milton Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889786" start="4441" end="4496" title="United States District Court for the District of Oregon" label="United States District Court for the District of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282014" start="4498" end="4512" title="Joseph Carroll (DIA)" label="Joseph Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="4539" end="4566" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863034" start="4603" end="4645" title="Air Force Office of Special Investigations" label="Air Force Office of Special Investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234509" start="4655" end="4668" title="David H. Coar" label="David H. Coar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="4699" end="4765" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650763" start="4767" end="4784" title="Suzanne B. Conlon" label="Suzanne B. Conlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="4815" end="4881" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183657" start="4883" end="4903" title="Philip H. Corboy" label="Philip H. Corboy Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q63226550" start="5071" end="5083" title="A. L. Cronin" label="A. L. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262216" start="5124" end="5135" title="John Darrah" label="John Darrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="5166" end="5232" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846659" start="5234" end="5242" title="Tom Dart" label="Tom Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="5262" end="5283" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q106602828" start="5285" end="5303" title="Joyce Karlin Fahey" label="Joyce Karlin Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="5332" end="5350" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="5351" end="5365" title="Superior court" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="5366" end="5371" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q568610" start="5395" end="5422" title="Manhattan Beach, California" label="Manhattan Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252745" start="5424" end="5441" title="John Phil Gilbert" label="John Phil Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889837" start="5472" end="5538" title="United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194577" start="5540" end="5551" title="John F. Harris (political aide)" label="John Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q151891" start="5553" end="5568" title="Rod Blagojevich" label="Rod Blagojevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019316" start="5585" end="5604" title="William Thomas Hart" label="William Thomas Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="5635" end="5701" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988714" start="5703" end="5716" title="Neil Hartigan" label="Neil Hartigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406491" start="5725" end="5750" title="Illinois Attorney General" label="Illinois Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238288" start="5752" end="5771" title="Lieutenant Governor of Illinois" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294665" start="5818" end="5837" title="Donald L. Hollowell" label="Donald L. Hollowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="5910" end="5931" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132849" start="5941" end="5951" title="Henry Hyde" label="Henry Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013102" start="5983" end="5995" title="Daniel Hynes" label="Daniel Hynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q673633" start="6004" end="6015" title="Comptroller" label="Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6019" end="6027" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934400" start="6070" end="6091" title="Virginia Mary Kendall" label="Virginia Mary Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="6122" end="6188" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182585" start="6213" end="6237" title="Arnstein &amp;amp; Lehr, LLP" label="Arnstein &amp;amp; Lehr, LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q529140" start="6350" end="6362" title="Lisa Madigan" label="Lisa Madigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406491" start="6371" end="6387" title="Illinois Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6391" end="6399" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q961894" start="6401" end="6416" title="Michael Madigan" label="Michael Madigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="6425" end="6432" title="Speaker (politics)" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q908954" start="6440" end="6473" title="Illinois House of Representatives" label="Illinois House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366421" start="6501" end="6529" title="Democratic Party of Illinois" label="Democratic Party of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921041" start="6531" end="6551" title="Howard Thomas Markey" label="Howard Thomas Markey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763845" start="6578" end="6632" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019477" start="6634" end="6652" title="Frank James McGarr" label="Frank James McGarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="6690" end="6756" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778899" start="6758" end="6778" title="Mary Ann G. McMorrow" label="Mary Ann G. McMorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q126726289" start="6829" end="6843" title="James Mulvaney" label="James Mulvaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q125102019" start="6892" end="6932" title="United States National Bank of San Diego" label="United States National Bank of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360389" start="6951" end="6973" title="San Diego Padres (PCL)" label="San Diego Padres (PCL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214226" start="6975" end="6984" title="Dan Proft" label="Dan Proft"/>
<link wikidata="Q465767" start="7069" end="7084" title="Mike Quigley (politician)" label="Michael Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q115581488" start="7308" end="7326" title="Elizabeth Rochford" label="Elizabeth Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021934" start="7379" end="7415" title="Illinois circuit courts" label="Illinois&amp;#x27; 19th Judicial Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338670" start="7418" end="7434" title="Edith S. Sampson" label="Edith S. Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="7587" end="7593" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7618" end="7622" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792955" start="7680" end="7698" title="Thomas P. Sullivan" label="Thomas P. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="7700" end="7722" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q644124" start="7762" end="7778" title="Robert R. Thomas" label="Robert R. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="7780" end="7793" title="Chief Justice" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001109" start="7801" end="7826" title="Supreme Court of Illinois" label="Supreme Court of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213774" start="7828" end="7839" title="Dan K. Webb" label="Dan K. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026035" start="7865" end="7885" title="Winston &amp;amp; Strawn" label="Winston &amp;amp; Strawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997367" start="7891" end="7903" title="Corinne Wood" label="Corinne Wood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772393" wikidata="Q1666325" url="?curid=772393" title="International Amphitheatre">
<text>The International Amphitheatre was an indoor arena located in Chicago, Illinois, that opened in 1934 and was demolished in 1999. It was located on the west side of Halsted Street, at 42nd Street, on the city&#x27;s south side, in the Canaryville neighborhood, adjacent to the Union Stock Yards.

==History==
The venue opened on November 30, 1934. It had been built for $1.5 million by the Stock Yard company and was principally built to host the International Livestock Exhibition. The arena replaced Dexter Park, a horse-racing track that had stood on the site for over 50 years until its destruction by fire on April 18, 1934. The completion of the Amphitheatre ushered in an era where Chicago reigned as a convention capital. In an era before air conditioning and space for the press and broadcast media were commonplace, the International Amphitheatre was among the first arenas to be equipped with these innovations.

The Stock Yards closed in 1971, but the Amphitheatre remained open, hosting rock concerts, college basketball and IHSA playoff games, circuses, religious gatherings, and other events. The shift of many conventions and trade shows to the more modern and more conveniently located lakefront McCormick Place convention center, during the 1960s and 1970s, began the International Amphitheatre&#x27;s decline, which continued with the opening of other convention and concert venues in the suburbs drawing more events away. By the 1980s, the venue was struggling due to competition from large facilities such as the Chicago Stadium, Rosemont Horizon, Arie Crown Theater, Alpine Valley Music Theatre, Holiday Star Theatre, UIC Pavilion, and the renovated Chicago Theatre.

In the late 1970s, developer Harry Chaddick proposed replacing the arena with a large shopping center, but these plans were killed after Mayor Michael Bilandic revoked his support for the project after residents and politicians of the Canaryville and Bridgeport neighborhoods complained that such a development would attract both intense vehicular traffic and draw over the residents from nearby Chicago Housing Authority projects.

After an automobile swap show in March 1983, the venue closed its doors. This was widely seen as an end for the venue. It was sold to new ownership for a mere $250,000 and sat dormant for three years. During plans were floated to convert the venue into a sound stage. However, on November 28, 1987, the International Amphitheatre reopened with a game by the Loyola Ramblers college basketball team, who became tenants of the reopened Amphitheatre. Some repairs and improvements had been made to the facility. A greater $5 million renovation was planned at the time of its reopening, and it was intended that Loyola basketball would remain tenants of the venue for at least five years. However, for their 1989 season, Loyola had moved to the Rosemont Horizon after the Amphitheatre proved to be an unsatisfactory home venue to the team. The team had faced attendance as low as 500 spectators while playing at the facility.

The sprawling venue was difficult to maintain and struggled to attract enough large events to pay for its own upkeep. It was eventually sold to promoters Cardenas &amp; Fernandez and then the City of Chicago, which had no more success at attracting events than its previous owner. In August 1999, demolition of the International Amphitheatre began. An Aramark Uniform Services plant is located on the site once occupied by the Amphitheatre.

==Events and tenants==
The original primary purpose of the arena was to host the North American International Livestock Exposition. This event would be held at the arena until several years after the Union Stock Yards closed in July 1971, when it left for Louisville, Kentucky.

===Presidential nominating conventions===
The Amphitheatre hosted several national American presidential nominating conventions, with an overall record of 1-4:
*1952 Republican National Convention (nominated Dwight D. Eisenhower for President and Richard M. Nixon for Vice President; ticket won)
*1952 Democratic National Convention (nominated Adlai E. Stevenson for President and John J. Sparkman for Vice President; ticket lost)
*1956 Democratic National Convention (nominated Adlai E. Stevenson for President and Estes Kefauver for Vice President; ticket lost)
*1960 Republican National Convention (nominated Richard M. Nixon for President and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. for Vice President; ticket lost)
*1968 Democratic National Convention (nominated Hubert H. Humphrey for President and Edmund S. Muskie for Vice President; ticket lost)

The 1952 Republican National Convention had the distinction of being the first political convention broadcast live by television coast to coast, with special studio facilities provided for all the major networks.

The 1968 Democratic National Convention was one of the most tumultuous political conventions in American history, noted by anti-war protests.

===Sports===
Televised boxing and wrestling events were held at the venue for decades, making it a well-known venue across the United States. In December 1981, Joe Frazier had his final boxing match at the Amphitheatre against Floyd Cummings, which resulted in a draw.

The arena, which seated 9,000, was the first home of the Chicago Packers of the NBA during 1961–62, before changing their name to the Chicago Zephyrs and moving to the Chicago Coliseum for their second season. It was also the home of the Chicago Bulls during their inaugural season of 1966–67; they also played only one game in the Chicago Coliseum, a playoff game in their first season, as no other arena was available for a game versus the St. Louis Hawks. Afterwards, the Bulls then moved permanently to Chicago Stadium, where they remained until , when they moved to their current home court at the United Center.

The Amphitheatre was also the primary home of the Chicago Cougars of the WHA from 1972 to 1975. It was originally intended to be only a temporary home for the Cougars, but the permanent solution, the Rosemont Horizon, was not completed until 1980, five years after the team folded and a year after the WHA ceased operation. The International Amphitheatre was the home for Chicago&#x27;s wrestling scene for years as well as the Chicago Auto Show for approximately 20 years beginning in the 1940s.

Strangely enough, on December 30, 1962, and January 5, 1964, the Chicago Amphitheatre hosted The Southside WinterNationals INDOOR Drag Races. With the smooth concrete floors, Drivers reported it was like racing on ice. It was also reported that after the first races, cases of Coca-Cola syrup were brought in, poured on the floor and allowed to dry overnight. Drivers like Arnie &quot;The Farmer&quot; Beswick, and Mr. Norm from Grand Spaulding Dodge later admitted the syrup did little to help traction. Staging was outside in the Chicago - January cold. Drivers did as many as 5 &quot;burnouts&quot; just to heat the rear tires. The shutdown area involved a sharp turn and wall that claimed more than a few of the entries.

On March 13–14, 1976, the Midwest Regional of the North American Soccer League&#x27;s 1976 Indoor tournament was hosted by the Chicago Sting at the Amphitheater. The Rochester Lancers won the Region to advance to the Final Four played in Florida.

The Loyola Ramblers basketball team were tenants of the venue during their 1987–88 and 1988–89 seasons, but faced poor attendance at the aging facility.

===Concerts and entertainment===
Notable performers who held shows at the venue included Dale Evans and Roy Rogers, Evel Knievel, The Rolling Stones, Frank Sinatra, Led Zeppelin, The Who, Pink Floyd, AC/DC, Black Sabbath, Santana, Ike &amp; Tina Turner, Grateful Dead, Van Halen, Aerosmith, UFO, Selena and The Jackson 5. The Amphitheatre is noted for being the site of one of Elvis Presley’s most notable concerts, on March 28, 1957, with the singer wearing his now legendary gold lamé suit for the first time. On September 5, 1964, and August 12, 1966, The Beatles performed at the Amphitheatre. The 1966 show was the first show of what proved to be their last tour. For eighteen years, the arena was the site of Chicago visits by the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus. In October 1978, English rock group UFO recorded parts of what would become &quot;Strangers in the Night&quot; at the International Amphitheatre.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

* International Amphitheatre article in the Encyclopedia of Chicago
* International Amphitheatre at WTTW</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1666325" start="4" end="30" title="International Amphitheatre" label="International Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="38" end="50" title="indoor arena" label="indoor arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="62" end="69" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="71" end="79" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643579" start="164" end="178" title="Halsted Street" label="Halsted Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q542707" start="234" end="245" title="Canaryville" label="Canaryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317397" start="276" end="293" title="Union Stock Yards" label="Union Stock Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268431" start="501" end="512" title="Dexter Park (Chicago)" label="Dexter Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="746" end="762" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999501" start="1037" end="1041" title="Illinois High School Association" label="IHSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072805" start="1212" end="1227" title="McCormick Place" label="McCormick Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703852" start="1533" end="1548" title="Chicago Stadium" label="Chicago Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336027" start="1550" end="1566" title="Rosemont Horizon" label="Rosemont Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790333" start="1568" end="1586" title="Arie Crown Theater" label="Arie Crown Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265153" start="1588" end="1615" title="Alpine Valley Music Theatre" label="Alpine Valley Music Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600828" start="1617" end="1637" title="Holiday Star Theatre" label="Holiday Star Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547208" start="1639" end="1651" title="UIC Pavilion" label="UIC Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q642866" start="1671" end="1686" title="Chicago Theatre" label="Chicago Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28648949" start="1718" end="1732" title="Harry Chaddick" label="Harry Chaddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="1775" end="1790" title="shopping center" label="shopping center"/>
<link wikidata="Q491938" start="1832" end="1848" title="Michael A. Bilandic" label="Michael Bilandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q542707" start="1924" end="1935" title="Canaryville" label="Canaryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925167" start="1940" end="1950" title="Bridgeport, Chicago" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095647" start="2085" end="2110" title="Chicago Housing Authority" label="Chicago Housing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="2377" end="2388" title="sound stage" label="sound stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q931107" start="2480" end="2495" title="Loyola Ramblers" label="Loyola Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q625708" start="3397" end="3404" title="ARAMARK" label="Aramark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053792" start="3568" end="3617" title="North American International Livestock Exposition" label="North American International Livestock Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317397" start="3687" end="3704" title="Union Stock Yards" label="Union Stock Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="3743" end="3753" title="Louisville" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3755" end="3763" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567526" start="3927" end="3962" title="1952 Republican National Convention" label="1952 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="3974" end="3994" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4013" end="4029" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="4034" end="4048" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567446" start="4063" end="4098" title="1952 Democratic National Convention" label="1952 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="4110" end="4128" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai E. Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q388215" start="4147" end="4163" title="John Sparkman" label="John J. Sparkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568685" start="4198" end="4233" title="1956 Democratic National Convention" label="1956 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108617" start="4282" end="4296" title="Estes Kefauver" label="Estes Kefauver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570049" start="4331" end="4366" title="1960 Republican National Convention" label="1960 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="4413" end="4434" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="4469" end="4504" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="4516" end="4534" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert H. Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="4553" end="4569" title="Edmund Muskie" label="Edmund S. Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567526" start="4608" end="4643" title="1952 Republican National Convention" label="1952 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="4822" end="4857" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="4941" end="4949" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381720" start="4950" end="4958" title="1968 Democratic National Convention protest activity" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102301" start="5121" end="5132" title="Joe Frazier" label="Joe Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462416" start="5188" end="5202" title="Floyd Cummings" label="Floyd Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="5288" end="5303" title="Chicago Packers" label="Chicago Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="5311" end="5314" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264502" start="5322" end="5329" title="1961–62 NBA season" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="5365" end="5380" title="Chicago Zephyrs" label="Chicago Zephyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370898" start="5399" end="5415" title="Chicago Coliseum" label="Chicago Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="5469" end="5482" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294141" start="5516" end="5523" title="1966–67 NBA season" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q159893" start="5673" end="5688" title="St. Louis Hawks" label="St. Louis Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="5834" end="5847" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q636106" start="5900" end="5915" title="Chicago Cougars" label="Chicago Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="5923" end="5926" title="World Hockey Association" label="WHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078462" start="5932" end="5936" title="1972 in sports" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074111" start="5940" end="5944" title="1975 in sports" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="6237" end="6246" title="Professional wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q630247" start="6278" end="6295" title="Chicago Auto Show" label="Chicago Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="7124" end="7152" title="North American Soccer League (1968–84)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577218" start="7160" end="7182" title="1976 NASL Indoor tournament" label="1976 Indoor tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q670603" start="7201" end="7214" title="Chicago Sting" label="Chicago Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627193" start="7240" end="7257" title="Rochester Lancers (1967–80)" label="Rochester Lancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q438048" start="7565" end="7575" title="Dale Evans" label="Dale Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="7580" end="7590" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q345231" start="7592" end="7604" title="Evel Knievel" label="Evel Knievel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="7606" end="7624" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="7626" end="7639" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="7641" end="7653" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="7655" end="7662" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="7664" end="7674" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="7676" end="7681" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="7683" end="7696" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q873384" start="7698" end="7705" title="Santana (band)" label="Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165506" start="7707" end="7728" title="Ike &amp;amp; Tina Turner" label="Ike &amp;amp; Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="7730" end="7743" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="7745" end="7754" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="7756" end="7765" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q251657" start="7767" end="7770" title="UFO (band)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23543" start="7772" end="7778" title="Selena" label="Selena"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="7783" end="7796" title="The Jackson 5" label="The Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="7853" end="7866" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="8031" end="8042" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716113" start="8134" end="8143" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1966 US tour" label="last tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="8213" end="8261" title="Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q251657" start="8299" end="8302" title="UFO (band)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500053" start="8345" end="8367" title="Strangers in the Night (UFO album)" label="Strangers in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017413" start="8557" end="8561" title="WTTW" label="WTTW"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772395" wikidata="Q547276" url="?curid=772395" title="Jacques-Arsène d'Arsonval">
<text>Jacques-Arsène d&#x27;Arsonval (8 June 1851 – 31 December 1940) was a French physician, physicist and inventor of the moving-coil D&#x27;Arsonval galvanometer and the thermocouple ammeter. D&#x27;Arsonval was an important contributor to the emerging field of electrophysiology, the study of the effects of electricity on biological organisms, in the nineteenth century.

==Life==
D&#x27;Arsonval was born in the Château de la Borie, in La Porcherie, Haute Vienne, France. He studied medicine in Limoges and Paris and obtained his medical degree in 1877. From 1873 to 1878 he was assistant to Claude Bernard, one of the founders of experimental physiology. After Bernard’s death he assisted Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard (1817-1894), giving his lectures, and when Brown-Séquard died in 1894 replaced him as professor at College de France.

Influenced by Bernard, D&#x27;Arsonval decided to devote his life to research. In 1892, he became director of the new laboratory of biophysics at the College de France and continued in that post until 1910. His main contributions were in electrophysiology. From 1889 D&#x27;Arsonval did the first research on the physiological effects of alternating current on the body. He discovered that currents with frequency over 5,000 Hz did not cause the muscular contractions and nerve stimulation effects of electric shock. Instead they seemed to have beneficial effects. He pioneered the therapeutic application of high frequency current to the body, founding the field of &quot;electrotherapy&quot;. He developed a spark-excited resonant circuit to generate currents of 0.5-2 MHz called &quot;D&#x27;Arsonval currents&quot; for therapy, which became known as &quot;D&#x27;Arsonvalization&quot;. It was later used for diathermy.

In 1881, d&#x27;Arsonval proposed tapping the thermal energy of the ocean. d&#x27;Arsonval&#x27;s student, Georges Claude, built the first OTEC plant in Cuba in 1930.

He was awarded the Prix Montyon in 1882 and was appointed a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1884, with Grand Cross in 1931.

==See also==
* Oudin coil
* Arthur Constantin Krebs

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*https://web.archive.org/web/20040419113144/http://chem.ch.huji.ac.il/~eugeniik/history/arsonval.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q547276" start="0" end="30" title="Jacques-Arsène d&amp;#x27;Arsonval" label="Jacques-Arsène d&amp;#x27;Arsonval"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="77" end="86" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="88" end="97" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179472" start="130" end="158" title="D&amp;#x27;Arsonval galvanometer" label="D&amp;#x27;Arsonval galvanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="167" end="179" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q166046" start="180" end="187" title="ammeter" label="ammeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="259" end="276" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="306" end="317" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="321" end="340" title="biological organism" label="biological organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q626124" start="436" end="448" title="La Porcherie" label="La Porcherie"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="592" end="606" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="644" end="654" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q725855" start="690" end="719" title="Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard" label="Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="819" end="836" title="College de France" label="College de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="1077" end="1094" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="1177" end="1196" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q244404" start="1340" end="1354" title="electric shock" label="electric shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752305" start="1512" end="1526" title="electrotherapy" label="electrotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q533734" start="1751" end="1760" title="diathermy" label="diathermy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125947" start="1809" end="1836" title="OTEC" label="thermal energy of the ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q537061" start="1870" end="1884" title="Georges Claude" label="Georges Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125947" start="1902" end="1906" title="OTEC" label="OTEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1916" end="1920" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q372160" start="1950" end="1962" title="Prix Montyon" label="Prix Montyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2008" end="2024" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041652" start="2076" end="2086" title="Oudin coil" label="Oudin coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865059" start="2089" end="2112" title="Arthur Constantin Krebs" label="Arthur Constantin Krebs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772403" wikidata="Q231851" url="?curid=772403" title="Artemisia II of Caria">
<text>Artemisia II of Caria (Greek: Ἀρτεμισία; died 351 BC) was a naval strategist, commander and the sister (and later spouse) and the successor of Mausolus, ruler of Caria. Mausolus was a satrap of the Achaemenid Empire, yet enjoyed the status of king or dynast of the Hecatomnid dynasty. After the death of her brother/husband, Artemisia reigned for two years, from 353 to 351 BCE. Her ascension to the throne prompted a revolt in some of the island and coastal cities under her command due to their objection to a female ruler. Her administration was conducted on the same principles as that of her husband; in particular, she supported the oligarchical party on the island of Rhodes.

Because of Artemisia&#x27;s grief for her brother-husband, and the extravagant and bizarre forms it took, she became to later ages &quot;a lasting example of chaste widowhood and of the purest and rarest kind of love&quot;, in the words of Giovanni Boccaccio. In art, she was usually shown in the process of consuming his ashes, mixed in a drink.

==Life==

While Artemisia&#x27;s father is known to have been Hekatomnos, the identity of her mother is less clear. There is a possibility that her mother might have been Aba, daughter of Hyssaldomos and a sister of Hekatomnos. This view however is challenged by scholars who believe either that the sibling marriages of the Hecatomnids were purely symbolic in nature and that while Ada was attested as his consort, it is not known if she was the mother of Hekatomnos children.

Artemisia is renowned in history for her extraordinary grief at the death of her husband (and brother) Mausolus. She is said to have mixed his ashes in her daily drink, and to have gradually pined away during the two years that she survived him. She induced the most eminent Greek rhetoricians to proclaim his praise in their oratory; and to perpetuate his memory she built at Halicarnassus the celebrated Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, listed by Antipater of Sidon as one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World and whose name subsequently became the generic term for any splendid sepulchral monument.

Artemisia is known for commanding a fleet and played a role in the military-political affairs of the Aegean after the decline in Athenian naval superiority. The island republic of Rhodes objected to the fact that a woman was ruling Caria. Rhodes sent a fleet against Artemisia without knowing that her deceased husband had built a secret harbour. Artemisia hid ships rowers, and marines and allowed the Rhodians to enter the main harbour. Artemisia and her citizens met the Rhodians at the city walls and invited them into the city. When the Rhodians began exiting their ships, Artemisia sailed her fleet through an outlet in the sea and into the main harbour. She captured empty Rhodian ships, and the Rhodian men who disembarked were killed in the marketplace. Artemisia then put her men on the Rhodian ships and had them sail back to Rhodes. The men were welcomed in the Rhodian harbour and they took over Rhodes.

Polyaenus, in the eighth book of his work &quot;Stratagems&quot;, mentions that when Artemisia (he may have been referring to Artemisia I, but more probably Artemisia II) wanted to conquer Latmus, she placed soldiers in ambush near the city and she, with women, eunuchs and musicians, celebrated a sacrifice at the sacred grove of the Mother of the Gods, which was about seven stades distant from the city. When the inhabitants of Latmus came out to see the magnificent procession, the soldiers entered the city and took possession of it.
==Other monuments==
Another celebrated monument was erected by Artemisia in Rhodes to commemorate her conquest of the island. The Rhodians, after regaining their liberty, made it inaccessible, whence it was called in later times the Abaton (άβατον) which means &quot;Do not tread&quot; or &quot;inaccessible&quot;. This bronze statue portrays Artemisia in the act of branding the personification of the island of Rhodes, potentially represented by the goddess Rhodos.

==In later art==
Artemisia drinking her husband&#x27;s ashes was a subject in painting from the Renaissance onwards, especially enjoying a vogue in Dutch Golden Age painting around the middle of the 17th century, being painted by Rembrandt (Prado) among others. This was probably stimulated by the publication in 1614 of a Dutch translation of the collection of anecdotes of Valerius Maximus, who was active in the reign of Tiberius. Rembrandt for one can be shown to have read and used this book.

Artemisia is always shown with a cup or urn, either alone or with a group of attendants offering or helping to mix the drink. The subject is therefore very similar to Sophonisba taking poison, and the Rembrandt, and a Donato Creti in the National Gallery, are examples of works where the intended subject remains uncertain between the two.

==Other cultural references==

Artemisia received a full and friendly biography in the &quot;De mulieribus claris&quot; (&quot;On Famous Women&quot;), a collection of biographies of historical and mythological women by the Florentine author Giovanni Boccaccio, written by 1374. Boccaccio completely omits reference to her husband being her brother (&quot;... knowledge of her parents or native country has not reached us ...&quot;), and praised her: &quot;to posterity she is a lasting example of chaste widowhood and of the purest and rarest kind of love&quot;.

===Plant genus===
According to Pliny, the plant genus &quot;Artemisia&quot; was named after Queen Artemisia II of Caria, who was also a botanist and medical researcher. The anti-malarial drug Artemisinin, extracted from the plant variety &quot;Artemisia annua&quot;, is therefore indirectly derived from the name of Queen Artemisia II of Caria.

==Representations of Artemisia in art==
==Citations==

==References==



==External links==

*Artemisia by Jona Lendering</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231851" start="0" end="21" title="Artemisia II of Caria" label="Artemisia II of Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="23" end="28" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92" end="121" title="Sibling marriage#Sibling marriage and incest" label="the sister (and later spouse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296857" start="143" end="151" title="Mausolus" label="Mausolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="162" end="167" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="184" end="190" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="198" end="215" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="251" end="257" title="dynast" label="dynast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206388" start="265" end="283" title="Hecatomnid dynasty" label="Hecatomnid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="639" end="651" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="665" end="671" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="675" end="681" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="924" end="942" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q296857" start="1614" end="1622" title="Mausolus" label="Mausolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1786" end="1791" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="1792" end="1803" title="rhetorician" label="rhetorician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843680" start="1888" end="1901" title="Halicarnassus" label="Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45368" start="1917" end="1943" title="Mausoleum at Halicarnassus" label="Mausoleum at Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q114280" start="1955" end="1973" title="Antipater of Sidon" label="Antipater of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="1988" end="2022" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="2051" end="2074" title="Mausoleum" label="became the generic term"/>
<link wikidata="Q537755" start="3032" end="3041" title="Polyaenus" label="Polyaenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232128" start="3158" end="3169" title="Artemisia I of Caria" label="Artemisia I"/>
<link wikidata="Q854649" start="3221" end="3227" title="Latmus" label="Latmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q811600" start="3347" end="3359" title="sacred grove" label="sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="3367" end="3385" title="Cybele" label="Mother of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="3409" end="3415" title="Stadion (unit of length)" label="stades"/>
<link wikidata="Q641286" start="4031" end="4037" title="Rhodos" label="Rhodos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="4188" end="4213" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="Dutch Golden Age painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="4270" end="4279" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160112" start="4281" end="4286" title="Prado" label="Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q379991" start="4415" end="4431" title="Valerius Maximus" label="Valerius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="4464" end="4472" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="4579" end="4582" title="urn" label="urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q241210" start="4706" end="4716" title="Sophonisba" label="Sophonisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340302" start="4757" end="4769" title="Donato Creti" label="Donato Creti"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="4777" end="4793" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169267" start="4973" end="4993" title="De mulieribus claris" label="De mulieribus claris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="5121" end="5139" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="5475" end="5480" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q156421" start="5504" end="5513" title="Artemisia (genus)" label="Artemisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q426921" start="5636" end="5647" title="Artemisinin" label="Artemisinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308044" start="5688" end="5703" title="Artemisia annua" label="Artemisia annua"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772405" wikidata="Q213753" url="?curid=772405" title="Harvest">
<text>Harvesting is the process of collecting plants, animals, or fish (as well as fungi) as food, especially the process of gathering mature crops, and &quot;the harvest&quot; also refers to the collected crops. Reaping is the cutting of grain or pulses for harvest, typically using a scythe, sickle, or reaper. On smaller farms with minimal mechanization, harvesting is the most labor-intensive activity of the growing season. On large mechanized farms, harvesting uses farm machinery, such as the combine harvester. Automation has increased the efficiency of both the seeding and harvesting processes. Specialized harvesting equipment, using conveyor belts for gentle gripping and mass transport, replaces the manual task of removing each seedling by hand. The term &quot;harvesting&quot; in general usage may include immediate postharvest handling, including cleaning, sorting, packing, and cooling.

The completion of harvesting marks the end of the growing season, or the growing cycle for a particular crop, and the social importance of this event makes it the focus of seasonal celebrations such as harvest festivals, found in many cultures and religions.

==Etymology==
&quot;&quot;, a noun, came from the Old English word (coined before the Angles moved from Angeln to Britain) meaning &quot;autumn&quot; (the season), &quot;harvest-time&quot;, or &quot;August&quot;. (It continues to mean &quot;autumn&quot; in British dialect, and &quot;season of gathering crops&quot; generally.) &quot;The harvest&quot; came to also mean the activity of reaping, gathering, and storing grain and other grown products during the autumn season, and also the grain and other grown products themselves. &quot;Harvest&quot; was also verbified: &quot;To &quot; means to reap, gather, and store the harvest (or the crop). People who harvest and equipment that harvests are harvesters; while they do it, they are harvesting.

==Crop failure==

Crop failure (also known as harvest failure) is an absent or greatly diminished crop yield relative to expectation, caused by the plants being damaged, killed, or destroyed, or affected in some way that they fail to form edible fruit, seeds, or leaves in their expected abundance.

Crop failures can be caused by catastrophic events such as plant disease outbreaks (such as the Great Famine in Ireland), volcanic eruptions (such as the Year Without a Summer), heavy rainfall, storms, floods, or drought, or by slow, cumulative effects of soil degradation, too-high soil salinity, erosion, desertification, usually as results of drainage, overdrafting (for irrigation), overfertilization, or overexploitation.

In history, crop failures and subsequent famines have triggered human migration, rural exodus, etc.

The proliferation of industrial monocultures, with their reduction in crop diversity and dependence on heavy use of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, has led to overexploited soils that are nearly incapable of regeneration. Over years, unsustainable farming of land degrades soil fertility and diminishes crop yield. With a steadily-increasing world population and local overpopulation, even slightly diminishing yields are already the equivalent to a partial harvest failure. Fertilizers obviate the need for soil regeneration in the first place, and international trade prevents local crop failures from developing into famines.

==Other uses==

&quot;Harvesting&quot; commonly refers to grain and produce, but also has other uses: fishing and logging are also referred to as harvesting. The term harvest is also used in reference to harvesting grapes for wine. &quot;Wild harvesting&quot; refers to the collection of plants and other edible supplies which have not been cultivated. Within the context of irrigation, &quot;water harvesting&quot; refers to the collection and run-off of rainwater for agricultural or domestic uses. Instead of &quot;harvest&quot;, the term &quot;exploit&quot; is also used, as in exploiting fisheries or water resources. &quot;Energy harvesting&quot; is the process of capturing and storing energy (such as solar power, thermal energy, wind energy, salinity gradients, and kinetic energy) that would otherwise go unexploited. &quot;Body harvesting&quot;, or &quot;cadaver harvesting&quot;, is the process of collecting and preparing cadavers for anatomical study. In a similar sense, &quot;organ harvesting&quot; is the removal of tissues or organs from a donor for purposes of transplanting.

In a non-agricultural sense, the word &quot;harvesting&quot; is an economic principle which is known as an exit event or liquidity event. For example, if a person or business was to cash out of an ownership position in a company or eliminate their investment in a product, it is known as a harvest strategy.

===Canada===

&quot;Harvesting&quot; or &quot;Domestic Harvesting&quot; in Canada refers to hunting, fishing, and plant gathering by First Nations, Métis, and Inuit in discussions of aboriginal or treaty rights. For example, in the Gwich&#x27;in Comprehensive Land Claim Agreement, &quot;Harvesting means gathering, hunting, trapping or fishing...&quot;. Similarly, in the Tlicho Land Claim and Self Government Agreement, Harvesting&#x27; means, in relation to wildlife, hunting, trapping or fishing and, in relation to plants or trees, gathering or cutting.&quot;

== Gallery ==
==See also==

*Combine harvester
*Energy harvesting
*Harvest (wine)
*Harvest festival
*Overharvesting
*Rainwater harvesting
*Sustainable agriculture
*Sustainable yield
*Threshing
*Winnowing

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="0" end="10" title="Harvest" label="Harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="233" end="238" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="242" end="248" title="pulse (legume)" label="pulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="280" end="286" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42233" start="288" end="294" title="sickle" label="sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367947" start="299" end="305" title="reaper" label="reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="337" end="350" title="mechanization" label="mechanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485549" start="375" end="380" title="manual labour" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="466" end="480" title="farm machinery" label="farm machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="494" end="511" title="combine harvester" label="combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q770135" start="639" end="652" title="conveyor belt" label="conveyor belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385709" start="736" end="744" title="seedling" label="seedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q426933" start="825" end="836" title="postharvest" label="postharvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304773" start="1101" end="1117" title="harvest festival" label="harvest festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1209" end="1220" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q506043" start="1263" end="1269" title="Angeln" label="Angeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="1296" end="1302" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783534" start="1719" end="1728" title="verbification" label="verbified"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="2007" end="2017" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662845" start="2268" end="2281" title="plant disease" label="plant disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="2305" end="2328" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="2331" end="2348" title="volcanic eruption" label="volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="2363" end="2384" title="Year Without a Summer" label="Year Without a Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="2403" end="2408" title="storm" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="2411" end="2416" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="2422" end="2429" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="2465" end="2481" title="soil degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="2492" end="2505" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="2507" end="2514" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="2516" end="2531" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="2555" end="2563" title="drainage" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113626" start="2565" end="2577" title="overdrafting" label="overdrafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="2583" end="2593" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="2596" end="2613" title="overfertilization" label="overfertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="2618" end="2634" title="overexploitation" label="overexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="2678" end="2684" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="2701" end="2716" title="human migration" label="human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608153" start="2718" end="2730" title="rural exodus" label="rural exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347753" start="2759" end="2769" title="industrial farming" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="2770" end="2781" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187949" start="2808" end="2822" title="crop diversity" label="crop diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="2854" end="2875" title="artificial fertilizer" label="artificial fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="2881" end="2890" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771018" start="2953" end="2965" title="regeneration (ecology)" label="regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="2979" end="2992" title="unsustainable" label="unsustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="3018" end="3032" title="soil fertility" label="soil fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="3048" end="3058" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="3087" end="3103" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="3114" end="3128" title="overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583088" start="3253" end="3270" title="soil regeneration" label="soil regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="3295" end="3314" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="3433" end="3438" title="cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="3477" end="3484" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="3489" end="3496" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="3579" end="3596" title="harvest (wine)" label="harvesting grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="3601" end="3605" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="3750" end="3760" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="3768" end="3784" title="rainwater harvesting" label="water harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q930236" start="4004" end="4021" title="Energy harvesting" label="Energy harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4068" end="4074" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="4084" end="4095" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="4113" end="4124" title="wind energy" label="wind energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="4150" end="4164" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="4241" end="4248" title="cadaver" label="cadaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="4323" end="4333" title="anatomy" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536444" start="4367" end="4383" title="organ harvesting" label="organ harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16946139" start="4592" end="4607" title="liquidity event" label="liquidity event"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="4913" end="4926" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="4928" end="4933" title="Métis in Canada" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="4939" end="4944" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091535" start="4963" end="4990" title="Indigenous land claims in Canada" label="aboriginal or treaty rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144501" start="5012" end="5025" title="Gwich&amp;#x27;in" label="Gwich&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091535" start="5026" end="5050" title="Comprehensive Land Claim" label="Comprehensive Land Claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186527" start="5153" end="5159" title="Tłı̨chǫ" label="Tlicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="5375" end="5392" title="Combine harvester" label="Combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q930236" start="5394" end="5411" title="Energy harvesting" label="Energy harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="5413" end="5427" title="Harvest (wine)" label="Harvest (wine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304773" start="5429" end="5445" title="Harvest festival" label="Harvest festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="5447" end="5461" title="Overharvesting" label="Overharvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="5463" end="5483" title="Rainwater harvesting" label="Rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="5485" end="5508" title="Sustainable agriculture" label="Sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738815" start="5510" end="5527" title="Sustainable yield" label="Sustainable yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="5529" end="5538" title="Threshing" label="Threshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="5540" end="5549" title="Winnowing" label="Winnowing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772408" wikidata="Q572303" url="?curid=772408" title="Philip van Artevelde">
<text>Philip van Artevelde (c. 1340 – 27 November 1382) was a Flemish patriot, the son of Jacob van Artevelde. Because of his father&#x27;s prominence he was godson of English queen Philippa of Hainault, who held him in her arms during his baptism.

Largely due to his father&#x27;s name and the memory of his godmother, Philip was a leader of Ghent in 1381 at the head of the burgher&#x27;s rebellion against Count Louis II of Flanders. Early success after the Battle of Beverhoutsveld, led to the capture of Bruges and most of Flanders by the rebels, but Philip perished in the crush of bodies at the Battle of Roosebeke in 1382.

His body was displayed before fourteen-years old French king Charles VI and then hanged from a tree. After his death the command of Ghent was taken up by Franz Ackerman.

His life was commemorated in a tragic play by Sir Henry Taylor in 1834.

== References ==

* Jean Froissart, &quot;Chroniques&quot;, Book II.

== External links ==
* Excerpt from Froissart&#x27;s Chronicle describing Philip&#x27;s rise to power.
* Excerpts from Taylor&#x27;s &quot;Philip Van Artevelde&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q572303" start="0" end="20" title="Philip van Artevelde" label="Philip van Artevelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="56" end="63" title="Flemings" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q359165" start="84" end="103" title="Jacob van Artevelde" label="Jacob van Artevelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="176" end="196" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="338" end="343" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458310" start="371" end="395" title="Revolt of Ghent (1379–1385)" label="burgher&amp;#x27;s rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q469648" start="404" end="430" title="Louis II of Flanders" label="Count Louis II of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290648" start="456" end="480" title="Battle of Beverhoutsveld" label="Battle of Beverhoutsveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="504" end="510" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651134" start="597" end="616" title="Battle of Roosebeke" label="Battle of Roosebeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="688" end="698" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594530" start="781" end="795" title="Franz Ackerman" label="Franz Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607302" start="844" end="860" title="Henry Taylor (dramatist)" label="Sir Henry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q315000" start="891" end="905" title="Jean Froissart" label="Jean Froissart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772409" wikidata="Q26961707" url="?curid=772409" title="Serpentine belt">
<text>A serpentine belt (or drive belt) is a single, continuous belt used to drive multiple peripheral devices in an automotive engine, such as an alternator, power steering pump, water pump, air conditioning compressor, air pump, etc. The belt may also be guided by an idler pulley and/or a belt tensioner (which may be spring-loaded, hydraulic, or manual).

To allow the belt to pass over more than three pulleys with a large enough wrap angle to avoid slipping, idler pulleys which press against the back of the belt are included, forcing the belt into a serpentine shape. To accommodate this bidirectional flexing while remaining strong enough to transfer the total force required by multiple loads, a serpentine belt is almost always of multi-groove (multi-vee, poly-v, or multi-rib) construction.

==Variations==
On some engine designs, the &quot;back&quot; (smooth side) of the belt may drive some accessories. This is typically limited to components requiring less torque or where a large angle of wrap is present. Such accessories will counter-rotate vs. the &quot;normal&quot; pulleys. Some vehicles use two serpentine belts for their system, such as the manual transaxle equipped Ford Taurus SHO, 1995–1999 DOHC Nissan Maxima, vehicles using the supercharged GM 3800 engine, and many BMWs.

==Advantages==
It is more efficient than the older multiple belt system and may consume less space in the engine compartment. By using a single, wider belt instead of multiple, thinner belts, the belt may be put under increased tension without stretching. Higher tension reduces slip, which increases belt life and mechanical efficiency. Reduced slip can allow the use of lower-ratio pulleys; this reduces the load on the engine, increasing fuel economy and available power. The tendency for V-belts to &quot;flip over&quot; in the pulley groove (at high RPM and/or when the belt stretches) is eliminated, and a serpentine belt is also much easier to maintain and replace, since there is no need to remove multiple belts in order to replace one of them, although newer adjustable-length V-belts (&quot;link belts&quot;) can be put on without having to remove other belts, and their link design also allows a self-tensioning characteristic to reduce the risk of flipping over. Also since only one movable belt tensioner is required all of the peripheral components (alternator, A/C compressor, etc.) can simply be mounted to the engine without the need to swivel.

==Disadvantages==
The drawback of this single belt is that if the belt breaks or is knocked loose, the vehicle instantly loses multiple critical functions. The water pump, power steering pump, and alternator (for battery charging) would cease functioning. The vehicle becomes quickly unusable due to loss of engine cooling. The belt typically gives ample visual warning of impending failure, sometimes even totally shedding several grooves (ribs) while continuing to function acceptably.

Furthermore, the loss of function of a single component (such as a power steering pump or air conditioning compressor) causes the failure of the entire accessory drive. Sometimes, this can be overcome with a shorter belt to bypass the failed components (if the belt is available). But this is not always possible. Thus, it is possible to be stranded because of, say, a seized power steering pump or A/C compressor clutch. It may also not be possible to restore use of the vehicle without first repairing the bad power steering pump or A/C compressor, which precludes a simple roadside repair.

==See also==
* Timing belt

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26961707" start="2" end="17" title="Serpentine belt" label="serpentine belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26961707" start="22" end="32" title="Serpentine belt" label="drive belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="58" end="62" title="belt (mechanical)" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056355" start="111" end="128" title="automotive engine" label="automotive engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992722" start="141" end="151" title="alternator (automotive)" label="alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054734" start="153" end="167" title="power steering" label="power steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="174" end="184" title="water pump" label="water pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="186" end="202" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="203" end="213" title="compressor" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q636009" start="215" end="223" title="air pump" label="air pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989142" start="264" end="276" title="idler pulley" label="idler pulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700688" start="286" end="300" title="belt tensioner" label="belt tensioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989142" start="459" end="471" title="idler pulley" label="idler pulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455133" start="552" end="568" title="serpentine shape" label="serpentine shape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="736" end="748" title="Belt (mechanical)#Multi-groove belts" label="multi-groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747980" start="1185" end="1200" title="Ford Taurus SHO" label="Ford Taurus SHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="1212" end="1216" title="DOHC" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q377287" start="1217" end="1230" title="Nissan Maxima" label="Nissan Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="1251" end="1263" title="supercharged" label="supercharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986361" start="1264" end="1271" title="Buick V6 engine" label="GM 3800"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="1289" end="1292" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628085" start="1611" end="1632" title="mechanical efficiency" label="mechanical efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="1788" end="1795" title="V belts" label="V-belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992722" start="2657" end="2667" title="alternator (automotive)" label="alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132815" start="3558" end="3569" title="Timing belt (camshaft)" label="Timing belt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772414" wikidata="Q1202177" url="?curid=772414" title="Owen Gingerich">
<text>Owen Jay Gingerich (; March 24, 1930 – May 28, 2023) was an American astronomer who had been professor emeritus of astronomy and of the history of science at Harvard University and a senior astronomer emeritus at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. In addition to his research and teaching, he had written many books on the history of astronomy.

Gingerich was also a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and the International Academy of the History of Science. A committed Christian, he had been active in the American Scientific Affiliation, a society of evangelical scientists. He served on the board of trustees of the Templeton Foundation.

==Early life==
Gingerich was born March 24, 1930, to Melvin and Verna (Roth) Gingerich, a Mennonite family in Washington, Iowa, but was raised on the prairies of Kansas where he first became interested in astronomy. His father taught history at Bethel College in North Newton, Kansas, from 1941 to 1947, when he took a job at Goshen College in Indiana. He traveled to Poland in 1946 as a seagoing cowboy. When his family relocated, Owen Gingerich began attending Goshen College although having only completed his junior year of high school. He continued his studies at Harvard University, completing his thesis in astronomy,“The Study of Non-Gray Stellar Atmospheres”, under Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin. In 2004 on May 22, Newton High School awarded him an honorary high school diploma, and he gave a graduation commencement speech to the Newton High School Class of 2004.

==Career and contributions==
Gingerich eventually came to teach astronomy at Harvard where his lectures became known for attention-getting schemes. Among them was propelling himself out of the classroom using a fire extinguisher to demonstrate Newton’s third law of motion, and dressing up like a sixteenth-century Latin scholar. He is associated with the Smithsonian through the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and also served as chairman of the International Astronomical Union’s Planet Definition Committee, which was charged in 2005 with updating the astronomical definition of planet to reflect then recent discoveries such as Eris.

The seven-member committee drafted a definition which preserved Pluto’s status by only requiring a planet to be (1) large enough to assume hydrostatic equilibrium (a nearly round shape) and (2) orbiting a star without itself being a star. This proposal was criticized by many for weakening the meaning of the term. The eventual definition adopted by the IAU added an additional requirement, that a body must have cleared its neighborhood of all other sizable objects, language that Gingerich was “not at all pleased” with.

After some early astronomical research on stellar atmospheres, he reoriented his studies toward the history of astronomy. In the 1950s, he researched Charles Messier’s life and the Messier Catalog. Gingerich found notes by Messier on two additional Objects, discovered by Pierre Méchain, which he added to the Messier Catalog: M108 (NGC 3556) and M109 (NGC 3992). He investigated the missing Messier Objects, concluding that M91 was probably a comet and that M102 was probably a duplication of M101. The first conclusion was later dismissed as W. C. Williams brought up evidence that M91 is probably NGC 4548, but the second is still open (M102 may be NGC 5866).

Gingerich was a recognized authority on both Johannes Kepler and Nicolaus Copernicus, especially in regard to Copernicus&#x27;s &quot;De revolutionibus orbium coelestium&quot;. He was also an expert on Galileo&#x27;s astronomical observations, and took a leading role in establishing that the watercolor lunar images in a celebrated copy of Galileo&#x27;s &quot;Sidereus Nuncius&quot; were modern forgeries and not made by Galileo.

In 1959, in chapter II of &quot;The Sleepwalkers&quot;, titled &quot;The System of Copernicus&quot;, Arthur Koestler wrote that: &quot;The book that nobody read – the &quot;Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres&quot; – was and is an all-time worst-seller.&quot; After reading in the Royal Observatory in Edinburgh a thoroughly annotated copy previously owned by Erasmus Reinhold, a prominent sixteenth-century German astronomer who worked in University of Wittenberg shortly after Copernicus&#x27; death, Gingerich was inspired to check Koestler&#x27;s claim and to research who had owned and studied the book&#x27;s first two editions, published in 1543 and 1566 in Nuremberg and Basel respectively. He discovered, from marginal annotations, that the book was widely read after all. Gingerich also documented where and how the book was censored. 

Due largely to Gingerich’s work, &quot;De revolutionibus&quot; has been researched and catalogued better than any other first-edition historical text except for the original Gutenberg Bible. His book &quot;An Annotated Census of Copernicus&#x27; De Revolutionibus (Nuremberg, 1543 and Basel, 1566)&quot; was published in 2002. His three-decade-long personal survey of Copernicus’ book &quot;De revolutionibus&quot; was recounted in &quot;The Book Nobody Read,&quot; published in 2004 by Walker &amp; Co. These Copernican researches earned him the Polish government’s Order of Merit in 1981. His latter books, &quot;God&#x27;s Universe&quot; (Harvard, 2006) and &quot;God&#x27;s Planet&quot; (Harvard, 2014), dealt with the intersection of science and religion.

==Science and religion==
Gingerich was a Christian as well as a historian of science and a cosmologist and had been asked several times to comment on matters concerning the interplay between science and faith. In one of these, Intelligent design, he asserted “immense incomprehension from both the friends and foes.” On the one hand, he said that it is unfortunate that there seems to be a knee-jerk reaction among its critics that I.D. is simply Young Earth creationism in disguise. On the other hand, he said that, while I.D. supporters make a good case for a coherent understanding of the nature of the cosmos,
they fall short in providing any mechanisms for the efficient causes that primarily engage scientists in our age. I.D. does not explain the temporal or geographical distribution of species, or the intricate relationships of the DNA coding. I.D. is interesting as a philosophical idea, but it does not replace the scientific explanations that evolution offers.

Gingerich believed “there is a God as a designer, who happens to be using the evolutionary process to achieve larger goals – which are, as far as we human beings can see, [the development of] self-consciousness and conscience.” He has written that “I ... believe in intelligent design, lowercase ‘i’ and ‘d’. But I have trouble with Intelligent Design – uppercase ‘I’ and ‘D’ – a movement widely seen as anti-evolutionist.” He indicated that teleological arguments, such as the apparent fine tuning of the universe, can count as evidence, but not proof, for the existence of God. He said that “a common-sense and satisfying interpretation of our world suggests the designing hand of a superintelligence.”

Accepting the common descent of species, Gingerich was a theistic evolutionist. Therefore, he did not accept metaphysical naturalism, writing that
Most mutations are disasters, but perhaps some inspired few are not. Can mutations be inspired? Here is the ideological watershed, the division between atheistic evolution and theistic evolution, and frankly it lies beyond science to prove the matter one way or the other. Science will not collapse if some practitioners are convinced that occasionally there has been creative input in the long chain of being.

Gingerich’s beliefs had sometimes resulted in criticism from young earth creationists, who dissent from the view that the universe is billions of years old. Gingerich had responded, in part, by saying that “the great tapestry of science is woven together with the question ‘how?’” while the biblical account and faith “addresses entirely different questions: not the how, but the motivations of the ‘Who’.”

==Accomplishments and awards==
At Harvard, Gingerich taught “The Astronomical Perspective,” a core science course for non-scientists, which at the time of his retirement in 2000 was the longest-running course under the same management (with David Latham) at the University. He was known for his creativity in teaching, using, for example, medieval costumes and fire extinguishers. A notable example was when in one semester, when the number of students signing up for the course lagged, Gingerich hired a plane to fly over Harvard Yard with a banner: &quot;Sci A-17. M, W, F. Try it!&quot;. In 1984, he won the Harvard-Radcliffe Phi Beta Kappa prize for excellence in teaching. 

Gingerich has written more than 20 books and published nearly 600 technical or educational articles and reviews. Two anthologies of his essays have been released, &quot;The Great Copernicus Chase and Other Adventures in Astronomical History&quot; from Cambridge University Press and &quot;The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler&quot; in the American Institute of Physics &quot;Masters of Modern Physics&quot; series.

Gingerich was a councilor of the American Astronomical Society, and helped organize its Historical Astronomy Division. In 2000, he won their Doggett Prize for his contributions to the history of astronomy. He was awarded the Prix Jules Janssen of the Société astronomique de France (French Astronomical Society) in 2006.

Gingerich won the Trotter Prize in 2009, an endowed lecture at Texas A&amp;M.

Asteroid 2658 Gingerich, discovered on February 13, 1980, at the Harvard College Observatory, is named in his honor.

==Personal life and death==
Gingerich and his wife, Miriam, were married for over 60 years. They had three sons, Jonathan, Mark, and Peter, as well as three grandchildren. They enjoyed traveling and photography. 

Gingerich died on May 28, 2023, at the age of 93.

== Works ==
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;Astronomy&quot; in &quot;The Encounter between Christianity and Science&quot;. Edited by Richard H. Bube, William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1968, pages 109-133
* Owen Gingerich, Robert S. Westman: The Wittich Connection. Conflict and Priority in Late Sixteenth-century Cosmology. American Philosophical Society, 1988, 
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;The Great Copernicus Chase and other Adventures in Astronomical History&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 1992 
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler&quot;. New York: American Institute of Physics, 1993 
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;An Annotated Census of Copernicus&#x27; De Revolutionibus (Nuremberg, 1543 and Basel, 1566)&quot;. Leiden: Brill, 2002 (Studia copernicana. Brill&#x27;s series; v. 2)
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;The Book Nobody Read: Chasing the Revolutions of Nicolaus Copernicus&quot;. New York: Walker, 2004 
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;God&#x27;s Universe&quot;. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006 
* Owen Gingerich: &quot;God&#x27;s Planet&quot;. Harvard University Press, 2014 
* General editor of Oxford Portraits in Science (1996– ?)

==References==
==External links==

===General===
* Gingerich Harvard homepage, archived 9 December 2006
* Video interview of Dr. Gingerich by Robert Wright for meaningoflife.tv
* Video interview of Dr. Gingerich on various &quot;Cosmic questions&quot;
* Interviewed by Alan Macfarlane 31st August 2008 (video)

===Essays===
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1202177" start="0" end="18" title="Owen Gingerich" label="Owen Jay Gingerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="115" end="124" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183341" start="136" end="154" title="history of science and technology" label="history of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="158" end="176" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="190" end="200" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755255" start="217" end="254" title="Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory" label="Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q50056" start="331" end="351" title="history of astronomy" label="history of astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="389" end="426" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="432" end="462" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q337449" start="472" end="519" title="International Academy of the History of Science" label="International Academy of the History of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744954" start="570" end="601" title="American Scientific Affiliation" label="American Scientific Affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="616" end="627" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026166" start="682" end="702" title="Templeton Foundation" label="Templeton Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="795" end="804" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q989456" start="815" end="831" title="Washington, Iowa" label="Washington, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="867" end="873" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897888" start="950" end="964" title="Bethel College (Kansas)" label="Bethel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662374" start="968" end="988" title="North Newton, Kansas" label="North Newton, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538540" start="1031" end="1045" title="Goshen College" label="Goshen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440437" start="1093" end="1108" title="Seagoing cowboys" label="seagoing cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="1233" end="1244" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1274" end="1292" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="1380" end="1404" title="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin" label="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="1468" end="1487" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1653" end="1660" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="1820" end="1848" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton’s third law of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1891" end="1896" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="1932" end="1943" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755255" start="1956" end="1993" title="Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory" label="Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="2029" end="2061" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743" start="2150" end="2170" title="definition of planet" label="definition of planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q611" start="2214" end="2218" title="136199 Eris" label="Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361306" start="2248" end="2268" title="2006 definition of planet" label="drafted a definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="2285" end="2290" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="2360" end="2383" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="2426" end="2430" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q681824" start="2634" end="2658" title="Clearing the neighbourhood" label="cleared its neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2856" end="2865" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="2895" end="2910" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="2926" end="2941" title="Messier Catalog" label="Messier Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751" start="3072" end="3076" title="Messier 108" label="M108"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746" start="3092" end="3096" title="Messier 109" label="M109"/>
<link wikidata="Q14344" start="3170" end="3173" title="Messier 91" label="M91"/>
<link wikidata="Q14374" start="3204" end="3208" title="Messier 102" label="M102"/>
<link wikidata="Q14371" start="3239" end="3243" title="Pinwheel Galaxy" label="M101"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="3454" end="3469" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="3474" end="3493" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="3543" end="3578" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457297" start="3771" end="3787" title="Sidereus Nuncius" label="Sidereus Nuncius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151691" start="3874" end="3890" title="The Sleepwalkers (Koestler book)" label="The Sleepwalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="3943" end="3958" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="4015" end="4050" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106882" start="4123" end="4153" title="Royal Observatory in Edinburgh" label="Royal Observatory in Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q544169" start="4202" end="4218" title="Erasmus Reinhold" label="Erasmus Reinhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="4282" end="4306" title="Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg" label="University of Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="4507" end="4516" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="4521" end="4526" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158075" start="4863" end="4878" title="Gutenberg Bible" label="Gutenberg Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5236" end="5242" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q93982" start="5256" end="5270" title="Order of Merit of Poland" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="5492" end="5501" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="5678" end="5696" title="Intelligent design" label="Intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="5898" end="5921" title="Young Earth creationism" label="Young Earth creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="6868" end="6889" title="teleological argument" label="teleological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="6913" end="6940" title="fine-tuned universe" label="fine tuning of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="6988" end="7004" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="7146" end="7160" title="common descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q498382" start="7189" end="7210" title="theistic evolutionist" label="theistic evolutionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q260994" start="7241" end="7264" title="metaphysical naturalism" label="metaphysical naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="7752" end="7775" title="young earth creationist" label="young earth creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="7825" end="7846" title="age of the universe" label="billions of years old"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="8728" end="8742" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463435" start="9238" end="9267" title="American Astronomical Society" label="American Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711648" start="9430" end="9448" title="Prix Jules Janssen" label="Prix Jules Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="9456" end="9486" title="Société astronomique de France" label="Société astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846359" start="9545" end="9558" title="Trotter Prize (Texas A&amp;amp;M)" label="Trotter Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="9590" end="9603" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="9606" end="9614" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q665633" start="9615" end="9629" title="2658 Gingerich" label="2658 Gingerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="9671" end="9698" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326141" start="10114" end="10129" title="Richard H. Bube" label="Richard H. Bube"/>
<link wikidata="Q941589" start="10131" end="10169" title="William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company" label="William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q88089" start="10232" end="10239" title="Paul Wittich" label="Wittich"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="10311" end="10341" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115421" start="11132" end="11159" title="Oxford Portraits in Science" label="Oxford Portraits in Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123126" start="11313" end="11326" title="Robert Wright (journalist)" label="Robert Wright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772416" wikidata="Q6752422" url="?curid=772416" title="Manuel Artime">
<text>Manuel Francisco Artime Buesa, M.D. (29 January 1932 – 18 November 1977) was a Cuban-American who at one time was a member of the rebel army of Fidel Castro but later was the political leader of Brigade 2506 land forces in the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961.

==Biography==
Manuel Artime was the nephew of popular Cuban poet José Ángel Bueza, and was raised as a devout Catholic by Jesuits. In 1957 he became a member of the Radical Liberation Party (PLR), a Christian democratic group. He graduated as a doctor and planned to become a psychiatrist.

In December 1958 he joined the rebel army of Fidel Castro and took part in offensives against the forces of the Batista regime at Guisa, Maffo and Palma Soriano.
In January 1959, after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution, Artime was appointed second in command of Zone 0–22 in the Ciro Redondo district in the Manzanillo region at INRA (Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria). In that post, under Major Humberto Sorí Marin, Minister of Agriculture, and Rogelio Gonzalez Corzo (alias &quot;Francisco Gutierrez&quot;), Director of Agriculture, Artime promoted the work of the Comandos Rurales (Rural Commandos), a kind of Peace Corps composed of young people, most of whom belonged to the University Catholic Group (ACU) in Havana. Both Sorí Marin and Rogelio Gonzalez were captured on the eve of the Bay of Pigs Invasion and executed on 20 April 1961. Artime was also a professor at the Havana Military Academy. During 1959, Artime formed the Movimiento de Recuperación Revolucionaria (MRR) (in English - &quot;Movement to Recover the Revolution&quot;) that included Rogelio Gonzalez Corzo, Higinio &quot;Nino&quot; Diaz, Jorge Sotus, Sergio Sanjenis, Rafael Rivas Vazquez, Carlos Rodriguez Santana, some of whom were already exiled in Mexico.

In October 1959, after the arrest and trial of Commander Huber Matos of the Cuban revolutionary army, the Cuban intelligence unit G-2 began searching for other counter-revolutionaries. Artime took asylum with the Jesuits in Havana, and on 7 November 1959 his resignation letter from INRA and the revolutionary army was published on the front page of &quot;Avance&quot; newspaper. Artime then contacted the American embassy in Havana, and on 14 December 1959, the CIA arranged for him to travel to the US on a Honduran freighter ship. He became closely involved with Gerry Droller (alias &quot;Frank Bender&quot;, alias &quot;Mr B&quot;) of the CIA in recruiting and organizing Cuban exiles in Miami for future actions against the Cuban government. Artime&#x27;s organization MRR thus grew to become the principal counter-revolutionary movement inside Cuba, with supporting members in Miami, Mexico, Venezuela etc. Involved were Tony Varona, José Miró Cardona, Rafael Quintero, Aureliano Sánchez Arango. Infiltration into Cuba, arms drops, etc. were arranged by the CIA.

In May 1960 he was one of a group of ten former Cuban officers in Miami planning a campaign against the Cuban government. They were all graduates of Cuba&#x27;s military academy, the Cadet School. On 2 June 1960, Artime and nine fellow &#x27;recruits&#x27; were transported by CIA agents to Useppa Island off Fort Myers, Florida, for physical and psychological assessments. On 22 June 1960 Artime and 27 others were taken by land and air to Fort Gulick in Panama for paramilitary training. On 22 August 1960 he flew via CIA C-54 transport aircraft to San Jose, Guatemala. On 15 April 1961, José Miró Cardona, chairman of the New York-based Cuban Revolutionary Council confirmed Manuel Artime as its Economic Administrator and &quot;Delegate in the Invading Army&quot;. On 17 April 1961 he went ashore with Brigade 2506, the assault brigade of Cuban exiles, at Playa Larga in the Bay of Pigs Invasion. After the Brigade had ceased fighting on 19 April 1961, he and others scattered into the woods and swamps near Playa Girón. On 2 May 1961, he was captured by Cuban forces near the Covadonga sugar mill with 21 other members of the Brigade. Artime, along with everyone else captured in the failed invasion, was sentenced to 30 years in a prison during a mass treason trial. He was finally released from prison and flown to Miami on 24 December 1962. On 29 December 1962, Manuel Artime was on stage next to US President John F. Kennedy at the Orange Bowl in Miami, Florida, during the &#x27;welcome back&#x27; ceremony for captured Brigade 2506 veterans.

At the initiative of US Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, he became involved in the Cuban project AMWORLD, a White House-sponsored and CIA-organized counter-revolutionary unit with bases in Costa Rica and Nicaragua that staged commando raids on Cuban shore installations. However, in 1964 the Cuban Project was cancelled by US President Lyndon B. Johnson. Artime participated in a failed assassination attempt against Fidel Castro in 1965. In the 1970s Artime organized the Miami Watergate Defense Relief Fund, collecting $21,000 for the convicted Watergate burglars, a number of whom were American or Cuban veterans of the Bay of Pigs operation. Artime was very close to E. Howard Hunt and was godfather to Hunt&#x27;s youngest son David. 
Manuel Artime died of cancer on 18 November 1977. The circumstances of his premature death are considered unusual on both sides of the Florida Straits, but such comments are commonly considered speculative (i.e. conspiracy theory).

He is buried at Woodlawn Park Cemetery and Mausoleum, now Caballero Rivero Woodlawn North Park Cemetery and Mausoleum, in Miami.

In the 2023 HBO Max miniseries &quot;White House Plumbers&quot;, as a friend of E. Howard Hunt, is portrayed by Steven Bauer.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz
* Humberto Sori Marin

==Notes==
==References==
*Chapelle, Dickey. 1962. What&#x27;s a Woman Doing Here?: A reporter&#x27;s report on herself. Morrow. New York ASIN B0006AXN80
*Corzo, Pedro. 2003. Cuba Cronología de la Lucha Contra el Totalitarismo. Ediciones Memorias, Miami. 
*Fernandez, Jose Ramon. 2001. Playa Giron/Bay of Pigs: Washington&#x27;s First Military Defeat in the Americas. Pathfinder 
*Hunt, E. Howard. 1973. Give Us This Day. Arlington House, New Rochelle, NY. 
*Johnson, Haynes. 1964. The Bay of Pigs: The Leaders&#x27; Story of Brigade 2506. W.W. Norton &amp; Co Inc. New York. 
*Kornbluh, Peter. 1998. Bay of Pigs Declassified: The Secret CIA Report on the Invasion of Cuba. The New Press. New York. 
*Rodriguez, Juan Carlos. 1999. Bay of Pigs and the CIA. Ocean Press Melbourne. 
*Ros, Enrique. 1994,1998. Giron la Verdadera Historia. Ediciones Universales (Colección Cuba y sus jueces) 3rd edition Miami 
*Wyden, Peter. 1979. Bay of Pigs - The Untold Story. Simon and Schuster. New York. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6752422" start="0" end="29" title="Manuel Artime" label="Manuel Francisco Artime Buesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="79" end="93" title="Cuban-American" label="Cuban-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="144" end="156" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q915334" start="195" end="207" title="Brigade 2506" label="Brigade 2506"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="236" end="256" title="Bay of Pigs invasion" label="Bay of Pigs invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="260" end="264" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="346" end="362" title="José Ángel Buesa" label="José Ángel Bueza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="617" end="629" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270" start="684" end="691" title="Fulgencio Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935474" start="702" end="707" title="Guisa" label="Guisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q742835" start="719" end="732" title="Palma Soriano" label="Palma Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="776" end="792" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020273" start="853" end="865" title="Ciro Redondo" label="Ciro Redondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115403" start="882" end="892" title="Manzanillo, Cuba" label="Manzanillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008716" start="903" end="907" title="INRA (Cuba)" label="INRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999676" start="975" end="994" title="Humberto Sorí Marin" label="Humberto Sorí Marin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1025" end="1047" title="Rogelio Gonzalez Corzo" label="Rogelio Gonzalez Corzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="1371" end="1391" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1514" end="1555" title="Movimiento de Recuperación Revolucionaria" label="Movimiento de Recuperación Revolucionaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q946934" start="1873" end="1884" title="Huber Matos" label="Huber Matos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552722" start="2382" end="2395" title="Gerry Droller" label="Gerry Droller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454483" start="2744" end="2755" title="Tony Varona" label="Tony Varona"/>
<link wikidata="Q926623" start="2757" end="2774" title="José Miró Cardona" label="José Miró Cardona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282274" start="2776" end="2791" title="Rafael Quintero" label="Rafael Quintero"/>
<link wikidata="Q775440" start="2793" end="2817" title="Aureliano Sánchez Arango" label="Aureliano Sánchez Arango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901818" start="3178" end="3191" title="Useppa Island" label="Useppa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q506451" start="3196" end="3206" title="Fort Myers" label="Fort Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471263" start="3328" end="3339" title="Fort Gulick" label="Fort Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252107" start="3411" end="3415" title="Douglas C-54" label="C-54"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192044" start="3527" end="3554" title="Cuban Revolutionary Council" label="Cuban Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562253" start="3730" end="3741" title="Cuban exile" label="Cuban exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q253103" start="3899" end="3910" title="Playa Girón" label="Playa Girón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245953" start="3968" end="3977" title="Aguada de Pasajeros" label="Covadonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="4305" end="4320" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="4328" end="4339" title="Orange Bowl (game)" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="4343" end="4348" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4350" end="4357" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="4462" end="4481" title="US Attorney General" label="US Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="4482" end="4499" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="4633" end="4643" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4780" end="4797" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="4923" end="4932" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q712791" start="5115" end="5129" title="E. Howard Hunt" label="E. Howard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015199" start="5475" end="5534" title="Caballero Rivero Woodlawn North Park Cemetery and Mausoleum" label="Caballero Rivero Woodlawn North Park Cemetery and Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="5559" end="5566" title="Max (streaming service)" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008231" start="5584" end="5604" title="White House Plumbers (miniseries)" label="White House Plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q705477" start="5659" end="5671" title="Steven Bauer" label="Steven Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159722" start="5702" end="5722" title="Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz" label="Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999676" start="5725" end="5744" title="Humberto Sori Marin" label="Humberto Sori Marin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772418" wikidata="Q1049650" url="?curid=772418" title="Return of Saturn">
<text>Return of Saturn is the fourth studio album by American rock band No Doubt, released on April 11, 2000, by Trauma Records and Interscope Records. It marked the band&#x27;s first album as a quartet, following the departure of original keyboardist Eric Stefani in 1994. After touring for two and a half years to promote their breakthrough third studio album, &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot; (1995), No Doubt wrote several dozen songs for its follow-up and eventually settled on working with producer Glen Ballard. Creating the album became a tumultuous process lasting two years, during which there was dissension among band members and between the band and its label. The album was completed after the band returned to the studio and recorded what became two of its singles.

The album maintains the ska punk and reggae influences of the band&#x27;s previous work, but with slower, more ballad-like songs. The lyrics to many of the songs describe singer Gwen Stefani&#x27;s pining for a more domestic life, contrasting that with her commitment to a music career.

Upon its release, &quot;Return of Saturn&quot; received favorable reviews from music critics, although several of them were divided over its different sound to its predecessor. It debuted at number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 but was unable to measure up to the sales of &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot;. The album spawned four singles, only one of which charted on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, It was nominated for Best Rock Album at the 43rd Grammy Awards.

==Background==
After the success of No Doubt&#x27;s breakthrough album &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot; (1995), the band wrote more than 20 songs for a new album, influenced by artists such as the Cure. Having toured extensively for two and a half years since the release of &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot;, they initially had trouble producing material and decided to experiment with new sounds. Many of the songs were written in a rented house in Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles, where bassist Tony Kanal was living. During early production in mid-1998 the band worked on seven tracks in Los Angeles with Matthew Wilder, who had produced &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot;, but had creative differences with him. They planned on going to New York City to work with producer Michael Beinhorn, who had produced for alternative rock acts such as Red Hot Chili Peppers, Hole, and Soundgarden.

When scheduling conflicts arose with Beinhorn, the band interviewed several producers and decided on Glen Ballard, who had produced Alanis Morissette&#x27;s &quot;Jagged Little Pill&quot; (1995), because of pressure from manager Jimmy Iovine and Ballard&#x27;s belief in not using heavy production techniques. Ballard went through the band&#x27;s 40 demos and ruled out half of them. They frequently missed due dates, arguing that hurrying the album to cash in on the success of &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot; was unwise since three years had passed. In early 1999, No Doubt released &quot;New&quot;, co-produced by Talking Heads member Jerry Harrison, for the soundtrack to the 1999 film &quot;Go&quot;.

By that July, the band stopped work on the album, intending to be done with the record. Interscope, however, recommended that they continue writing so they would have a more marketable single. The band was split when singer Gwen Stefani offered to do so but drummer Adrian Young and guitarist Tom Dumont did not want to, hesitant to trust Interscope after it had sublicensed &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot; to Trauma Records. After a brief break, Dumont sent Stefani some of his demos as a peace offering. The band returned to the studio to create more upbeat songs and penned &quot;Ex-Girlfriend&quot; and &quot;Simple Kind of Life&quot;. More recording, audio mixing and audio mastering were done late that year, and David LaChapelle photographed the band for the album cover in January 2000.

The album&#x27;s working title was originally announced as &quot;Magic&#x27;s in the Makeup&quot; in May 1998 and later as &quot;Saturn Returns&quot; in November 1999. Stefani was confused by her feelings of depression and interest in Sylvia Plath while recording the album. Her boyfriend Gavin Rossdale told her that she was going through her Saturn return. Saturn&#x27;s orbit takes 29.4 Earth years and, in astrology, the time when Saturn returns to its position during a person&#x27;s birth is believed to be a period of self-evaluation. Stefani was born October 3, 1969, and many of the songs were written during her Saturn return.

==Music and lyrics==
The music of &quot;Return of Saturn&quot; further explores new wave style, while adding an alternative rock feel and maintaining some of the band&#x27;s ska and reggae sounds. Adrian Young&#x27;s drum part on &quot;Simple Kind of Life&quot; was mixed through low fidelity filters to give it the sound of a lo-fi power ballad. &quot;Six Feet Under&quot; and &quot;Staring Problem&quot; were described as a more self-aware return to the band&#x27;s earlier material, a combination of work by new wave band Missing Persons and hard rock band Van Halen.

No Doubt experiments with several new styles on the album. &quot;Ex-Girlfriend&quot;, which originally featured a Prince-style funk sound, was rewritten and includes rapped vocals over piano and flamenco guitar parts. After opening with Gabrial McNair&#x27;s jazz funeral horn part over Young&#x27;s beatboxing, &quot;Bathwater&quot; proceeds into a song written in swing time. It was described as a combination of the band&#x27;s 2 Tone roots with the operatic slapstick of Gilbert and Sullivan. &quot;Marry Me&quot; features use of the tabla, a pair of tuned hand drums prominent in India. Young and bassist Tony Kanal&#x27;s contributions were compared to the rhythm of nu metal music, and the fragmented progression of &quot;Comforting Lie&quot; was likened to the work of Korn.

The album&#x27;s lyrics depict Stefani&#x27;s maturation and femininity, reflected by images of oral contraceptives, a wedding cake and makeup on the album cover, as well as her romantic relationship with Rossdale. Her lyrics drew comparisons to the bitter, confessional styling of Hole frontwoman Courtney Love. &quot;New&quot; was written while the band was touring about the excitement of meeting Rossdale and her infatuation with him. Later compositions, however, discuss the problems that the two had maintaining a long-distance relationship. &quot;Ex-Girlfriend&quot; discusses a failing relationship, and &quot;Suspension Without Suspense&quot; and &quot;Home Now&quot; detail feelings of resentment, loneliness, and indecision. On &quot;Simple Kind of Life&quot;, she confesses to hoping for a mistake with her birth control and a desire to leaving music for a domestic life. She contrasts this, however, with her need for independence:
==Critical reception==
&quot;Return of Saturn&quot; received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 68, based on 16 reviews. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s David Browne characterized the album as filled with &quot;smoother, layered mid-tempo ballads as creamily textured as extra-thick napoleon pastries&quot;, but stated that Stefani&#x27;s lyrics were too much of a throwback to the alternative rock scene of the early 1990s and contrasted with the boom of teen pop. Robert Christgau, writing for &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, described the emotions Stefani expressed as shallow, and Siobhan Grogan of &quot;NME&quot; stated that Stefani&#x27;s preoccupation with Rossdale was distracting and weakened the intense, Madonna-like character she had established on &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot;. AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine, however, called it &quot;a terrific, layered record that exceeds any expectations set by &quot;Tragic Kingdom&quot;&quot;. Barry Walters from &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; referred to it as &quot;a superstar follow-up that not only betters its predecessor but also radically departs from it.&quot; The publication included the album in its list of the top 50 albums of the year, describing it as &quot;a record that charges ahead like gangbusters while biting its nails.&quot; Sal Cinquemani from &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; commented that although the album did not have any successful singles, &quot;Return of Saturn&quot; was &quot;a solid album and proof of a healthy, genre-breaking future for No Doubt.&quot;

==Commercial performance==
&quot;Return of Saturn&quot; debuted at number two on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, behind &#x27;N Sync&#x27;s &quot;No Strings Attached&quot;, and sold 202,000 copies in its first week. The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified the album platinum in May 2000, and as of July 2012, it had sold 1,587,000 copies in the United States. The album was successful in the modern rock market and its first two singles, &quot;New&quot; and &quot;Ex-Girlfriend&quot;, reached the top 10 of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart. It was less successful in the mainstream market, and &quot;Simple Kind of Life&quot; was the only single to chart on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, where it peaked at number 38. The album was nominated for Best Rock Album at the 2001 Grammy Awards, but lost out to Foo Fighters&#x27; &quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot;. In Canada, it peaked at number two on &quot;RPM&quot; albums chart and number four on &quot;Billboard&quot; albums chart. &quot;Return of Saturn&quot; was awarded a Platinum certification by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA) in June 2000, denoting sales in excess of 100,000 copies.

==Track listing==
All tracks produced by Glen Ballard, except &quot;New&quot; produced by Jerry Harrison and No Doubt, &quot;Too Late (Instrumental)&quot; produced by Ballard and Matthew Wilder, and &quot;Big Distraction&quot; produced by Wilder.


===Notes===
* &quot;Too Late (Instrumental)&quot; is 4:56 and appears after one minute of silence as a hidden track after the end of the last credited song.
* &quot;Dark Blue&quot; is 4:36 on the international and Japanese editions.

==Personnel==
Credits adapted from the liner notes of &quot;Return of Saturn&quot;.

===No Doubt===
* Gwen Stefani – vocals
* Tony Kanal – bass guitar
* Tom Dumont – guitars
* Adrian Young – drums, percussion

===Additional musicians===
* Gabrial McNair – synthesizer, piano, all keyboard instruments, trombone, horn arrangements ; synthesizer programming 
* Stephen Bradley – trumpet
* Bryan Carrigan – synthesizer programming 
* Michael Boddicker – synthesizer programming 
* Theo &quot;Hound Dog&quot; Mondle – tablas 
* Orion Crawford – chart preparation
* Mike Garson – piano 
* Paul Buckmaster – string arrangements 

===Technical===
* Glen Ballard – production 
* Jerry Harrison – production 
* No Doubt – production 
* Alain Johannes – recording 
* Karl Derfler – recording 
* Jack Joseph Puig – mixing
* Bob Ludwig – mastering
* Scott Campbell – additional recording
* Bryan Carrigan – additional recording
* Sean Beavan – additional recording ; sonic manipulation 
* Colin &quot;Dog&quot; Mitchell – pre-production recording, equipment coordination
* Jolie Levine-Aller – production coordination
* Rachel Cleverley – production assistance
* Matthew Wilder – production 
* Thom Panunzio – recording 

===Artwork===
* David LaChapelle – photography
* Robert Fisher – design
* Joe Mama-Nitzberg – photography, art coordination
* Cindy Cooper – album package coordination

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="56" end="60" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="66" end="74" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818262" start="107" end="121" title="Trauma Records" label="Trauma Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="126" end="144" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351671" start="246" end="258" title="Eric Stefani" label="Eric Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q262981" start="363" end="377" title="Tragic Kingdom" label="Tragic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q920983" start="493" end="505" title="Glen Ballard" label="Glen Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q460674" start="794" end="802" title="ska punk" label="ska punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="807" end="813" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="948" end="960" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1267" end="1292" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1431" end="1460" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="1483" end="1498" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="1506" end="1524" title="43rd Grammy Awards" label="43rd Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q262981" start="1604" end="1618" title="Tragic Kingdom" label="Tragic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="1714" end="1722" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138378" start="1965" end="1980" title="Hollywood Hills" label="Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080305" start="2009" end="2019" title="Tony Kanal" label="Tony Kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378792" start="2120" end="2134" title="Matthew Wilder" label="Matthew Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q703637" start="2281" end="2297" title="Michael Beinhorn" label="Michael Beinhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="2350" end="2371" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="2373" end="2377" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="2383" end="2394" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q920983" start="2498" end="2510" title="Glen Ballard" label="Glen Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="2529" end="2546" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q750084" start="2560" end="2578" title="Jagged Little Pill" label="Jagged Little Pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q718427" start="2626" end="2638" title="Jimmy Iovine" label="Jimmy Iovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="2747" end="2752" title="Demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912742" start="2983" end="2986" title="New (No Doubt song)" label="New"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="3009" end="3022" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634067" start="3030" end="3044" title="Jerry Harrison" label="Jerry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533374" start="3088" end="3090" title="Go (1999 film)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="3323" end="3335" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449590" start="3365" end="3377" title="Adrian Young" label="Adrian Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q930038" start="3392" end="3402" title="Tom Dumont" label="Tom Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818262" start="3504" end="3518" title="Trauma Records" label="Trauma Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663314" start="3677" end="3690" title="Ex-Girlfriend (song)" label="Ex-Girlfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559350" start="3707" end="3726" title="Simple Kind of Life" label="Simple Kind of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="3750" end="3762" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="audio mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="3767" end="3782" title="audio mastering" label="audio mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="3813" end="3829" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="4125" end="4137" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q432743" start="4179" end="4193" title="Gavin Rossdale" label="Gavin Rossdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426811" start="4234" end="4247" title="Saturn return" label="Saturn return"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="4249" end="4255" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="4300" end="4309" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="4608" end="4616" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="4640" end="4656" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="4702" end="4705" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="4710" end="4716" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449590" start="4725" end="4737" title="Adrian Young" label="Adrian Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119376" start="4812" end="4820" title="fidelity" label="fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="4855" end="4860" title="lo-fi music" label="lo-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="4861" end="4873" title="power ballad" label="power ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939021" start="5053" end="5068" title="Missing Persons (band)" label="Missing Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="5073" end="5082" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="5088" end="5097" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="5214" end="5220" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="5227" end="5231" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="5266" end="5272" title="rapping" label="rapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="5295" end="5303" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246460" start="5337" end="5351" title="Gabrial McNair" label="Gabrial McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136972" start="5359" end="5371" title="jazz funeral" label="jazz funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q213608" start="5400" end="5410" title="beatboxing" label="beatboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301473" start="5418" end="5427" title="Bathwater (song)" label="Bathwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="5466" end="5476" title="swing time" label="swing time"/>
<link wikidata="Q209498" start="5531" end="5537" title="2 Tone (music genre)" label="2 Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="5562" end="5571" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="5575" end="5595" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="5638" end="5643" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080305" start="5710" end="5720" title="Tony Kanal" label="Tony Kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="5773" end="5781" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="5877" end="5881" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q866081" start="5945" end="5955" title="femininity" label="femininity"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="6166" end="6170" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="6182" end="6195" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406917" start="6404" end="6430" title="long-distance relationship" label="long-distance relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="6703" end="6716" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="6940" end="6950" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050272" start="6968" end="6978" title="Standard score" label="normalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="7060" end="7067" title="Weighted arithmetic mean" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7108" end="7128" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231828" start="7137" end="7149" title="David Browne (journalist)" label="David Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491" start="7267" end="7284" title="Mille-feuille" label="napoleon pastries"/>
<link wikidata="Q739138" start="7440" end="7448" title="teen pop" label="teen pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="7450" end="7466" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="7486" end="7503" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="7592" end="7595" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="7699" end="7706" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="7773" end="7781" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="7789" end="7812" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="7962" end="7975" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="8313" end="8327" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="8613" end="8638" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="8647" end="8659" title="&amp;#x27;N Sync" label="&amp;#x27;N Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403940" start="8673" end="8692" title="No Strings Attached (&amp;#x27;N Sync album)" label="No Strings Attached"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="8747" end="8788" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="8942" end="8953" title="modern rock" label="modern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="9083" end="9101" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="9230" end="9259" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="9319" end="9334" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="9342" end="9360" title="43rd Grammy Awards" label="2001 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="9378" end="9390" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q907605" start="9403" end="9432" title="There Is Nothing Left to Lose" label="There Is Nothing Left to Lose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="9484" end="9487" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="9548" end="9560" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="albums chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q550619" start="9635" end="9674" title="Music Canada" label="Canadian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q920983" start="9782" end="9794" title="Glen Ballard" label="Glen Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634067" start="9831" end="9845" title="Jerry Harrison" label="Jerry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="9850" end="9858" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378792" start="9920" end="9934" title="Matthew Wilder" label="Matthew Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="10093" end="10105" title="hidden track" label="hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="10326" end="10338" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080305" start="10350" end="10360" title="Tony Kanal" label="Tony Kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q930038" start="10377" end="10387" title="Tom Dumont" label="Tom Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449590" start="10400" end="10412" title="Adrian Young" label="Adrian Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246460" start="10463" end="10477" title="Gabrial McNair" label="Gabrial McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="10583" end="10598" title="Stephen Bradley (musician)" label="Stephen Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980011" start="10611" end="10625" title="Bryan Carrigan" label="Bryan Carrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="10738" end="10743" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116703" start="10765" end="10770" title="Chord chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292408" start="10785" end="10796" title="Mike Garson" label="Mike Garson"/>
<link wikidata="Q374682" start="10808" end="10823" title="Paul Buckmaster" label="Paul Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q920983" start="10866" end="10878" title="Glen Ballard" label="Glen Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634067" start="10895" end="10909" title="Jerry Harrison" label="Jerry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="10926" end="10934" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q984115" start="10951" end="10965" title="Alain Johannes" label="Alain Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113375" start="11009" end="11025" title="Jack Joseph Puig" label="Jack Joseph Puig"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="11037" end="11047" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636666" start="11142" end="11153" title="Sean Beavan" label="Sean Beavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378792" start="11375" end="11389" title="Matthew Wilder" label="Matthew Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786742" start="11406" end="11419" title="Thom Panunzio" label="Thom Panunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="11450" end="11466" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772421" wikidata="Q93745" url="?curid=772421" title="Inejirō Asanuma">
<text>was a Japanese politician and leader of the Japan Socialist Party. During World War II, Asanuma was aligned with the Imperial Rule Assistance Association and advocated for war in Asia. Asanuma later became a forceful advocate of socialism in post-war Japan. He was noted for his support of the newly established People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) as well as the criticism of United States–Japanese relations, making him a polarizing figure.

Asanuma was assassinated with a &quot;wakizashi&quot;, a traditional short sword, by far-right ultranationalist Otoya Yamaguchi while speaking in a televised political debate in Tokyo. His violent death was seen in graphic detail on national television by millions of Japanese, causing widespread public shock and outrage.

==Early life and education==
Asanuma was born on the island of Miyake-jima, a remote volcanic island that is administratively part of Tokyo, on 27 December 1898. His mother died in childbirth. He was consequently raised by his father, who later died of cancer, leaving Asanuma an orphan. After completing high school, Asanuma entered Waseda University, graduating in 1923. While still in college, Asanuma joined the newly formed Farmer-Labor Party and took part in various forms of leftist activism. Among other activities, he founded the &quot;Builders League,&quot; which studied the works of English socialists, worked for Russian famine relief, and protested against military-related research being conducted at Waseda. In 1924, Asanuma left the Farmer-Labor Party after the party became divided into three different factions, and became involved in tenant organizing and the Labor-Farmer movement.

==Political career==
In 1926, Asanuma was one of the main founders of the Japan Labour-Farmer Party, as part of his efforts to link urban labor movements with rural peasant&#x27;s movements. In 1929, Asanuma began running for Tokyo City Council, representing Fukagawa ward. He was elected in 1933. In 1936, Asanuma was elected to the National Diet of Japan for the first time, as a member of the newly-formed Social Masses Party, which merged into the Imperial Rule Assistance Association in 1940. Asanuma would serve in the Diet for a total of 20 years.

As a member of the Diet, Asanuma pivoted from his earlier anti-imperialist views and became a vocal supporter of Japan&#x27;s &quot;holy war&quot; in East Asia, claiming that it was necessary to &quot;liberate&quot; Asia from the forces of western imperialism. He even led the drive to censure Saitō Takao and expel him from the Social Masses Party following the latter&#x27;s anti-war speech on the floor of the Diet in 1940. Asanuma decided not to run for reelection in 1942, due to suffering a mental breakdown, despite securing a &quot;recommendation&quot; from the government. 

In the immediate aftermath of Japan&#x27;s defeat in World War II, Asanuma was one of the founders of the Japan Socialist Party (JSP). He rose to become its secretary-general (1955–1960) and eventually, party chairman (1960). As a politician, Asanuma cultivated an &quot;everyman&quot; image. He lived modestly in public housing his entire life, and was particularly popular among ordinary laborers, small shopkeepers, and other members of the working class.

In contrast to his pro-war stance during World War II, in the postwar period, Asanuma spearheaded the JSP&#x27;s staunch opposition to revising Article 9 of Japan&#x27;s postwar constitution and remilitarizing Japan. However, historian Andrew Gordon argues that Asanuma was consistent in his antipathy to western imperialism and a desire for Asia to chart its own course in world affairs.

In 1959, Asanuma was widely criticized for an incident in which he visited the People&#x27;s Republic of China and called the United States &quot;the shared enemy of China and Japan&quot; during a speech in front of the Chinese Communist Party in Beijing. When he returned from this trip, he wore a Mao suit while disembarking from a plane in Japan, sparking criticism even from Socialist leaders. At this time, Japan, its ally the United States, and many other countries recognized the Republic of China as the legitimate government of China. Under Asanuma&#x27;s leadership, the JSP played a leading role in the massive Anpo protests against revision of the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty in 1960, which led to the resignation of prime minister Nobusuke Kishi, angering rightists and ultranationalists who supported the treaty.

==Assassination==

On 12 October 1960, Asanuma was assassinated by 17-year-old Otoya Yamaguchi, a right-wing ultranationalist, during a televised political debate ahead of upcoming elections for the House of Representatives. While Asanuma spoke from the lectern at Tokyo&#x27;s Hibiya Hall, Yamaguchi rushed onstage and ran his wakizashi, a traditional samurai short sword, through Asanuma&#x27;s ribs on the left side, fatally wounding him. Japanese public broadcaster NHK was videorecording the debate for later transmission and the tape of Asanuma&#x27;s assassination was shown many times to millions of viewers. The photograph of Asanuma&#x27;s assassination won its photographer Yasushi Nagao both the Pulitzer Prize and World Press Photo of the Year.

Yamaguchi was captured at the scene of the crime, and a few weeks afterwards committed suicide by hanging himself while in police custody.

==Commemoration==

Asanuma&#x27;s assassination shocked Japan&#x27;s political establishment. Shortly after his death, conservative prime minister and erstwhile electoral rival Hayato Ikeda captured the mood of his fellow lawmakers when he gave a heartfelt eulogy for Asanuma on the floor of the Diet. Commemorating Asanuma as a &quot;speech-giving everyman&quot; (&quot;enzetsu hyakushō&quot;), Ikeda declared:

According to reportage at the time, Ikeda&#x27;s short speech was met with thunderous applause and left many lawmakers in tears.

==Legacy==
The Japan Socialist Party had been a union between left socialists, centrist socialists, and right socialists, who had been forced together in order to oppose the consolidation of conservative parties into the Liberal Democratic Party in 1955. Asanuma had been able to hold many of these mutually antagonistic factions together, and under Asanuma&#x27;s leadership, the party had won an increasing amount of seats in the Diet in every election over the latter half of the 1950s and seemed to be gathering momentum.

Asanuma&#x27;s death deprived the party of his leadership, and thrust Saburō Eda into the leadership role instead. A centrist, Eda rapidly took the party in a more centrist direction, far faster than the left socialists were ready to accept. This led to growing infighting within the party, and damaged its ability to present a cohesive message to the public. Over the rest of the 1960s and going forward, the number of seats the Socialists held in the Diet continued to decline until the party&#x27;s extinction in 1996.

== References ==
===Works cited===
*
*
*



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1144146" start="44" end="65" title="Japan Socialist Party" label="Japan Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="74" end="86" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q714797" start="117" end="153" title="Imperial Rule Assistance Association" label="Imperial Rule Assistance Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="172" end="183" title="Pacific War" label="war in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="229" end="238" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046461" start="242" end="256" title="Post-occupation Japan" label="post-war Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="312" end="343" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227243" start="378" end="410" title="United States–Japanese relations" label="United States–Japanese relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256383" start="457" end="469" title="Assassination of Inejirō Asanuma" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q221693" start="483" end="492" title="wakizashi" label="wakizashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181924" start="530" end="556" title="Uyoku dantai" label="far-right ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q469406" start="557" end="572" title="Otoya Yamaguchi" label="Otoya Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="623" end="628" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075076" start="832" end="843" title="Miyake-jima" label="Miyake-jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="1103" end="1120" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435707" start="1198" end="1216" title="Farmer-Labour Party" label="Farmer-Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467366" start="1649" end="1661" title="Labour-Farmer Party" label="Labor-Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156667" start="1747" end="1772" title="Japan Labour-Farmer Party" label="Japan Labour-Farmer Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090689" start="1932" end="1945" title="Fukagawa, Tokyo" label="Fukagawa ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="2007" end="2029" title="National Diet" label="National Diet of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855874" start="2082" end="2101" title="Shakai Taishūtō" label="Social Masses Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q714797" start="2125" end="2161" title="Imperial Rule Assistance Association" label="Imperial Rule Assistance Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698248" start="2523" end="2534" title="Saitō Takao (politician)" label="Saitō Takao"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2866" end="2878" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144146" start="2919" end="2940" title="Japan Socialist Party" label="Japan Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="3257" end="3270" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q712737" start="3417" end="3463" title="Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution" label="Article 9 of Japan&amp;#x27;s postwar constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757131" start="3509" end="3522" title="Andrew Gordon (historian)" label="Andrew Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3742" end="3773" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3789" end="3802" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="3883" end="3906" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q118463" start="3962" end="3970" title="Mao suit" label="Mao suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="4150" end="4167" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11257460" start="4285" end="4298" title="Anpo protests" label="Anpo protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="4323" end="4349" title="U.S.-Japan Security Treaty" label="U.S.-Japan Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q315572" start="4406" end="4420" title="Nobusuke Kishi" label="Nobusuke Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q469406" start="4569" end="4584" title="Otoya Yamaguchi" label="Otoya Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q659587" start="4689" end="4713" title="House of Representatives (Japan)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q221693" start="4818" end="4827" title="wakizashi" label="wakizashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="4843" end="4850" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="4960" end="4963" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q376396" start="5175" end="5188" title="Yasushi Nagao" label="Yasushi Nagao"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5198" end="5212" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935928" start="5217" end="5246" title="World Press Photo of the Year" label="World Press Photo of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883956" start="5336" end="5354" title="suicide by hanging" label="suicide by hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q299142" start="5566" end="5578" title="Hayato Ikeda" label="Hayato Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q232595" start="6153" end="6177" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11551256" start="6529" end="6539" title="Saburō Eda" label="Saburō Eda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772425" wikidata="Q380439" url="?curid=772425" title="Sholem Asch">
<text>Sholem Asch (, ; 1 November 1880 – 10 July 1957), also written Shalom Ash, was a Polish-Jewish novelist, dramatist, and essayist in the Yiddish language who settled in the United States.

==Life and work==
Asch was born Szalom Asz in Kutno, Congress Poland, to Moszek Asz (1825, Gąbin – 1905, Kutno), a cattle-dealer and innkeeper, and Frajda Malka, née Widawska (born 1850, Łęczyca). Frajda was Moszek&#x27;s second wife; his first wife Rude Shmit died in 1873, leaving him with either six or seven children (the exact number is unknown). Sholem was the fourth of the ten children that Moszek and Frajda Malka had together. Moszek would spend all week on the road and return home every Friday in time for the Sabbath. He was known to be a very charitable man who would dispense money to the poor.

=== Upbringing ===
Born into a Hasidic family, Sholem Asch received a traditional Jewish education. Considered the designated scholar of his siblings, his parents dreamed of him becoming a rabbi and sent him to the town&#x27;s best religious school (or &quot;cheder&quot;), where the wealthy families sent their children. There, he spent most of his childhood studying the Talmud, and would later study the Bible and the Haggadah on his own time. Asch grew up in a majority Jewish town, so he grew up believing Jews were the majority in the rest of the world as well. In Kutno, Jews and gentiles mostly got along, barring some tension around religious holidays. He had to sneak through a majority gentile area to get to a lake where he loved to swim, where he was once cornered by boys wielding sticks and dogs, who demanded he admit to killing &quot;Christ&quot;–which Asch did not, at the time, know to be a name for Jesus–or they would rip his coat. He admitted to killing Christ out of fear, but they beat him and tore his coat anyway. Asch never lost his fear of dogs from that incident.

In his adolescence, after moving from the &quot;cheder&quot; to the House of Study, Sholem became aware of major social changes in popular Jewish thinking. New ideas and the Enlightenment were asserting themselves in the Jewish world. At his friend&#x27;s house, Sholem would explore these new ideas by secretly reading many secular books, which led him to believe himself too worldly to become a rabbi. At age 17, his parents found out about this &quot;profane&quot; literature and sent him to live with relatives in a nearby village, where he became a Hebrew teacher. After a few months there, he received a more liberal education at Włocławek, where he supported himself as a letter writer for the illiterate townspeople. It is in Włocławek where he became enamored with the work of prominent Yiddish writer I. L. Peretz. It is also where he began writing. He attempted to master the short story and wrote in Hebrew. What he wrote there would later be revised, translated into Yiddish, and ultimately, launch his career.

=== Young adulthood ===

In 1899, he moved to Warsaw where he met I. L. Peretz and other young writers under Peretz&#x27;s mentorship such as David Pinski, Abraham Reisen, and Hersh Dovid Nomberg. Influenced by the Haskalah (Jewish Enlightenment), Asch initially wrote in Hebrew, but Peretz convinced him to switch to Yiddish. Asch&#x27;s reputation was established in 1902 with his first book of stories, &quot;In a shlekhter tsayt&quot; (&quot;In a Bad Time&quot;). In 1903, he married Mathilde Shapiro, the daughter of the Polish-Jewish teacher and poet Menahem Mendel Shapiro.

In 1904, Asch released one of his most well-known works, &quot;A shtetl&quot;, an idyllic portrait of traditional Polish-Jewish life. In January 1905, he released the first play of his incredibly successful play-writing career, &quot;Tsurikgekumen&quot; (&quot;Coming Back&quot;).

Asch wrote the drama &quot;Got fun nekome&quot; (&quot;God of Vengeance&quot;) in the winter of 1906 in Cologne, Germany. It is about a Jewish brothel owner who attempts to become respectable by commissioning a Torah scroll and marrying off his daughter to a yeshiva student. Set in a brothel, the play includes Jewish prostitutes and a lesbian scene. I. L. Peretz famously said of the play after reading it: &quot;Burn it, Asch, burn it!&quot; Instead, Asch went to Berlin to pitch it to director Max Reinhardt and actor Rudolph Schildkraut, who produced it at the Deutsches Theater. &quot;God of Vengeance&quot; opened on March 19, 1907 and ran for six months, and soon was translated and performed in a dozen European languages.

The play was first brought to New York City by David Kessler in 1907. The audience mostly came for Kessler, and they booed the rest of the cast. The New York production sparked a major press war between local Yiddish papers, led by the Orthodox &quot;Tageplatt&quot; and even the secular &quot;Forverts&quot;. Orthodox papers referred to &quot;God of Vengeance&quot; as &quot;filthy,&quot; &quot;immoral,&quot; and &quot;indecent,&quot; while radical papers described it as &quot;moral,&quot; &quot;artistic,&quot; and &quot;beautiful&quot;. Some of the more provocative scenes in the production were changed, but it wasn&#x27;t enough for the Orthodox papers. Even Yiddish intellectuals and the play&#x27;s supporters had problems with the play&#x27;s inauthentic portrayal of Jewish tradition, especially Yankl&#x27;s use of the Torah, which they said Asch seemed to be using mostly for cheap effects; they also expressed concern over how it might stigmatize Jewish people who already faced much anti-Semitism. The association with Jews and sex work was a popular stereotype at the time. Other intellectuals criticized the writing itself, claiming that the second act was beautifully written but the first and third acts failed to support it.

&quot;God of Vengeance&quot; was published in English-language translation in 1918. In 1922, it was staged in New York City at the Provincetown Theatre in Greenwich Village, and moved to the Apollo Theatre on Broadway on February 19, 1923, with a cast that included the acclaimed Jewish immigrant actor Rudolph Schildkraut. Its run was cut short on March 6, when the entire cast, producer Harry Weinberger, and one of the owners of the theater were indicted for violating the state&#x27;s Penal Code, and later convicted on charges of obscenity. Weinberger, who was also a prominent attorney, represented the group at the trial. The chief witness against the play was Rabbi Joseph Silberman, who declared in an interview with &quot;Forverts&quot;: &quot;This play libels the Jewish religion. Even the greatest anti-Semite could not have written such a thing&quot;. After a protracted battle, the conviction was successfully appealed. In Europe, the play was popular enough to be translated into German, Russian, Polish, Hebrew, Italian, Czech, Romanian and Norwegian.

&quot;Indecent&quot; is a 2015 play written by Paula Vogel that recounts the controversy of &quot;God of Vengeance&quot;. It opened on Broadway at the Cort Theater in April 2017, directed by Rebecca Taichman.

Asch attended the Czernowitz Yiddish Language Conference of 1908, which declared Yiddish to be &quot;a national language of the Jewish people.&quot; He traveled to Palestine in 1908 and the United States in 1910, a place about which he felt deeply ambivalent.

=== Later adult career ===

In the pursuit of a safe haven from the violence in Europe, he and his family moved to the United States in 1914, moving around New York City for a while before settling in Staten Island. In New York, he began to write for &quot;Forverts&quot;, the mass-circulation Yiddish daily that had also covered his plays, a job provided both income and an intellectual circle.

Asch became increasingly active in public life and played a prominent role in the American Jewry&#x27;s relief efforts in Europe for Jewish war victims. He was a founding member of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee. After a series of pogroms in Lithuania in 1919, Asch visited the country as representative of the Joint Committee, and he suffered a nervous breakdown due to the shock of the horrors he witnessed. His &quot;Kiddush ha-Shem&quot; (1919), chronicling the anti-Jewish and anti-Polish Chmielnicki Uprising in mid-17th century Ukraine and Poland, is one of the earliest historical novels in modern Yiddish literature. In 1920, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States.

Asch returned to Poland in 1923, visiting Germany frequently. The Yiddish literary circle hoped he would stay in Poland, because I. L. Peretz&#x27;s death in 1915 had left them devoid of a head figure. Asch had no desire to take Peretz&#x27;s place, moving to Bellevue, France after years and continuing to write regularly for Yiddish papers in the US and Poland. In Bellevue, he wrote his 1929–31 trilogy &quot;Farn Mabul.&quot; (&quot;Before the Flood&quot;, translated as &quot;Three Cities&quot;) describes early 20th century Jewish life in Saint Petersburg, Warsaw, and Moscow. Ever the traveller, Asch took many trips to the Soviet Union, Palestine and the United States. He always held painters in high regard and formed close friendships with the like of Isaac Lichtenstein, Marc Chagall, Emil Orlik, and Jules Pascin. He spoke to the hundreds of mourners at Pascin&#x27;s funeral after the painter died by suicide.

Asch was a celebrated writer in his own lifetime. In 1920, in honor of his 40th birthday, a committee headed by Judah L. Magnes published a 12-volume set of his collected works. In 1932 he was awarded the Polish Republic&#x27;s Polonia Restituta decoration and was elected honorary president of the Yiddish PEN Club.

In 1930, when Asch was at the height of his fame and popularity, he moved to Nice, then almost immediately moved back to Poland and spent months touring the countryside to do research for his next novel: &quot;Der tehilim-yid&quot; (&quot;Salvation&quot;). He then moved into a house outside of Nice and rebuilt it as the &quot;Villa Shalom,&quot; with luxuries such as a study facing the sea, a swimming pool, a bowling green, and an orchard. In 1935, he visited America at the Joint Committee&#x27;s request to raise funds for Jewish relief in Europe.

Asch&#x27;s next work, &quot;Bayrn Opgrunt&quot; (1937, translated as &quot;The Precipice&quot;), is set in Germany during the hyperinflation of the 1920s. &quot;Dos Gezang fun Tol&quot; (&quot;The Song of the Valley&quot;) is about the &quot;halutzim&quot; (Jewish-Zionist pioneers in Palestine), and reflects his 1936 visit to that region. Asch visited Palestine again in 1936. Then, in 1939, he returned to Villa Shalom for the last time. He delayed leaving Europe until the last possible moment, then reluctantly returned to the United States.

On his second sojourn in the US, Asch first lived in Stamford, Connecticut, then moved to Miami Beach, where he stayed until the early 1950s. He offended Jewish sensibilities with his 1939–1949 trilogy, &quot;The Nazarene,&quot; &quot;The Apostle,&quot; and &quot;Mary,&quot; which dealt with New Testament subjects. Despite accusations of conversion, Asch remained proudly Jewish; he had written the trilogy not as a promotion of Christianity but as an attempt to bridge the gap between Jews and Christians. Much of his readership and the Jewish literary community, however, did not see it that way. His long-standing employer, New York Yiddish newspaper &quot;Forverts,&quot; not only dropped him as a writer but also openly attacked him for promoting Christianity. He subsequently started writing for a communist paper, &quot;Morgen frayhayt,&quot; leading to repeated questioning by the House Committee on Un-American Activities. In 1953, Chaim Lieberman published &quot;The Christianity of Sholem Asch,&quot; a scathing criticism of Asch and his Christological trilogy that disgusted even some of Asch&#x27;s strongest critics. Lieberman&#x27;s book, and the McCarthy Hearings, led Asch and his wife to leave the US in 1953, whereafter they split their time between London (where their daughter lived), continental Europe, and Israel.

==Death and legacy==
Asch spent most of his last two years in Bat Yam near Tel Aviv, Israel, in a house that the mayor had invited him to build, but died in London at his desk writing. Due to his controversies, his funeral in London was small. His house in Bat Yam is now the Sholem Asch Museum and part of the MoBY-Museums of Bat Yam complex of three museums. The bulk of his library, containing rare Yiddish books and manuscripts, as well as the manuscripts of some of his own works, is held at Yale University. Although many of his works are no longer read today, his best works have proven to be standards of Jewish and Yiddish literature. His sons were Moszek Asz/Moses &quot;Moe&quot; Asch (2 December 1905, Warsaw – 19 October 1986, United States), the founder and head of Folkways Records, and Natan Asz/Nathan Asch (1902, Warsaw – 1964, United States), also a writer. His grandson Michael Asch is an anthropologist, and his great-grandson, David Mazower, is a writer and a BBC Journalist.

== Inspirations and major themes ==
Many of Asch&#x27;s father figures are inspired by his own father. Sholem was believed to have adopted much of his own philosophies from his father, such as his love for humanity and his concern for Jewish-Christian reconciliation. He summed up his father&#x27;s faith as &quot;love of God and love of neighbor&quot;. Asch often wrote two kinds of characters: the pious Jew and the burly worker. This was inspired by his family, as his brothers dealt with peasants and butchers and fit in with the hardy outdoor Jews of Kutno, which Asch had much pride in. His older half-brothers, on the other hand, were pious Hasidim.

One of Asch&#x27;s major goals in his writing was to articulate Jewish life, past and present. He placed the Jew at the center of his every work, along with an awareness of the Jewish relationship with the outside world. Some of his most frequent recurring themes were: man&#x27;s faith, goodness, and generosity. He was repelled and intrigued by Christian violence, and inspired by Jewish martyrdom and survival.

Asch reflected on cosmopolitan interests and concern for the people and conditions he encountered. His fiction can mostly be put into three categories: tales, novels and plays of Eastern European Jewish life (Polish mostly); tales and novels of Jewish life in America; five biblical novels: two on figures in the Hebrew Bible and three on New Testament figures. Smaller groupings included works on the Holocaust and modern Israel. His work was not easily categorized, and straddled the lines between romanticism and realism, naturalism and idealism.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;A Shtetl&quot; (&quot;The Village&quot;), 1904 or earlier, story
* &quot;Mitn Shtrom&quot; (&quot;With the Stream&quot;), 1904 novel and play
* &quot;Tsurikgekumen&quot; (&quot;Coming Back&quot;), 1905
* &quot;Moshiakhs tsaytn&quot; (&quot;Time of the Messiah&quot;), 1906, play
* &quot;Got fun Nekomeh&quot; (&quot;God of Vengeance&quot;), 1907, play
* &quot;Mary&quot;, 1913, novel
* &quot;Reb Shloyme Nogid&quot;, 1913, novel
* &quot;Motke Ganev&quot; (&quot;Motke the Thief&quot;), 1916, novel
* &quot;Mary&quot;, 1917, play
* &quot;Der Veg tsu Zikh&quot; (&quot;The Way to Oneself&quot;), 1917, play
* &quot;Motke Ganev&quot; (&quot;Motke the Thief&quot;), 1917, play
* &quot;Onkl Mozes (Uncle Moses)&quot;, 1918 (translated into English 1938), novel
* &quot;Kiddush ha-Shem&quot;, 1919 (translated into English 1926), novel
* &quot;Di Muter&quot; (&quot;The Mother&quot;), 1919 (translated into English 1930)
* &quot;Di Kishufmakherin fun Kastilien&quot; (&quot;The Witch of Castile&quot;), 1921
* &quot;Der Toyter Mensch&quot; (&quot;The Dead Man&quot;), 1922, play (translated into English 2021)
* &quot;Urteyl&quot; (&quot;Death Sentence&quot;), 1924
* &quot;Khaym Lederers Tsurikkumen&quot; (&quot;The Return of Khaym Lederer&quot;), 1927
* Schalom Asch, &quot;Rückblick,&quot; &quot;Jahrbuch&quot; (Berlin: Paul Zsolnay Verlag, 1931), pp. 35–77.
* &quot;Farn Mabul&quot; trilogy (&quot;Before the Flood&quot;) 1929–31, translated as &quot;Three Cities&quot;, 1933
* &quot;Gots Gefangene&quot; (&quot;God&#x27;s Captives&quot;), 1933
* &quot;Der T&#x27;hilim Yid&quot;, 1934, translated as: &quot;Salvation&quot;

* &quot;The War Goes On&quot;, 1935
* &quot;The Calf of Papers&quot;, 1936, novel
* &quot;Bayrn Opgrunt&quot;, 1937, translated as: &quot;The Precipice&quot;
* &quot;The Mother&quot;, 1937, novel
* &quot;Three Novels&quot;, 1938
* &quot;Dos Gezang fun Tol&quot; (&quot;The Song of the Valley&quot;), 1938 (translated into English, 1939)
* &quot;The Nazarene&quot;, 1939, novel
* &quot;What I Believe&quot; 1941, essay, 201 pages
* &quot;Children of Abraham&quot;, 1942, short stories
* &quot;My Personal Faith&quot;, 1942, Published: London, George Rutledge &amp; Sons, Ltd
* &quot;The Apostle&quot;, 1943, novel
* &quot;One Destiny: An Epistle to the Christians&quot;, 1945
* &quot;East River&quot;, 1946, spent more than 6 months on the New York Times Best Seller List (1946–7) including one week at #1
* &quot;Tales of My People&quot;, 1948, short stories
* &quot;Mary&quot;, 1949, novel, unrelated to his earlier work of the same name
* &quot;Salvation&quot;, 1951
* &quot;Moses&quot;, 1951, novel
* &quot;A Passage in the Night&quot;, 1953
* &quot;The Prophet&quot;, 1955
===Discography===
* &quot;In the Beginning: Bible Stories for Children by Sholem Asch (Performed by Arna Bontemps)&quot; (Folkways Records, 1955)
* &quot;Joseph and His Brothers: From In the Beginning by Sholem Asch (Performed by Arna Bontemps)&quot; (Folkways Records, 1955)
* &quot;Jewish Classical Literature: Read by Chaim Ostrowsky&quot; (Folkways Records, 1960)
* &quot;Nativity: Sholem Asch&#x27;s Story of the Birth of Jesus (Performed by Pete Seeger)&quot; (Folkways Records, 1963)
* &quot;Readings from the Bible - Old Testament: Compiled by Sholem Asch (Performed by Harry Fleetwood)&quot; (Folkways Records, 1972)
* &quot;Sholem Asch: A Statement and Lecture at Columbia University, N.Y. October, 1952&quot; (Folkways Records, 1977)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Mostly about Asch&#x27;s controversial trilogy that began with &quot;The Nazarene&quot;.
* “The Yiddish writer’s re-Judaized imagining of St. Paul turns 75.”

==External links==
* 
* 
* Sholem Asch Discography at Smithsonian Folkways
* Ben Siegel, , 313 pages.
* Alyssa Quint, &quot;Asch&#x27;s Diamonds, A New Essay Collection Gives an Oft-neglected Master His Due&quot;, a review in &quot;The Jewish Daily Forward&quot;
* &quot;Workbook&quot; on the Asch-Howe Quarrel
* Biographical article of Sholem Asch by Encyclopaedia Britannica
* Sara Blacher-Retter reads &quot;A shtiler gortn&quot; and &quot;A dorf-tsadik&quot;
* A bust of Sholem Asch by Jacob Epstein, from the collection of the Israel Museum, Jerusalem
* . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
* Asch Wednesday 2021: A Celebration of the Life and Work of Sholem Asch Congress for Jewish Culture. Feature-length (1:49) video on various aspects of his life and work.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380439" start="0" end="11" title="Sholem Asch" label="Sholem Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q380439" start="63" end="73" title="Sholem Asch" label="Shalom Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="81" end="94" title="Polish Jews" label="Polish-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="136" end="152" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q202160" start="234" end="239" title="Kutno" label="Kutno"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="241" end="256" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q990808" start="279" end="284" title="Gąbin" label="Gąbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q325727" start="375" end="382" title="Łęczyca" label="Łęczyca"/>
<link wikidata="Q623354" start="1220" end="1228" title="Haggadah" label="Haggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258534" start="2508" end="2525" title="liberal education" label="liberal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q106681" start="2529" end="2538" title="Włocławek" label="Włocławek"/>
<link wikidata="Q425644" start="2704" end="2716" title="Isaac Leib Peretz" label="I. L. Peretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2964" end="2970" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q443970" start="3060" end="3072" title="David Pinski" label="David Pinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q330539" start="3074" end="3088" title="Abraham Reisen" label="Abraham Reisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620347" start="3094" end="3113" title="Hersh Dovid Nomberg" label="Hersh Dovid Nomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="3133" end="3141" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3190" end="3196" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3475" end="3497" title="Menahem Mendel Shapiro" label="Menahem Mendel Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="4280" end="4293" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q85145" start="4304" end="4323" title="Rudolph Schildkraut" label="Rudolph Schildkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894360" start="4562" end="4575" title="David Kessler (actor)" label="David Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="4803" end="4823" title="The Forward" label="&amp;quot;Forverts&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252605" start="5892" end="5912" title="Provincetown Playhouse" label="Provincetown Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="5916" end="5933" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780357" start="5952" end="5966" title="Apollo Theatre (42nd Street)" label="Apollo Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5970" end="5978" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="6296" end="6305" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30606398" start="6836" end="6844" title="Indecent (play)" label="Indecent"/>
<link wikidata="Q433987" start="6877" end="6888" title="Paula Vogel" label="Paula Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173206" start="6981" end="6993" title="Cort Theater" label="Cort Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q30239064" start="7021" end="7037" title="Rebecca Taichman" label="Rebecca Taichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919734" start="7058" end="7096" title="Czernowitz Conference" label="Czernowitz Yiddish Language Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="7204" end="7213" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="7502" end="7515" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="7552" end="7572" title="The Forward" label="&amp;quot;Forverts&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="7883" end="7927" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="8210" end="8230" title="Chmielnicki Uprising" label="Chmielnicki Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="8294" end="8310" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688922" start="8322" end="8340" title="Yiddish literature" label="Yiddish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="8363" end="8382" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="8951" end="8967" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="9189" end="9201" title="Marc Chagall" label="Marc Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q379150" start="9203" end="9213" title="Emil Orlik" label="Emil Orlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q469063" start="9219" end="9231" title="Jules Pascin" label="Jules Pascin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710862" start="9443" end="9458" title="Judah Leon Magnes" label="Judah L. Magnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="9536" end="9551" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q579688" start="9559" end="9576" title="Polonia Restituta" label="Polonia Restituta"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="9638" end="9646" title="PEN Club" label="PEN Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="9726" end="9730" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="10331" end="10345" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="11046" end="11059" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="11415" end="11423" title="Forverts" label="Forverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="11507" end="11519" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912017" start="11582" end="11597" title="Morgen Freiheit" label="Morgen frayhayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="11644" end="11685" title="House Committee on Un-American Activities" label="House Committee on Un-American Activities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11696" end="11711" title="Chaim Lieberman" label="Chaim Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794369" start="11917" end="11934" title="Army–McCarthy hearings" label="McCarthy Hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208725" start="12156" end="12163" title="Bat Yam" label="Bat Yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="12169" end="12177" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12251" end="12257" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="12591" end="12606" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949140" start="12763" end="12789" title="Moe Asch" label="Moses &amp;quot;Moe&amp;quot; Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="12874" end="12890" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618607" start="12906" end="12917" title="Nathan Asch" label="Nathan Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q53568379" start="12984" end="12996" title="Michael Asch" label="Michael Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="13003" end="13017" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15710" end="15730" title="Pope Paul IV#In fiction" label="The Witch of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991585" start="17105" end="17136" title="The New York Times Fiction Best Sellers of 1946" label="New York Times Best Seller List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="17565" end="17581" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="17695" end="17711" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="17787" end="17803" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="17890" end="17901" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="17910" end="17926" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="18045" end="18061" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="18164" end="18180" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168499" start="18445" end="18465" title="Smithsonian Folkways" label="Smithsonian Folkways"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="18623" end="18647" title="The Jewish Daily Forward" label="The Jewish Daily Forward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772428" wikidata="Q3709427" url="?curid=772428" title="Port Fourchon, Louisiana">
<text>Port Fourchon is Louisiana’s southernmost port, located on the southern tip of Lafourche Parish, on the Gulf of Mexico. It is a seaport, with significant petroleum industry traffic from offshore Gulf oil platforms and drilling rigs as well as the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port pipeline. Fourchon&#x27;s primary service markets are domestic deepwater oil and gas exploration, drilling, and production in the Gulf. Port Fourchon currently services over 90% of the Gulf of Mexico&#x27;s deepwater oil production. There are over 600 oil platforms within a 40-mile radius of Port Fourchon. This area furnishes 16 to 18 percent of the US oil supply.

Port Fourchon is part of the Houma–Bayou Cane–Thibodaux Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Port Fourchon was developed as a multi-use facility. It has historically been a land base for offshore oil support services as well as a land base for the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP). In addition, there is commercial and recreational fishing, a foreign cargo shipping terminal, and an area for recreation and tourism.

The Board of Commissioners of the Greater Lafourche Port Commission is charged with ensuring the progress and continued development of Port Fourchon and the South Lafourche Leonard Miller, Jr. Airport. Nine members seated at-large comprise the Commission in lettered seats A through I. Every six years, the people of the Tenth Ward of Lafourche Parish elect all nine commissioners.

The Greater Lafourche Port Commission, established by the state of Louisiana in 1960 as a political subdivision of the state of Louisiana, exercises jurisdiction over the Tenth Ward of Lafourche Parish south of the Intracoastal Waterway, including the seaport and the airport. The Port Commission facilitates the economic growth of the communities in which it operates by maximizing the flow of trade and commerce, largely through Port Fourchon. Bristow Helicopters and Petroleum Helicopters International Inc. both operate helicopters out of the heliport at Port Fourchon that ferry people and supplies to the Offshore Oil Drilling and Production Platform Rigs in the Gulf of Mexico, such at the BP Thunderhorse PDQ that lies 150 miles to the South.

Port Fourchon was damaged by Hurricane Lili in October 2002. It did not take a direct hit by Hurricane Katrina on August 29, 2005, and was only slightly damaged. Sixteen years after Katrina, the center of category 4 Hurricane Ida made landfall in Port Fourchon at 11:54 am CDT, August 29, 2021, with sustained winds of 150 mph (240 km/h).

==Geography==
Port Fourchon is a short distance off Louisiana Highway 1 (LA 1), the road to Grand Isle, via Louisiana Highway 3090. It is the southernmost point of Louisiana accessible by automobile.

As a critical infrastructure of national significance, LA 1 provides a vital link to Port Fourchon. In the mid-2000&#x27;s, funding was sought to begin replacing a 17-mile (27-km) stretch of LA 1, the road into Port Fourchon. Having been designated as a &quot;High Priority&quot; corridor by Congress in 2001, a solution was needed to replace the road prone to flooding and natural disaster being outside the hurricane levee system. The replacement was an elevated highway that can stand up to a major storm and remain open even if the land around it floods. In 2007, a seven-mile (11-km) section of the project from Leeville to Port Fourchon, including a higher bridge across Bayou Lafourche, began construction and was completed in December 2011.

The next phase in the LA-1 Project looked to extend the elevated highway from within the flood gates of Golden Meadow to Port Fourchon. The final design was approved in December 2018 and funding was fully secured in 2022. The groundbreaking for the new 8.3 mile extension of elevated highway took place on June 24, 2022 with an estimated completion date of June 2027.

==See also==
*Louisiana International Gulf Transfer Terminal Regional Center
*Port of New Orleans

==References==
==External links==

* Greater Lafourche Port Commission website
* Directions and info to the beach on lafishmag.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3709427" start="0" end="13" title="Port Fourchon, Louisiana" label="Port Fourchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="17" end="26" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q507139" start="79" end="95" title="Lafourche Parish, Louisiana" label="Lafourche Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="104" end="118" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242994" start="247" end="274" title="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port" label="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="527" end="539" title="oil platform" label="oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="627" end="629" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q388503" start="672" end="677" title="Houma, Louisiana" label="Houma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083417" start="678" end="688" title="Bayou Cane, Louisiana" label="Bayou Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013317" start="689" end="698" title="Thibodaux, Louisiana" label="Thibodaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913165" start="699" end="728" title="Houma-Bayou Cane-Thibodaux metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q910850" start="2233" end="2247" title="Hurricane Lili" label="Hurricane Lili"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="2297" end="2314" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108300283" start="2420" end="2433" title="Hurricane Ida" label="Hurricane Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400923" start="2596" end="2615" title="Louisiana Highway 1" label="Louisiana Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542628" start="2636" end="2646" title="Grand Isle, Louisiana" label="Grand Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898102" start="2652" end="2674" title="Louisiana Highway 3090" label="Louisiana Highway 3090"/>
<link wikidata="Q115704850" start="3362" end="3370" title="Leeville, Louisiana" label="Leeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892300" start="3422" end="3437" title="Bayou Lafourche" label="Bayou Lafourche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240066" start="3599" end="3612" title="Golden Meadow, Louisiana" label="Golden Meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314587" start="3878" end="3940" title="Louisiana International Gulf Transfer Terminal Regional Center" label="Louisiana International Gulf Transfer Terminal Regional Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q773908" start="3942" end="3961" title="Port of New Orleans" label="Port of New Orleans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772438" wikidata="Q251875" url="?curid=772438" title="List of Louisiana state parks">
<text>The state of Louisiana has 21 state parks, which are governed by the Office of Lieutenant Governor, a division of the Louisiana Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism. Louisiana&#x27;s state park system began in 1934 when the state passed legislation that created the State Parks Commission of Louisiana. In 1952, legislation broadened the role of the commission to include the development of outdoor recreation programs and resources. The commission was renamed to the Louisiana State Parks and Recreation Commission. In 1977, the Office of State Parks was created in the Department of Culture, Recreation, and Tourism.

After the State Parks Commission of Louisiana was formed in 1934, 7 sites were acquired for use as state parks. During World War II, the rate of new park acquisition declined with the addition of only one new site, Sam Houston Jones State Park in 1944. In 1966, the National Park Service reviewed Louisiana&#x27;s state parks system and made many recommendations, which led to specific guidelines and requirements for state parks. Over time, many state parks that did not meet these guidelines were either reclassified as state historic sites or were turned over to local or state agencies. Some of these parks include , Saline Bayou, and Black Lake. During the 1970s, government management of the state parks was restructured. The Office of State Parks was created, and 2 new parks were acquired. From 1995 to 2009, $80 million were invested in creating new facilities, or updating existing facilities.

Louisiana state parks are selected on the criteria that they must be natural areas of unique or exceptional scenic value. Many of the state parks also have historic or scientific importance. For example, Chemin-A-Haut State Park served as a route used by Native Americans during seasonal migrations. Louisiana state parks have many accommodations, including overnight cabins, boating rentals, guided daily tours, and fishing piers. In 2002, Louisiana state parks had more than 2 million visitors. With the addition of Palmetto Island State Park in 2010, Louisiana state parks comprise more than of land.

==Current parks==

==Other names of current parks==
The following are significantly different former or alternate names for current Louisiana state parks.

==Former state parks==
The following are parks that were officially recognized as a state park after the 1966 National Park Service review, but were later removed.

==See also==

*List of Louisiana state historic sites
*Louisiana State Arboretum
*List of U.S. national parks

==References==
*
==External links==

* Louisiana State Parks </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="13" end="22" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="30" end="40" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390925" start="118" end="173" title="Louisiana Department of Culture, Recreation &amp;amp; Tourism" label="Louisiana Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="748" end="760" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="895" end="916" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079132" start="1250" end="1262" title="Saline Bayou" label="Saline Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921136" start="1268" end="1278" title="Black Lake (Louisiana)" label="Black Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1789" end="1805" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577133" start="2475" end="2513" title="List of Louisiana state historic sites" label="List of Louisiana state historic sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689283" start="2515" end="2540" title="Louisiana State Arboretum" label="Louisiana State Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="2542" end="2569" title="List of U.S. national parks" label="List of U.S. national parks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772441" wikidata="Q176750" url="?curid=772441" title="Memorylessness">
<text>In probability and statistics, memorylessness is a property of certain probability distributions. It describes situations where the time already spent waiting for an event does not affect how much longer the wait will be. To model memoryless situations accurately, we have to disregard the past state of the system – the probabilities remain unaffected by the history of the process.

Only two kinds of distributions are memoryless: geometric and exponential probability distributions.

== Definition ==
A random variable formula_1 is memoryless if formula_2where formula_3 is its probability mass function or probability density function when formula_1 is discrete or continuous respectively and formula_5 and formula_6 are nonnegative numbers. In discrete cases, the definition describes the first success in an infinite sequence of independent and identically distributed Bernoulli trials, like the number of coin flips until landing heads. In continuous situations, memorylessness models random phenomena, like the time between two earthquakes. The memorylessness property asserts that the number of previously failed trials or the elapsed time is independent, or has no effect, on the future trials or lead time.

The equality characterizes the geometric and exponential distributions in discrete and continuous contexts respectively. In other words, the geometric random variable is the only discrete memoryless distribution and the exponential random variable is the only continuous memoryless distribution.

In discrete contexts, the definition is altered to formula_7 when the geometric distribution starts at formula_8 instead of formula_9 so the equality is still satisfied.

== Characterization of exponential distribution ==
If a continuous probability distribution is memoryless, then it must be the exponential distribution.

From the memorylessness property,formula_10The definition of conditional probability reveals thatformula_11Rearranging the equality with the survival function, formula_12, givesformula_13This implies that for any natural number formula_14formula_15Similarly, by dividing the input of the survival function and taking the formula_14-th root,formula_17In general, the equality is true for any rational number in place of formula_14. Since the survival function is continuous and rational numbers are dense in the real numbers (in other words, there is always a rational number arbitrarily close to any real number), the equality also holds for the reals. As a result,formula_19where formula_20. This is the survival function of the exponential distribution.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="3" end="14" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="19" end="29" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q176750" start="31" end="45" title="Memorylessness" label="memorylessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="71" end="95" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176750" start="421" end="431" title="Memorylessness" label="memoryless"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="433" end="442" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="447" end="458" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="506" end="521" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="581" end="606" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="610" end="638" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="657" end="665" title="Discrete random variable" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="669" end="679" title="Continuous random variable" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="725" end="736" title="nonnegative" label="nonnegative"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="835" end="874" title="Independent and identically distributed random variables" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="875" end="891" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="1152" end="1163" title="Independence (probability theory)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937829" start="1232" end="1245" title="Characterization (mathematics)" label="characterizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="1250" end="1259" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="1264" end="1289" title="Exponential distribution" label="exponential distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="1902" end="1925" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915096" start="1982" end="1999" title="survival function" label="survival function"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="2054" end="2068" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="2232" end="2247" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2303" end="2313" title="Continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="2339" end="2344" title="Dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2352" end="2364" title="Real number" label="real numbers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772442" wikidata="Q3363854" url="?curid=772442" title="Lansdowne Park">
<text>Lansdowne Park is a urban park, historic sports, exhibition and entertainment facility in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, owned by the City of Ottawa. It is located on Bank Street adjacent to the Rideau Canal in The Glebe neighbourhood of central Ottawa. Lansdowne Park contains the TD Place Stadium and Arena complex (formerly Frank Clair Stadium and the Ottawa Civic Centre, respectively), the Aberdeen Pavilion, and the Horticulture Building.

In 2012, the park began a major redevelopment. The stadium complex were partially rebuilt and major retail and residential developments were added to the site. Along the Rideau Canal, the open space which used to be parking was converted into an urban park with green space and recreation facilities. Parking for the site was relocated underground. Basketball courts, a skate park, and water features were also constructed.

==History==
In 1847, the then Bytown was deeded acres by the government of the Province of Canada, and acquired another bought from owners over several years, to make up the initial grounds of what is now called Lansdowne Park. Two notable exhibitions occurred prior to the first Central Canada Exhibition. In 1875, the City of Ottawa hosted the thirtieth annual Exhibition of the Provincial Agricultural and Arts Association. In 1877 an exhibition included the first public demonstration of the telephone in Canada.

A third provincial exhibition was held at Lansdowne in 1879. In order to provide sufficient space for subsequent fairs, the City acquired more of Lansdowne and the buildings that were there in 1883 for $25,000. The Central Canada Exhibition Association was formed in 1888 and the site witnessed many improvements, including the erection of a new Horticultural Hall and Grandstand. The first Central Canada Exhibition opened on 20 September 1888 and was held annually until 2010. In 1890 the park was named for the 5th Marquess of Lansdowne, who served as Governor General of Canada from 1883 to 1888.

The Aberdeen Pavilion has figured prominently in military matters: troops of Lord Strathcona&#x27;s Horse were encamped there during the Boer War; the Princess Patricia&#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry mustered there before being sent to France in the First World War; and during World War II it served as an induction centre for thousands of Canadian troops heading overseas and was the home to The Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa (4th Princess Louise Dragoon Guards).

In 1947, the Marian Congress was held at Lansdowne Park from June 18 to 22, 1947, hosted by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ottawa. Estimates of attendance vary from 100,000 to 250,000. A huge outdoor site was built for the religious spectacular. In front were benches enough to seat 75,000 people. There were also 110 exhibits on the site. Msgr. John O&#x27;Neill, assistant pastor at St George&#x27;s Church was the prime organizer of the Congress. Its purpose was to celebrate the centenary of the Archdiocese of Ottawa and to pray for lasting peace in the world. Although now largely forgotten, in its day it was the largest religious conference in North America, with thousands of visitors coming from all parts of North America to witness this week of prayer. Many were locals but visitors arrived by car, bus, plane, and 66 special excursion trains. During the five-day Congress there was a procession of floats along the canal driveway. The Congress also featured the Dionne Quintuplets (age 13) singing hymns in both English and French. The event ended with an event called &quot;the greatest fireworks display ever held in Canada&quot; depicting scenes in the life of the Blessed Virgin. A message to the Congress from Pope Pius XII was broadcast during a Mass on June 19 and carried by major radio networks across the country.

In April 1952, the fairground at the park was selected in an exercise by the federal civil defence organization as an assembly point where the survivors of a nuclear attack on Ottawa gathered to receive food and water.

The City of Ottawa periodically reviews the use and state of the facility. Lansdowne was developed as a municipal fairgrounds, and somewhat rural in nature. Over time, permanent buildings were built on the site, and a majority of the site was paved, both for parking and for exhibition use. As the result of a review in the 1990s, the city demolished some of the buildings, and restored some parkland. The city restored the Aberdeen Pavilion at the time, using funds planned for a Central Canada Ex move, in exchange for allowing the Ex to continue to use the site.

Lansdowne Park has long been the primary sports facility in Ottawa. The sports venues located on the site have played host to championships in curling, figure skating, Canadian football, ice hockey and association football. The Aberdeen Pavilion hosted Stanley Cup championship games in 1904 played by the Ottawa Silver Seven. The Civic Centre has hosted the Canadian Men&#x27;s curling championship, Canadian and World championships in figure skating and the Memorial Cup Canadian junior-age ice hockey championships.

In particular, Frank Clair Stadium and its outdoor field has a long history of sports usage in baseball, football, lacrosse and soccer (including Olympic soccer). The stadium has held Grey Cup football, and World Cup Under 20 soccer championships. Before the south stands were built, the field was a combination baseball, outdoor lacrosse and football facility. The Ottawa Giants and Ottawa Athletics professional baseball teams used the facility from 1951 to 1954. The Ottawa Lacrosse Club and the Ottawa Capitals lacrosse clubs used the field from before 1900 for field lacrosse. Prior to the redevelopment, the CFL professional football franchises Ottawa Rough Riders and Ottawa Renegades used the field until 2005.

Currently, the stadium is home to the CFL franchise Ottawa RedBlacks and Canadian Premier League soccer team Atletico Ottawa. Major annual events in the stadium include the Panda Game with rival university football teams from Carleton University and University of Ottawa, and the Escapade Music Festival.

A dirt track existed at the field and it was used initially for horse racing. In 1955, it was converted to host stock car racing. The track was extended to , banked and paved in 1957. Successful financially, the stock cars were evicted from the site after lobbying by local residents. Race promoter Gerry Bisson then built a race track west of Ottawa in Stittsville, Ontario (now part of Ottawa) which is today known as Capital City Speedway.

The Horticulture Building, built in 1914, was designed for winter use as a curling rink with seasonal exhibition uses. Other buildings including the General Purpose Building and the McElroy Building, both since demolished, also had sheets of ice installed for curling.

==Exhibition and entertainment usage==
The site hosted the annual Central Canada Exhibition, also known as the &#x27;Ottawa Super Ex&#x27; from 1888 until 2010. The Exhibition used the full site, offering agricultural and cultural exhibits, midway rides and various entertainments for 10 days every year in August. The Central Canada Exhibition Association (CCEA) was the primary manager of Lansdowne Park for the city until turning over operation of the park to the city on May 1, 1973. The Central Canada Exhibition completed its last season at Lansdowne Park in August 2010.

The Arena at TD Place and Coliseum (now demolished) buildings are used regularly for other exhibitions such as home shows, industrial exhibitions and conventions, including political conventions. Since 1967, when the Ottawa Auditorium was demolished, Lansdowne Park has become a site of musical concerts, both inside the Arena at TD Place and outside on the Stadium field. Although the Canadian Tire Centre arena was built in 1996 and hosts the largest indoor concerts in Ottawa, the Arena at TD Place continues to host musical concerts.

==Redevelopment==

In September 2007, cracks were found in Frank Clair Stadium, necessitating the demolition of a portion of its south-side stands. The City of Ottawa subsequently started a review to redevelop Lansdowne Park. A group of Ottawa businessmen, known as the Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group (OSEG), were awarded a new Canadian Football League franchise (now the Ottawa Redblacks) in March 2008, contingent on securing a stadium in which to play.
OSEG proposed a public-private partnership with the city to rebuild the stadium and redevelop the grounds with residential and commercial uses to finance the reconstruction and annual upkeep of the site. Ottawa City Council decided to enter into a partnership with the OSEG group and abandoned its own review.

The redevelopment plan split into two components after the City rejected the portion of the OSEG proposal regarding the lands bordering the Rideau Canal. OSEG was assigned the precinct around the stadium and along Bank Street, while a design competition was held for an urban park to be located along the canal. The OSEG plan envisions two towers along Bank Street, a new set of grandstands at the football stadium and a new residential and commercial precinct to the north of the stadium. The new greenspace along the Rideau Canal frontage is intended as a new front lawn for Lansdowne.
The estimated cost to the city for the stadium renovation and its share of the parking development is $129.3 million. OSEG&#x27;s funding of the commercial redevelopment and its share of the parking is $118 million. The urban park is estimated to cost $35 million and $8.5 million has been spent for a new trade show and exhibition hall built near Ottawa airport, to replace the existing space at Lansdowne. The total estimated cost is $290.8 million, $172.8 million coming from the city. The city retains ownership of the site, leasing the commercial and retail component to pay off the debt under a revenue-sharing formula with OSEG. Under the most recent schedule, the City estimates completion of the project in 2015.

The redevelopment plan has been opposed by some Ottawa residents, particularly those near the Lansdowne site. Heritage activists objected to a plan to move a heritage building on the site. An organization called the Lansdowne Park Conservancy made an unsolicited stadium and park bid for Lansdowne that was rejected by the City of Ottawa. The $98 million proposal included retaining the existing buildings and a renovated stadium. Under the LPC plan, the city would fund the entire redevelopment cost to be repaid through site revenues. Two challenges of the project were made. Opponents opposed the redevelopment plan at the Ontario Municipal Board, which approved the project after a mediated agreement with many opponents was made. A court challenge brought by the Friends of Lansdowne group was heard at Ontario Superior Court, arguing that the project was illegal and the city acted in bad faith. In a verdict delivered on July 28, 2011, the court rejected all of the group&#x27;s arguments. Both the Conservancy and Friends groups filed appeals. The Conservancy appeal was dismissed without merit as an &quot;abuse of process,&quot; and awarded a legal judgment of $10,000 costs against. The Friends appeal was dismissed in April 2012 in a unanimous decision by the court. It dismissed all points raised by the Friends&#x27; appeal but did not award costs to the City.

== Gallery==
==References==
;Footnotes

;Bibliography


==External links==
* Lansdowne Park
* City of Ottawa Lansdowne Partnership Plan
* Collections Canada archives on the Central Canada Exhibition
* Ottawa Citizen - A history of Lansdowne Park</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3363854" start="0" end="14" title="Lansdowne Park" label="Lansdowne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="90" end="96" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="98" end="105" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q778395" start="161" end="172" title="Bank Street (Ottawa)" label="Bank Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q651323" start="189" end="201" title="Rideau Canal" label="Rideau Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139711" start="205" end="214" title="The Glebe" label="The Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442809" start="276" end="292" title="TD Place Stadium" label="TD Place Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143666" start="297" end="302" title="TD Place Arena" label="Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666960" start="389" end="406" title="Aberdeen Pavilion" label="Aberdeen Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004647" start="895" end="901" title="Bytown" label="Bytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="944" end="962" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109253" start="1145" end="1170" title="Ottawa SuperEX" label="Central Canada Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1185" end="1199" title="City of Ottawa" label="City of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q337386" start="1897" end="1922" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="5th Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="1938" end="1964" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666960" start="1989" end="2006" title="Aberdeen Pavilion" label="Aberdeen Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259400" start="2062" end="2090" title="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse" label="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2122" end="2130" title="Second Boer War#Canada" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061319" start="2136" end="2184" title="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry" label="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2235" end="2250" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2263" end="2275" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520188" start="2379" end="2412" title="The Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa" label="The Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639410" start="2414" end="2448" title="4th Princess Louise Dragoon Guards" label="4th Princess Louise Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365203" start="2548" end="2584" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ottawa" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212029" start="2840" end="2863" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Church (Ottawa)" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q252209" start="3430" end="3448" title="Dionne quintuplets" label="Dionne Quintuplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="3683" end="3696" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666960" start="4437" end="4454" title="Aberdeen Pavilion" label="Aberdeen Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="4723" end="4730" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="4732" end="4746" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="4748" end="4765" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="4767" end="4777" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4782" end="4802" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="4833" end="4844" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753100" start="4886" end="4905" title="Ottawa Senators (original)" label="Ottawa Silver Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502193" start="4939" end="4979" title="The Brier" label="Canadian Men&amp;#x27;s curling championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q928173" start="5040" end="5052" title="Memorial Cup" label="Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="5195" end="5203" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="5215" end="5223" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q582424" start="5246" end="5260" title="Football at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="5284" end="5292" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109182" start="5466" end="5479" title="Ottawa Giants" label="Ottawa Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109140" start="5484" end="5500" title="Ottawa Athletics" label="Ottawa Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="5714" end="5717" title="CFL" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361518" start="5751" end="5770" title="Ottawa Rough Riders" label="Ottawa Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q471136" start="5775" end="5791" title="Ottawa Renegades" label="Ottawa Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109151" start="5872" end="5888" title="Ottawa RedBlacks" label="Ottawa RedBlacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000566" start="5893" end="5916" title="Canadian Premier League" label="Canadian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q84127265" start="5929" end="5944" title="Atletico Ottawa" label="Atletico Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513961" start="5993" end="6003" title="Panda Game" label="Panda Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="6046" end="6065" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="6070" end="6090" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442642" start="6480" end="6500" title="Stittsville, Ontario" label="Stittsville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937386" start="6546" end="6567" title="Capital City Speedway" label="Capital City Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109141" start="7636" end="7653" title="Ottawa Auditorium" label="Ottawa Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327290" start="7805" end="7825" title="Canadian Tire Centre" label="Canadian Tire Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442809" start="8017" end="8036" title="Frank Clair Stadium" label="Frank Clair Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082536" start="8228" end="8265" title="Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group" label="Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109151" start="8337" end="8353" title="Ottawa Redblacks" label="Ottawa Redblacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q651323" start="8872" end="8884" title="Rideau Canal" label="Rideau Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094842" start="10669" end="10692" title="Ontario Municipal Board" label="Ontario Municipal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094918" start="10851" end="10873" title="Ontario Superior Court" label="Ontario Superior Court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772445" wikidata="Q3890747" url="?curid=772445" title="Max Boot">
<text>Max A. Boot (born September 12, 1969) is a Russian-born naturalized American author, editorialist, lecturer, and military historian. He worked as a writer and editor for &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot; and then for &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; in the 1990s. Since then, he has been the Jeane J. Kirkpatrick Senior Fellow in National Security Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations and a contributor to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;. He has written for such publications as &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and he has authored books of military history. In 2018, Boot published &quot;The Road Not Taken&quot;, a biography of Edward Lansdale, which was a New York Times bestseller and a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for biography, and &quot;The Corrosion of Conservatism: Why I Left the Right&quot;, which details Boot&#x27;s &quot;ideological journey from a &#x27;movement&#x27; conservative to a man without a party&quot;, in the aftermath of the 2016 U.S. presidential election. His biography of Ronald Reagan, &quot;&quot;, was a New York Times Bestseller and named one of the &quot;New York Times&quot;″ 10 Best Books of 2024, as well as one of the year&#x27;s best books by &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;The New Yorker&quot;.

==Personal life==

Boot was born in Moscow. His parents and grandmother, all Russian Jews, emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1976 to Los Angeles, where he was raised and eventually gained naturalized U.S. citizenship. Boot attended the University of California, Berkeley where he graduated with honors with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history in 1991 and Yale University with an MA in Diplomatic History in 1992. He began his career in journalism writing columns for the Berkeley student newspaper &quot;The Daily Californian&quot;. He later said that he believes he is the only conservative writer in that paper&#x27;s history. , Boot and his family lived in the New York area.

Max Boot&#x27;s spouse is Sue Mi Terry. On July 16, 2024, Terry was indicted and arrested for allegedly acting as an unregistered foreign agent of the South Korean government. Boot co-authored an opinion piece with Terry for the &quot;Washington Post&quot; in 2023. According to prosecutors, the article was written at the behest of South Korean officials and used information they provided without disclosing the involvement of the Korean government. Boot has not been accused of any wrongdoing.

==Career==
Boot has been the Jeane J. Kirkpatrick Senior Fellow in National Security Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), a contributing editor to &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot; and the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and a regular contributor to other publications such as &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot;. He has blogged regularly for &quot;Commentary&quot; since 2007, and for several years on its blog page called &quot;Contentions&quot;. He has given lectures at U.S. military institutions such as the Army War College and the Command and General Staff College.

Boot worked as a writer and as an editor for &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot; from 1992 to 1994. He moved to &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; for the next eight years. After writing an investigative column about legal issues called &quot;Rule of Law&quot; for four years, he was promoted to editor of the op-ed page.

Boot left the &quot;Journal&quot; in 2002 to join the Council on Foreign Relations as a Senior Fellow in National Security Studies. His initial writings with the CFR appeared in several publications, including &quot;The New York Post&quot;, &quot;The Times&quot;, &quot;Financial Times&quot;, and &quot;International Herald Tribune&quot;.
Boot wrote &quot;Savage Wars of Peace&quot;, a study of small wars in American history, with Basic Books in 2002. The title came from Kipling&#x27;s poem &quot;White Man&#x27;s Burden&quot;. James A. Russell in &quot;Journal of Cold War Studies&quot; criticized the book, saying that &quot;Boot did none of the critical research, and thus the inferences he draws from his uncritical rendition of history are essentially meaningless.&quot; Benjamin Schwarz argued in &quot;The New York Times&quot; that Boot asked the U.S. military to do a &quot;nearly impossible task&quot;, and he criticized the book as &quot;unrevealing&quot;. Victor Davis Hanson in History News Network gave a positive review, saying that &quot;Boot&#x27;s well-written narrative is not only fascinating reading, but didactic as well&quot;. Robert M. Cassidy in &quot;Military Review&quot; labeled it &quot;extraordinary&quot;. Boot&#x27;s book also won the 2003 General Wallace M. Greene Jr. Award from the Marine Corps Heritage Foundation as the best non-fiction book recently published pertaining to Marine Corps history.

Boot wrote once again for the CFR in 2003 and 2004.

The World Affairs Councils of America named Boot one of &quot;the 500 most influential people in the United States in the field of foreign policy&quot; in 2004. He also worked as member of the Project for the New American Century (PNAC) in 2004.

Boot published the work &quot;War Made New&quot;, an analysis of revolutions in military technology since 1500, in 2006. The book&#x27;s central thesis is that a military succeeds when it has the dynamic, forward-looking structures and administration in place to exploit new technologies. It concludes that the U.S. military may lose its edge if it does not become flatter, less bureaucratic, and more decentralized. The book received praise from Josiah Bunting III in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, who called it &quot;unusual and magisterial&quot;, and criticism from Martin Sieff in &quot;The American Conservative&quot;, who called it &quot;remarkably superficial&quot;.

Boot wrote many more articles with the CFR in 2007, and he received the Eric Breindel Award for Excellence in Opinion Journalism that year. In an April 2007 episode of &quot;Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg&quot;, Boot stated that he &quot;used to be a journalist&quot; and that he currently views himself purely as a military historian. Boot served as a foreign policy adviser to Senator John McCain in his 2008 United States presidential election bid. He stated in an editorial in &quot;World Affairs Journal&quot; that he saw strong parallels between Theodore Roosevelt and McCain. Boot continued to write for the CFR in several publications in 2008 and 2009.

Boot wrote for the CFR through 2010 and 2011 for publications such as &quot;Newsweek&quot;, &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;. He particularly argued that President Barack Obama&#x27;s health care plans made maintaining U.S. superpower status harder, that withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq occurred prematurely while making another war there more likely, and that the initial U.S. victory in Afghanistan had been undone by government complacency though forces could still pull off a victory. He also wrote op-eds criticizing planned budget austerity measures in both the U.S. and the U.K. as hurting their national security interests.

In September 2012, Boot co-wrote with Brookings Institution senior fellow Michael Doran a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed titled &quot;5 Reasons to Intervene in Syria Now&quot;, advocating U.S. military force to create a countrywide no-fly zone reminiscent of NATO&#x27;s role in the Kosovo War. He stated first and second that &quot;American intervention would diminish Iran&#x27;s influence in the Arab world&quot; and that &quot;a more muscular American policy could keep the conflict from spreading&quot; with &quot;sectarian strife in Lebanon and Iraq&quot;. Third, Boot argued that &quot;training and equipping reliable partners within Syria&#x27;s internal opposition&quot; could help &quot;create a bulwark against extremist groups like Al Qaeda&quot;. He concluded that &quot;American leadership on Syria could improve relations with key allies like Turkey and Qatar&quot; as well as &quot;end a terrible human-rights disaster&quot;.

Another well received book by Boot, titled &quot;Invisible Armies&quot; (2013), is about the history of guerrilla warfare, analyzing various cases of successful and unsuccessful insurgent efforts such as the fighting during the American war of independence, the Vietnam War, and the current Syrian Civil War. He states that traditional, conventional army tactics as employed by the American military under the administrations of President Bush and President Obama against guerrilla organizations have produced strategic failures. Boot has discussed his book in various programs such as the Hoover Institution&#x27;s &quot;Uncommon Knowledge&quot; series, appearing on it in January 2014.

==Political beliefs==
Boot considers himself to be a &quot;natural contrarian&quot;. He identifies as a conservative, once joking that &quot;I grew up in the 1980s, when conservatism was cool&quot;. He is in favor of limited government at home and American leadership abroad, believing America should be &quot;the world&#x27;s policeman&quot;.

Boot was one of the earliest proponents of the US invasion and occupation of Iraq. In October 2001, in an article titled &quot;The Case for American Empire&quot;, he proposed that the United States must greatly increase its military engagement against other countries and compared his proposal to invade Afghanistan and Iraq with the American role in defeating Nazi Germany. He wrote:

Once Afghanistan has been dealt with, America should turn its attention to Iraq ... Once we have deposed Saddam, we can impose an American-led, international regency in Baghdad, to go along with the one in Kabul ... It is a matter of self-defense: [Saddam] is currently working to acquire weapons of mass destruction that he or his confederates will unleash against America ... To turn Iraq into a beacon of hope for the oppressed peoples of the Middle East ... This could be the chance to right the scales, to establish the first Arab democracy, and to show the Arab people that America is committed to freedom for them.

Boot is a strong supporter of Israel and opposed the dismantling of Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank. He wrote in 2008 that &quot;the reason Israelis aren&#x27;t dismantling the settlements (and that President Bush isn&#x27;t pressing them to do so) has nothing to do with the views of American Jewish groups and everything to do with the dismal record of recent Israeli concessions in southern Lebanon and the Gaza Strip. In both cases (as well as at the Camp David negotiations in 2000) Israelis thought that territorial concessions would lead to peace. Instead they led to the empowerment of terrorists.&quot; In 2017 Boot supported President Trump&#x27;s controversial decision to relocate the American embassy to Jerusalem: &quot;he got this one right. My only complaint is that this move is more symbolic than substantive&quot;. In January 2024, he criticized South Africa&#x27;s ICJ genocide case against Israel.

In 2011, Boot supported the NATO-led military intervention in Libya.

In 2015 and 2016, Boot was a campaign advisor to Marco Rubio for the 2016 United States presidential primaries and strongly opposed Trump&#x27;s 2016 presidential candidacy. Boot said in March 2016 that he would &quot;sooner vote for Josef Stalin than he would vote for Donald Trump&quot;. In August 2016, after Trump won the presidential nomination, he became highly critical of the Republican Party and endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Boot was critical of the nomination of Rex Tillerson to the position of Secretary of State, believing him to be problematically pro-Russian, and subsequently called on Tillerson to resign.

In an opinion piece for &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; in September 2017, Boot outlined his political views as follows: &quot;I am socially liberal: I am pro-LGBTQ rights, pro-abortion rights, pro-immigration. I am fiscally conservative: I think we need to reduce the deficit and get entitlement spending under control. I am pro-environment: I think that climate change is a major threat that we need to address. I am pro-free trade: I think we should be concluding new trade treaties rather than pulling out of old ones. I am strong on defense: I think we need to beef up our military to cope with multiple enemies. And I am very much in favor of America acting as a world leader: I believe it is in our own self-interest to promote and defend freedom and free markets as we have been doing in one form or another since at least 1898.&quot;

In December 2017, also in &quot;Foreign Policy&quot;, Boot wrote that recent events—particularly since the 2016 election of Donald Trump as president—had caused him to rethink some of his previous views concerning the existence of white privilege and male privilege. &quot;In the last few years, in particular, it has become impossible for me to deny the reality of discrimination, harassment, even violence that people of color and women continue to experience in modern-day America from a power structure that remains for the most part in the hands of straight, white males. People like me, in other words. Whether I realize it or not, I have benefited from my skin color and my gender—and those of a different gender or sexuality or skin color have suffered because of it.&quot;

Boot is a member of the advisory board of Renew Democracy Initiative, a non-partisan organization founded in 2017.

In March 2019, Boot proposed to retire the neoconservative label, saying that the term &quot;neocon thinking&quot; is falsely associated with the advocacy of the United States invasion and occupation of Iraq:

The misuse of the &quot;neocon&quot; label reached an absurd extreme in a Post op-ed by Rep. Ro Khanna (D-Calif.), [who wrote:] &quot;I have been consistent of talking about the neocon thinking that led to the Iraq blunder and what followed.&quot; That actually isn&#x27;t much of an improvement, because Khanna is repeating the canard that neocons were responsible for the Iraq War.

Boot is a proponent of perpetual deployment:

 We need to think of these deployments [in Afghanistan and Syria] in much the same way we thought of our Indian Wars, which lasted roughly 300 years (ca. 1600-1890), or as the British thought about their deployment on the North West Frontier (today&#x27;s Pakistan-Afghanistan border), which lasted 100 years (1840s-1940s). U.S. troops are not undertaking a conventional combat assignment. They are policing the frontiers of the Pax Americana.

In 2018 he argued for the United States to help the Syrian Democratic Forces establish an &#x27;autonomous zone&#x27; in Syria as &quot;this would protect at least a portion of Syrian territory from Russian and Iranian domination and give the United States a strong say in that country&#x27;s future.

Boot has suggested that if conservative television news channels—Fox News Channel, One America News and Newsmax—do not &quot;stop propagating lies&quot;, &quot;large cable companies such as Comcast and Charter Spectrum need to step in&quot; and &quot;boot&quot; them off, dealing with them &quot;just as we do with foreign terrorist groups&quot;.

Mark Ames of &quot;The Nation&quot;, Adam Johnson of Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, Tucker Carlson and Glenn Greenwald have denounced Boot as a &quot;warmonger&quot;.

Boot has argued in favor of increased content moderation of social media. When Elon Musk proposed to acquire Twitter, Boot said that he was &quot;frightened by the impact on society and politics&quot; and asserted that &quot;[f]or democracy to survive, we need more content moderation, not less.&quot;

== Bibliography ==

* &quot;Reagan: His Life and Legend&quot; (Liveright Publishing Corporation/W.W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc., 2024), 
* &quot;The Corrosion of Conservatism: Why I Left the Right&quot;. Description &amp; arrow/scrollable preview. (Liveright Publishing Corporation/W. W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc., 2018), 
* &quot;The Road Not Taken: Edward Lansdale and the American Tragedy in Vietnam&quot; (Liveright Publishing Corporation/W. W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc., 2018), 
* &quot;Invisible Armies: An Epic History of Guerrilla Warfare from Ancient Times to the Present&quot; (Liveright, 2013), 
* &quot;War Made New: Technology, Warfare, and the Course of History, 1500 to Today&quot; (Gotham Books, 2006), 
* &quot;The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and the Rise of American Power&quot; (Basic Books, 2002), 
* &quot;Out of Order: Arrogance, Corruption and Incompetence on the Bench&quot; (Basic Books, 1998), 

==References==
== External links ==
* &quot;MaxBoot.net&quot;
* Articles at &quot;Commentary&quot;
* Live Debates for Intelligence Squared U.S. Debates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3890747" start="0" end="11" title="Max Boot" label="Max A. Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="56" end="76" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized American"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189313" start="85" end="97" title="editorialist" label="editorialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="113" end="131" title="military historian" label="military historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="176" end="205" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="231" end="254" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q240534" start="303" end="323" title="Jeane J. Kirkpatrick" label="Jeane J. Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="374" end="402" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="430" end="449" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="503" end="522" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="540" end="557" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="575" end="593" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q558992" start="719" end="734" title="Edward Lansdale" label="Edward Lansdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="1045" end="1076" title="2016 U.S. presidential election" label="2016 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1095" end="1108" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="1130" end="1155" title="New York Times Bestseller" label="New York Times Bestseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1183" end="1197" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="1282" end="1301" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1318" end="1332" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="1418" end="1430" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1451" end="1463" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1475" end="1486" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1578" end="1612" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1651" end="1667" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="1678" end="1685" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1698" end="1713" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1722" end="1724" title="Master&amp;#x27;s Degree" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="1779" end="1789" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="1823" end="1840" title="student newspaper" label="student newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728624" start="1847" end="1868" title="The Daily Californian" label="The Daily Californian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2007" end="2015" title="New York State" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q57208109" start="2049" end="2061" title="Sue Mi Terry" label="Sue Mi Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240534" start="2550" end="2570" title="Jeane J. Kirkpatrick" label="Jeane J. Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="2621" end="2649" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="2688" end="2707" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="2728" end="2745" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2815" end="2838" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="2852" end="2871" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2888" end="2906" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="2921" end="2925" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="2949" end="2959" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="3113" end="3129" title="U.S. Army War College" label="Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="3138" end="3171" title="Command and General Staff College" label="Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="3225" end="3254" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="3558" end="3586" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="3720" end="3737" title="The New York Post" label="The New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3751" end="3760" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="3774" end="3789" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q100294968" start="3807" end="3835" title="International Herald Tribune" label="International Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="3936" end="3947" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="3977" end="3984" title="Kipling" label="Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q908734" start="4003" end="4026" title="White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden" label="White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294981" start="4060" end="4087" title="Journal of Cold War Studies" label="Journal of Cold War Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522521" start="4282" end="4298" title="Benjamin Schwarz (writer)" label="Benjamin Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276395" start="4473" end="4492" title="Victor Davis Hanson" label="Victor Davis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774749" start="4496" end="4516" title="History News Network" label="History News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q14478377" start="4682" end="4697" title="Military Review" label="Military Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974515" start="4822" end="4854" title="Marine Corps Heritage Foundation" label="Marine Corps Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035337" start="4997" end="5030" title="World Affairs Councils of America" label="World Affairs Councils of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q428649" start="5186" end="5222" title="Project for the New American Century" label="Project for the New American Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290438" start="5687" end="5705" title="Josiah Bunting III" label="Josiah Bunting III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5811" end="5823" title="Martin Sieff" label="Martin Sieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q159664" start="5833" end="5858" title="The American Conservative" label="The American Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386179" start="5989" end="6045" title="Eric Breindel Award for Excellence in Opinion Journalism" label="Eric Breindel Award for Excellence in Opinion Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784529" start="6091" end="6121" title="Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg" label="Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="6233" end="6251" title="military historian" label="military historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="6296" end="6303" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="6304" end="6315" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="6323" end="6363" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="6469" end="6487" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="6492" end="6498" title="John McCain" label="McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="6677" end="6693" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="6807" end="6819" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="6827" end="6844" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="health care plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="6929" end="6933" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7036" end="7047" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="7177" end="7202" title="Austerity" label="budget austerity measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="7318" end="7339" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="7514" end="7525" title="no-fly zone" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7541" end="7545" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="7565" end="7575" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="7923" end="7928" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="8329" end="8346" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8453" end="8481" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8487" end="8498" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="8516" end="8532" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="8562" end="8579" title="Conventional war" label="conventional army"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8654" end="8668" title="George W. Bush" label="President Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8673" end="8688" title="Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="8815" end="8833" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882871" start="8847" end="8865" title="Uncommon Knowledge" label="Uncommon Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165738" start="8981" end="8991" title="contrarian" label="contrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="9018" end="9030" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="9131" end="9149" title="limited government" label="limited government"/>
<link wikidata="Q637759" start="9228" end="9250" title="Pax Americana" label="world&amp;#x27;s policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="9306" end="9340" title="Iraq War" label="US invasion and occupation of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="9556" end="9574" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="invade Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="9579" end="9583" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="9620" end="9632" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="9750" end="9756" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="9814" end="9821" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="9851" end="9856" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="9934" end="9961" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118038" start="10176" end="10190" title="Arab democracy" label="Arab democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10298" end="10304" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="10336" end="10354" title="Israeli settlement" label="Israeli settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="10372" end="10381" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10481" end="10495" title="George W. Bush" label="President Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="10692" end="10702" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="10737" end="10747" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q124208778" start="11167" end="11199" title="South Africa v. Israel (Genocide Convention)" label="ICJ genocide case against Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="11230" end="11234" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="11239" end="11269" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="military intervention in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q324546" start="11321" end="11332" title="Marco Rubio" label="Marco Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="11341" end="11382" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 United States presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="11404" end="11444" title="Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s 2016 presidential candidacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="11506" end="11518" title="Josef Stalin" label="Josef Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11542" end="11554" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11656" end="11672" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11686" end="11696" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="11707" end="11722" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="11730" end="11761" title="2016 U.S. presidential election" label="2016 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q331401" start="11802" end="11815" title="Rex Tillerson" label="Rex Tillerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="11835" end="11853" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="11983" end="11997" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="12080" end="12096" title="socially liberal" label="socially liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="12107" end="12119" title="gay rights" label="LGBTQ rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="12121" end="12133" title="pro-abortion" label="pro-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="12164" end="12185" title="fiscally conservative" label="fiscally conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="12217" end="12224" title="deficit spending" label="deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386606" start="12233" end="12253" title="entitlement spending" label="entitlement spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="12274" end="12289" title="environmentalism" label="pro-environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="12304" end="12318" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="12371" end="12381" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="12706" end="12717" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="13023" end="13038" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742931" start="13043" end="13057" title="male privilege" label="male privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="13205" end="13220" title="people of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q62062210" start="13617" end="13643" title="Renew Democracy Initiative" label="Renew Democracy Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="13734" end="13749" title="neoconservative" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339221" start="13994" end="14003" title="Ro Khanna" label="Ro Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469686" start="14309" end="14329" title="perpetual war" label="perpetual deployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="14437" end="14448" title="Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857659" start="14554" end="14573" title="Military history of the North-West Frontier" label="North West Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q288292" start="14588" end="14615" title="Pakistan-Afghanistan border" label="Pakistan-Afghanistan border"/>
<link wikidata="Q637759" start="14761" end="14774" title="Pax Americana" label="Pax Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096224" start="14829" end="14853" title="Syrian Democratic Forces" label="Syrian Democratic Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="15144" end="15160" title="Fox News Channel" label="Fox News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107494" start="15162" end="15178" title="One America News" label="One America News"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037115" start="15183" end="15190" title="Newsmax" label="Newsmax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000145" start="15245" end="15260" title="cable companies" label="cable companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="15269" end="15276" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805197" start="15281" end="15297" title="Spectrum (TV service)" label="Charter Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q312484" start="15402" end="15417" title="terrorist group" label="terrorist group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530052" start="15427" end="15436" title="Mark Ames" label="Mark Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="15446" end="15456" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393365" start="15480" end="15514" title="Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting" label="Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q743162" start="15516" end="15530" title="Tucker Carlson" label="Tucker Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568842" start="15535" end="15550" title="Glenn Greenwald" label="Glenn Greenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318184" start="15638" end="15656" title="content moderation" label="content moderation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="15660" end="15672" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="15679" end="15688" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q111725317" start="15701" end="15716" title="Acquisition of Twitter by Elon Musk" label="acquire Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="16914" end="16924" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q114351052" start="16950" end="16983" title="Intelligence Squared U.S. Debates" label="Intelligence Squared U.S. Debates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772448" wikidata="Q469030" url="?curid=772448" title="List of Polish football champions">
<text>The Polish football champions are the annual winners of Poland&#x27;s premier annual football competition. The title has been contested since 1920 in varying forms of competition. From 1921 to 1926 the championship was decided in a series of tournaments until the league was formed in 1927. Since then the title was awarded the winners of the highest league in Polish football. In 1951 the title was awarded to the winner of the Polish Cup.

== Pre-independence era (1913–1914) ==
Before Poland regained its independence in 1918, Polish clubs had held their own championships in Austrian and Prussian partitions.

=== Galicia (Austrian partition) ===
Competitions were organized by the original Polish Football Association, which was part of the Austrian Football Association.
=== Province of Posen (Prussian partition) ===
Competitions were organized by Association of Polish Sports Societies for the German Reich (now Greater Poland Football Association, a part of Polish Football Association).

Not to be confused with Posen Football Championship, the regional competition organized by South Eastern German Association, a part of German Football Association in 1908–1914.

== Under German occupation (1940–1944) ==

=== Warsaw Championship ===

=== Kraków Championship ===

==List of champions==
The performance of various clubs is shown in the following table:


==Winning clubs==

=== By number of championships ===
Bold indicates clubs currently playing in the top division.&lt;br&gt;&quot;Italics&quot; indicates clubs not existing anymore.

=== By voivodeship ===
=== By city ===
==Honoured teams==
After 10 Polish Championship titles a representative Golden Star is placed above the team&#x27;s badge to indicate 10 Polish Championship titles. 
The current (as of July 2020) officially sanctioned Championship stars are:
*Golden Star 10 or more Polish Championship titles:
** Ruch Chorzów
** Górnik Zabrze
** Wisła Kraków
** Legia Warsaw
*Silver Star 5–9 Polish Championship titles:
** Cracovia
** Lech Poznań
*White Star 1-4 Polish Championship titles
** Pogoń Lwów
** Warta Poznań
** Garbarnia Kraków
** Polonia Warsaw
** Polonia Bytom
** ŁKS Łódź
** Stal Mielec
** Śląsk Wrocław
** Szombierki Bytom
** Widzew Łódź
** Zagłębie Lubin
** Piast Gliwice
** Raków Częstochowa
** Jagiellonia Białystok

==Statistics==

At the end of 2023–24 Ekstraklasa.
Bold indicates clubs currently playing in the top division.&lt;br&gt;&quot;Italics&quot; indicates clubs not existing anymore.

== See also ==
* Football in Poland
* Ekstraklasa
* Polish Cup
* Polish Super Cup
* Ekstraklasa Cup
* Sports in Poland

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==
* List of Polish football champions 
* List of Polish football championships </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q469030" start="4" end="29" title="List of Polish football champions" label="Polish football champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="56" end="62" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="85" end="93" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="264" end="270" title="Ekstraklasa" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="429" end="439" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q129794" start="579" end="587" title="Austrian Partition" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q129791" start="592" end="600" title="Prussian Partition" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9392400" start="686" end="722" title="Związek Polski Piłki Nożnej" label="original Polish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q222108" start="746" end="775" title="Austrian Football Association" label="Austrian Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q309008" start="967" end="994" title="Polish Football Association" label="Polish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381336" start="1089" end="1121" title="South Eastern German football championship" label="South Eastern German Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q154191" start="1133" end="1160" title="German Football Association" label="German Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q301726" start="1885" end="1897" title="Ruch Chorzów" label="Ruch Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q134255" start="1901" end="1914" title="Górnik Zabrze" label="Górnik Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="1918" end="1930" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="1934" end="1946" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074158" start="1995" end="2003" title="KS Cracovia" label="Cracovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52942" start="2007" end="2018" title="Lech Poznań" label="Lech Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q941363" start="2065" end="2075" title="Pogoń Lwów" label="Pogoń Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198772" start="2079" end="2091" title="Warta Poznań" label="Warta Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493954" start="2095" end="2111" title="Garbarnia Kraków" label="Garbarnia Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q262569" start="2115" end="2129" title="Polonia Warsaw" label="Polonia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q859458" start="2133" end="2146" title="Polonia Bytom" label="Polonia Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q345142" start="2150" end="2158" title="ŁKS Łódź" label="ŁKS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388790" start="2162" end="2173" title="Stal Mielec" label="Stal Mielec"/>
<link wikidata="Q328655" start="2177" end="2190" title="Śląsk Wrocław" label="Śląsk Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q586516" start="2194" end="2210" title="Szombierki Bytom" label="Szombierki Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="2214" end="2225" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="2229" end="2243" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q668112" start="2247" end="2260" title="Piast Gliwice" label="Piast Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q287236" start="2264" end="2281" title="Raków Częstochowa" label="Raków Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189170" start="2285" end="2306" title="Jagiellonia Białystok" label="Jagiellonia Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q117290009" start="2338" end="2357" title="2023–24 Ekstraklasa" label="2023–24 Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888210" start="2504" end="2522" title="Football in Poland" label="Football in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="2525" end="2536" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q837397" start="2539" end="2549" title="Polish Cup" label="Polish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q370641" start="2552" end="2568" title="Polish Super Cup" label="Polish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300167" start="2571" end="2586" title="Ekstraklasa Cup" label="Ekstraklasa Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="2589" end="2605" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772452" wikidata="Q1978036" url="?curid=772452" title="Ivor Wynne Stadium">
<text>Ivor Wynne Stadium (formerly Civic Stadium) was a Canadian football stadium located at the corner of Balsam and Beechwood avenues, two blocks west of Gage Avenue North in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. The stadium was the home of the Hamilton Tiger-Cats of the CFL from 1950 until it closed on October 27, 2012. The club&#x27;s previous home was the Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds. The stadium was replaced by Tim Hortons Field, with a fixed capacity of 24,000, on the same property.

From 1928, while the stands were still under construction, the civic stadium was mainly used for track &amp; field by the Hamilton Olympic Club and men&#x27;s soccer teams, while the Hamilton AAA was used more for football and cricket. The stadium had a cinder track where the Cap Cornelius Secondary School relays were held.

==Construction history==
The stadium, called simply the civic stadium (lower cased), was originally built in 1928 to host the 1930 British Empire Games (later the Commonwealth Games). However, playing fields had stood on the site since the city bought the land from a local farmer in 1913.

The stadium was heavily rebuilt in 1970–71. In 1971, it was renamed for Ivor Wynne, a former chairman of the city parks board who was athletic director and dean of students at McMaster University when he died in 1970. He was considered to be largely responsible for creating McMaster&#x27;s physical education course and planning its athletic complex. From 1971 to 1975, Ivor Wynne was the largest stadium in the CFL, with 34,500 seats.

Ivor Wynne was the first facility in Canada to use AstroTurf (but not the first with artificial turf; Empire Stadium in Vancouver was the first stadium to have it, albeit using 3M&#x27;s Tartan Turf, which it installed in 1970), which it installed in 1971. In the 1980s, the west endzone bleachers were removed so that a new scoreboard could be added. That dropped capacity to about 29,500. A later retrofit of the north stand&#x27;s lower east section for handicapped access in the 1990s dropped capacity further to just under 29,000.

The stadium was renovated again after the 2002 CFL season and had a new next-generation FieldTurf playing surface installed and the end zones were squared off. Shortly after the 2003 season, a new scoreboard was erected in the west end of the stadium; owing to sponsorship, it was known as Dofasco TigerVision.

In 2012, the stadium had a large grandstand on one side of the field, with a small section curving around the end zone, and a separate grandstand on the opposite side of the field, with a capacity of just under 29,000.

In 2011, plans were announced to renovate the stadium again in 2012, with a completion date in 2014, and the stadium would also be used for the then upcoming 2015 Pan American Games. On February 25, 2011, the Toronto 2015 Pan Am board of directors approved stadium plans which would see the south side stands demolished and rebuilt and the north side stands extensively renovated. However, that plan was not used. A new plan announced August 31, 2011, called for a brand-new $150 million stadium with a new north-south field alignment that would provide equal advantage for sports where prevailing wind direction and sun glares are equal for both teams. It would be a multi-function stadium, hosting concerts and football, soccer, and hockey games. During construction, the Tiger-Cats played at the University of Guelph&#x27;s Alumni Stadium for the 2013 season, and proceeds from the temporary site agreement went to the Gryphon Athletics fundraising campaign as a part of the University of Guelph&#x27;s BetterPlanet Project.

==Events==

On August 8, 1961, the Tiger-Cats defeated the visiting Buffalo Bills, at that time a member of the American Football League, in a preseason exhibition game in Hamilton. The Bills, playing the entire game under Canadian rules, lost 38–21. The game marked the only CFL–AFL meeting where the CFL team won.

Some concerts have occurred at Ivor Wynne. The biggest was Pink Floyd in 1975, during which a pyrotechnics display damaged the scoreboard. The last concert held at Ivor Wynne was Rush in 1979 until the Tragically Hip played on October 6, 2012 before departing for an American tour.

In April 2005, Ivor Wynne hosted Our Game to Give, a charity hockey game instigated as a result of the 2004–05 NHL lockout. Nearly 20,000 spectators braved inclement weather to watch locked-out NHL players and a handful of former professionals lace up the skates at an outdoor charity hockey game. Hockey Hall of Famer Gordie Howe dropped the puck for the ceremonial faceoff. Team Gilmour rallied in the third period to defeat Team Staios 11-6. Proceeds of the Our Game To Give event went to the Tsunami Relief Fund of the Canadian Red Cross and Camp Trillium, the Ontario facility for children with cancer.

On January 21, 2012, Ivor Wynne hosted a regular season game of the American Hockey League, between the Toronto Marlies and the Hamilton Bulldogs. It was the first outdoor game in Canada in the league&#x27;s history and the fourth in an annual series of outdoor AHL games.

===Grey Cup===

Ivor Wynne Stadium hosted the Grey Cup three times: 
* in 1944, when the Flying Wildcats were defeated by a wartime team from the Montreal Navy
* in 1972, with a win by the hometown Tiger-Cats over Saskatchewan before a capacity crowd
* 1996, when the Hamilton Tiger-Cats did not play. In the 1996 game, temporary west and east end zone seating raised capacity to 40,000. That game, perhaps one of the greatest of all time, was played in a steady snowstorm, and was won by Doug Flutie and the Toronto Argonauts over the Edmonton Eskimos.
==See also==
*List of sports venues in Hamilton, Ontario
*List of Canadian Football League stadiums
*Venues of the 2015 Pan American and Parapan American Games
*List of Commonwealth Games venues

== Notes ==
== External links ==
*Ivor Wynne Stadium profile from TiCats.ca 
* A farewell to Ivor Wynne 
* Ivor Wynne Stadium scrapbook clippings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1978036" start="0" end="18" title="Ivor Wynne Stadium" label="Ivor Wynne Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978036" start="29" end="42" title="Ivor Wynne Stadium" label="Civic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="50" end="67" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="68" end="75" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516831" start="150" end="167" title="Gage Avenue (Hamilton, Ontario)" label="Gage Avenue North"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="171" end="188" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q44149" start="230" end="249" title="Hamilton Tiger-Cats" label="Hamilton Tiger-Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="257" end="260" title="Canadian Football League" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644834" start="346" end="391" title="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds" label="Hamilton Amateur Athletic Association Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008048" start="421" end="438" title="Tim Hortons Field" label="Tim Hortons Field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="773" end="786" title="Cap Cornelius" label="Cap Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q919129" start="949" end="974" title="1930 British Empire Games" label="1930 British Empire Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="986" end="1004" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978036" start="1186" end="1196" title="Ivor Wynne" label="Ivor Wynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="1290" end="1309" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="1603" end="1612" title="AstroTurf" label="AstroTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374130" start="1654" end="1668" title="Empire Stadium (Vancouver)" label="Empire Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24662" start="1951" end="1959" title="retrofit" label="retrofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599814" start="2131" end="2146" title="2002 CFL season" label="2002 CFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185431" start="2779" end="2802" title="2015 Pan American Games" label="2015 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2830" end="2868" title="TO2015#Board of Directors" label="Toronto 2015 Pan Am board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008048" start="3109" end="3116" title="Tim Hortons Field" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q795988" start="3420" end="3440" title="University of Guelph" label="University of Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="4026" end="4036" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="4146" end="4150" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="4169" end="4183" title="Tragically Hip" label="Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="4353" end="4372" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="2004–05 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q358519" start="4569" end="4580" title="Gordie Howe" label="Gordie Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030521" start="4773" end="4791" title="Canadian Red Cross" label="Canadian Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4796" end="4809" title="Camp Trillium" label="Camp Trillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="4927" end="4949" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q278957" start="4963" end="4978" title="Toronto Marlies" label="Toronto Marlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q748294" start="4987" end="5004" title="Hamilton Bulldogs (AHL)" label="Hamilton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600955" start="5113" end="5130" title="AHL Outdoor Classic" label="outdoor AHL games"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="5179" end="5187" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644794" start="5442" end="5451" title="84th Grey Cup" label="1996 game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251736" start="5622" end="5633" title="Doug Flutie" label="Doug Flutie"/>
<link wikidata="Q142349" start="5642" end="5659" title="Toronto Argonauts" label="Toronto Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285835" start="5669" end="5685" title="Edmonton Eskimos" label="Edmonton Eskimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640404" start="5701" end="5743" title="List of sports venues in Hamilton, Ontario" label="List of sports venues in Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565685" start="5745" end="5786" title="List of Canadian Football League stadiums" label="List of Canadian Football League stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100197" start="5788" end="5846" title="Venues of the 2015 Pan American and Parapan American Games" label="Venues of the 2015 Pan American and Parapan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883023" start="5848" end="5881" title="List of Commonwealth Games venues" label="List of Commonwealth Games venues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772459" wikidata="Q798314" url="?curid=772459" title="Back (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[back]] is the large posterior area of the human body, rising from the top of the buttocks to the back of the neck and the shoulders.

Back may also refer to:

== People ==
* Adam Back (born 1970), British cryptographer
* Charles Back, South African winemaker
* Chris Back (born 1950), Australian politician
* Ernst Emil Alexander Back (1881–1959), German physicist
* Frédéric Back (1924–2013), Canadian animator
* George Back (1796–1878), British naval officer and explorer
* Les Back (born 1962), English sociology professor and author
* Natasja Crone Back (born 1971), Danish journalist
* Neil Back (born 1969), English rugby player
* Ralph-Johan Back, Finnish computer scientist
* Rico Back (born 1954), Swiss-domiciled German businessman
* Sven-Erik Bäck (1919–1984), Swedish composer
* William Back (1856–1911), Australian cricketer

== Places ==
* Back (crater), lunar crater
* Back, Lewis, a village on the Isle of Lewis, Scotland
* Back Bay (disambiguation), several places
* Back Peninsula, Nunavut, Canada
* Back railway station, in Back, Manitoba, Canada
* The Backs, an area at the rear of several colleges in Cambridge, England

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Music===
* &quot;Back&quot; (Lynn Anderson album), 1983
* Back (Ohio Players album), 1988
* &quot;Back&quot; (song), a song by Colt Ford from the album &quot;Declaration of Independence&quot;
* &quot;B.A.C.K.&quot;, a 1999 album by Danish thrash metal band Artillery
* &quot;Back&quot;, a song by Lil Pump featuring Lil Yachty from the album &quot;Lil Pump&quot;
* Back, in music, accompaniment

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Back&quot; (novel), a 1946 novel by Henry Green
* &quot;Back&quot; (TV series), a 2017 British sitcom
* &quot;Back&quot; (&quot;Louie&quot;), an episode of the American television series &quot;Louie&quot;
* &quot;Back&quot; (&quot;Spaced&quot;), a television episode

==Sports==
* Back (American football)
* Back nine, the last nine holes on a golf course
* Fullback (American football), a common position in many football games
* Half back (disambiguation), a position in many football games
* Nickelback (American football), a defensive back in American and Canadian football
* Quarterback, a position in the offensive backfield of American and Canadian football
* Running back, a position in the offensive backfield of American and Canadian football
* Back, another term for the position of defender, in association football and Australian rules football
* Back, a player who is defending the goal, in hockey and many other games who is defending the goal
* Back, a rugby football player who is not involved in the scrum
** Back (rugby league)
** Back (rugby union)

== Other uses ==
* Bauk (field) (alternatively spelled &quot;back&quot;) a Scottish agricultural term
* Back (horse), the back of a horse
* Back vowel, a type of spoken sound
* Back, the backrest of a chair
* Back, a light-sensing unit for a camera, such as a digital camera back
* Back, the rear of a string instrument&#x27;s sound board 
* Back, to bet on something: Betting exchange § Backing and laying</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q798314" start="4" end="12" title="Back (disambiguation)" label="[[back]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q798314" start="140" end="144" title="Back (disambiguation)" label="Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q348671" start="180" end="189" title="Adam Back" label="Adam Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075354" start="227" end="239" title="Charles Back" label="Charles Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105780" start="267" end="277" title="Chris Back" label="Chris Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q77487" start="315" end="340" title="Ernst Emil Alexander Back" label="Ernst Emil Alexander Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q69218" start="373" end="386" title="Frédéric Back" label="Frédéric Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q282922" start="420" end="431" title="George Back" label="George Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529186" start="482" end="490" title="Les Back" label="Les Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q512320" start="545" end="563" title="Natasja Crone Back" label="Natasja Crone Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168182" start="597" end="606" title="Neil Back" label="Neil Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287124" start="643" end="659" title="Ralph-Johan Back" label="Ralph-Johan Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152072" start="690" end="699" title="Rico Back" label="Rico Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347023" start="750" end="764" title="Sven-Erik Bäck" label="Sven-Erik Bäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004901" start="797" end="809" title="William Back" label="William Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q798307" start="860" end="873" title="Back (crater)" label="Back (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777232" start="890" end="901" title="Back, Lewis" label="Back, Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839063" start="946" end="971" title="Back Bay (disambiguation)" label="Back Bay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839131" start="990" end="1004" title="Back Peninsula" label="Back Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357460" start="1024" end="1044" title="Back railway station" label="Back railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519854" start="1074" end="1083" title="The Backs" label="The Backs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839035" start="1197" end="1235" title="Back (Lynn Anderson album)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (Lynn Anderson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122973542" start="1244" end="1269" title="Back (Ohio Players album)" label="Back (Ohio Players album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949923" start="1278" end="1301" title="Back (song)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938558" start="1386" end="1394" title="B.A.C.K." label="B.A.C.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q44007070" start="1528" end="1548" title="Lil Pump (album)" label="&amp;quot;Lil Pump&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="1567" end="1580" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839036" start="1635" end="1659" title="Back (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28443716" start="1691" end="1719" title="Back (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114503203" start="1745" end="1781" title="Back (Louie)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Louie&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114231" start="1848" end="1885" title="Back (Spaced)" label="&amp;quot;Back&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Spaced&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q67175894" start="1922" end="1946" title="Back (American football)" label="Back (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="1949" end="1958" title="Back nine" label="Back nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q526960" start="1999" end="2027" title="Fullback (American football)" label="Fullback (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237947" start="2072" end="2098" title="Half back (disambiguation)" label="Half back (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985634" start="2136" end="2166" title="Nickelback (American football)" label="Nickelback (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="2221" end="2232" title="Quarterback" label="Quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="2308" end="2320" title="Running back" label="Running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="2435" end="2443" title="defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622659" start="2546" end="2552" title="hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q611749" start="2659" end="2664" title="Scrum (rugby)" label="scrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="2668" end="2687" title="Back (rugby league)" label="Back (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="2691" end="2709" title="Back (rugby union)" label="Back (rugby union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873516" start="2730" end="2742" title="Bauk (field)" label="Bauk (field)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037298" start="2815" end="2827" title="Back (horse)" label="Back (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q853589" start="2851" end="2861" title="Back vowel" label="Back vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15026" start="2912" end="2917" title="chair" label="chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q209099" start="2971" end="2990" title="digital camera back" label="digital camera back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189953" start="3038" end="3049" title="sound board (music)" label="sound board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3080" end="3117" title="Betting exchange#Backing and laying" label="Betting exchange § Backing and laying"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772462" wikidata="Q1810204" url="?curid=772462" title="McMahon Stadium">
<text>McMahon Stadium ( ) is a Canadian football stadium in Calgary, Alberta. The stadium is owned by the University of Calgary and operated by the McMahon Stadium Society.

The stadium is located between the downtown core and the University of Calgary, north of 16 Avenue NW between Crowchild Trail and University Drive. It is adjacent to the Banff Trail C-Train station.

It is the home venue for the University of Calgary Dinos, Calgary Colts of the Canadian Junior Football League, Calgary Gators and Calgary Wolfpack of the Alberta Football League, and the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League, who played at Mewata Stadium from 1935 to 1959. The stadium also was the open-air venue (as an ice rink) for the National Hockey League&#x27;s 2011 Heritage Classic match between the Calgary Flames and the Montreal Canadiens.

The stadium was also the location of the 1988 Winter Olympics&#x27; opening and closing ceremonies, serving as the Olympic Stadium.

==History==
From 1945 to 1960, the Calgary Stampeders and other athletic organizations operated out of Mewata Park Stadium, a 10,000-person facility, later expanded to 16,700, in the Downtown west end. An early proposal for a new stadium came in 1954 when the Stampeders proposed a new 20,000-person facility south of Victoria Park. The rush for a new stadium came with construction of a new bridge for 14 Street, which was believed to require land adjacent to Mewata Park Stadium. The Victoria Park stadium proposal had limited support from the Calgary Stampede and Exhibition board.

In February 1957, it was announced that a new stadium was planned near the University of Alberta (Calgary) with an estimated cost of $1 million. The planning sketches detailed a 20,000-person facility on an tract of land near the site of a tract of land set aside for the university. The initial plan sought financing through provincially or city issued bonds.

The city and province failed to back the stadium plan. On January 1, 1960, the team General Manager Jim Finks, play-by-play commentator Eric Bishop and &quot;Calgary Herald&quot; columnist Gorde Hunter approached the McMahon brothers to finance the stadium, which they agreed to. The stadium was designed by architect Peter Rule and constructed by Red Dutton&#x27;s firm Burns and Dutton Concrete and Construction Company on the then University of Alberta (Calgary) campus using pre-cast concrete over 103 days with groundbreaking beginning on April 4, 1960, for a cost of $1.05 million. George McMahon and Dutton wagered $1,500 on whether the construction would finish on time, and when the project finished on time 103 days later, Dutton paid McMahon with one-dollar bills. The original stadium capacity was 19,536 and the university hoped that the structure could be expanded to 45,000 at some point in the future. McMahon stadium repurposed bleachers from Mewata Stadium around the end zone to provide seating for youth football program members, and the Mewata scoreboard was also relocated to the new stadium.

The University Board of Governors announced the stadium would be named after Calgary residents Frank McMahon and his brother, George McMahon, in August 1960. The McMahon brothers donated $300,000 to the university and the citizens of Calgary, and guaranteed the balance of money for the stadium&#x27;s construction. Another name commonly considered was &quot;Devil&#x27;s Head Stadium&quot; after Devils Head a mountain summit in Alberta. The stadium opened on August 15, 1960, with a Canadian Football League game seeing the Stampeders fall to the Winnipeg Blue Bombers 38–23. George McMahon kicked the ceremonial kickoff with a ball held by university president Walter H. Johns. Defensive Tackle Don Luzzi scored the first touchdown on a fumble recovery.

McMahon Stadium was expanded multiple times, first in 1967 with 2,600 seats for a capacity of 22,136, then in 1973 adding 3,500 seats to 25,636, and in 1975 with a $1.125-million expansion to 32,454 in time for the 63rd Grey Cup. Additional expansions occurred in 1978 at a cost of $4.5 million to 33,386, and in 1987 saw major expansion and upgrades at a cost of $17 million with 11,000 theatre-style seats added with capacity raised to 38,205. Skyboxes were added in 1993, lowering capacity to 37,211, with more skyboxes added in 2000 to lower capacity again to 35,967. Throughout the stadium&#x27;s history temporary bleachers were employed for major events, including a record 60,000 at the opening and closing ceremonies for the 1988 Winter Olympics, and 50,000 for the 81st Grey Cup.

The university acquired complete ownership of the stadium and land in 1985 after the original financing was retired (1973) and a land exchange agreement was signed with the City of Calgary.

==McMahon Stadium Society==
The stadium is operated by the McMahon Stadium Society. The society was incorporated as a non-profit society in Alberta in 1960 with its objectives to operate, improve and manage the stadium and its facilities, for sports, recreation and other useful purposes.

Its membership consists of: two persons appointed by the University of Calgary; from the City of Calgary, the Commissioner of Finance and the Commissioner of Planning and Community Services; and two other persons appointed by the four other members. The two other members were appointed by the McMahon brothers until the financing guaranteed by the McMahons was retired in 1973.

The society operates the stadium under two leases and a four-year, three-month agreement with the City of Calgary, approved on January 7, 2007.

==Seating==

With permanent seating totalling 35,650, the stadium is the fifth-largest stadium in Canada. It was expanded in several stages from its original 22,000-seat capacity in 1960 to 38,205 in 1988.

More recent renovations in 2001 and 2005, in which luxury boxes replaced bleacher seating in the higher rows of the grandstands, reduced the capacity to 37,317 in 2001, and to its current 35,650 in 2005. In 2007, Calgary Stampeders president Ted Hellard proposed a further reduction of the stadium&#x27;s capacity by approximately 4,200 seats to accommodate further luxury boxes, with renovations to be underwritten with personal seat licenses.

For special events such as Grey Cup games, temporary bleachers have been built in the facility&#x27;s end zones. These seats accounted for a stadium attendance record 46,020 spectators at the 97th Grey Cup, between the Montreal Alouettes and Saskatchewan Roughriders on November 29, 2009.

==Field==
The stadium features an infilled artificial FieldTurf field installed in 2006. Previously, the stadium installed its first AstroTurf artificial playing surface in 1975 amid concerns the original grass field (which was in place from the stadium&#x27;s opening) would not withstand an intended increase in use of the stadium facilities by professional, amateur and recreational teams.

==Notable events==

===Football===
* The first football game took place at the stadium on August 15, 1960. The Winnipeg Blue Bombers beat the Calgary Stampeders 38–20.
* The CFL Grey Cup game was held at stadium in 1975, 1993, 2000, 2009, and 2019.
* The stadium hosted two CFL All-Star Games, in 1972 and 1978.

===Hockey===
It was the site of the 2011 NHL Heritage Classic regular season game between the Calgary Flames and Montreal Canadiens on February 20, 2011.

===Olympics===
The stadium was also used for the opening and closing ceremonies of the 1988 Winter Olympics, which required major expansion of its seating area.

===Concerts===
* the Festival Express tour in 1970, the Lilith Fair tours in 1997, 1998 and 2010 and Ozzy Osbourne and the Monsters of Rock on July 26, 2008.
* On August 13, 2009, ZZ Top and Aerosmith were to perform at the venue, but an injury that occurred to Aerosmith&#x27;s lead singer Steven Tyler led to the show&#x27;s cancellation.

===Other events===
*The stadium hosted a Billy Graham Crusade in 1981.
*Queen Elizabeth II conducted an inspection of the Canadian Army at the stadium during her visit in 1990.
*&quot;Nitro Circus Live&quot; came to the stadium in 2017.
*Filming for the coin toss incident scene in &quot;Rat Race&quot; with Cuba Gooding Jr. took place before a Stampeders game September 4, 2000.

==Gallery==
==See also==

*List of Canadian Football League stadiums
*CalgaryNEXT, a formerly proposed replacement for McMahon Stadium
*Calgary Stampeders, the CFL franchise that McMahon Stadium is most well known for hosting

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==

*Calgary Stampeders profile of McMahon Stadium.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1810204" start="0" end="15" title="McMahon Stadium" label="McMahon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="25" end="42" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="43" end="50" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="54" end="61" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067471" start="100" end="121" title="University of Calgary" label="University of Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189146" start="278" end="293" title="Crowchild Trail" label="Crowchild Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791261" start="338" end="349" title="Banff Trail (C-Train)" label="Banff Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022321" start="350" end="357" title="C-Train" label="C-Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019664" start="397" end="424" title="Calgary Dinos" label="University of Calgary Dinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019655" start="426" end="439" title="Calgary Colts" label="Calgary Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030267" start="447" end="478" title="Canadian Junior Football League" label="Canadian Junior Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711631" start="480" end="494" title="Calgary Gators" label="Calgary Gators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711631" start="523" end="546" title="Alberta Football League" label="Alberta Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026679" start="556" end="574" title="Calgary Stampeders" label="Calgary Stampeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="582" end="606" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825676" start="622" end="636" title="Mewata Stadium" label="Mewata Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="721" end="743" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976608" start="751" end="772" title="2011 Heritage Classic" label="2011 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="791" end="805" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="814" end="832" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9658" start="876" end="896" title="1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q589481" start="950" end="965" title="Olympic Stadium" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026679" start="1003" end="1021" title="Calgary Stampeders" label="Calgary Stampeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825676" start="1071" end="1090" title="Mewata Park Stadium" label="Mewata Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889343" start="1286" end="1299" title="Victoria Park, Calgary" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026682" start="1514" end="1545" title="Calgary Stampede and Exhibition" label="Calgary Stampede and Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067471" start="1629" end="1660" title="University of Calgary" label="University of Alberta (Calgary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194975" start="2016" end="2025" title="Jim Finks" label="Jim Finks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386142" start="2052" end="2063" title="Eric Bishop" label="Eric Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026672" start="2074" end="2088" title="Calgary Herald" label="Calgary Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190500" start="2234" end="2244" title="Rule Wynn and Rule" label="Peter Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373960" start="2264" end="2274" title="Red Dutton" label="Red Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q125355162" start="2504" end="2518" title="George L. McMahon" label="George McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488073" start="3127" end="3140" title="Frank M. McMahon" label="Frank McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22626043" start="3429" end="3440" title="Devils Head (Canada)" label="Devils Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117549" start="3581" end="3602" title="Winnipeg Blue Bombers" label="Winnipeg Blue Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965029" start="3696" end="3711" title="Walter H. Johns" label="Walter H. Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641970" start="4005" end="4018" title="63rd Grey Cup" label="63rd Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q852359" start="4236" end="4244" title="Skybox (sports)" label="Skyboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644551" start="4565" end="4578" title="81st Grey Cup" label="81st Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q852359" start="5845" end="5855" title="luxury box" label="luxury box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170623" start="6215" end="6236" title="personal seat license" label="personal seat license"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818731" start="6432" end="6445" title="97th Grey Cup" label="97th Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="6584" end="6593" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="6663" end="6672" title="AstroTurf" label="AstroTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117549" start="7035" end="7056" title="Winnipeg Blue Bombers" label="Winnipeg Blue Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026679" start="7066" end="7084" title="Calgary Stampeders" label="Calgary Stampeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="7102" end="7110" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641970" start="7139" end="7143" title="63rd Grey Cup" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644551" start="7145" end="7149" title="81st Grey Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645079" start="7151" end="7155" title="88th Grey Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818731" start="7157" end="7161" title="97th Grey Cup" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508475" start="7167" end="7171" title="107th Grey Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010681" start="7198" end="7215" title="CFL All-Star Game" label="CFL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976608" start="7273" end="7298" title="2011 NHL Heritage Classic" label="2011 NHL Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="7331" end="7345" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="7350" end="7368" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9658" start="7479" end="7499" title="1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q536608" start="7575" end="7591" title="Festival Express" label="Festival Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770211" start="7610" end="7621" title="Lilith Fair" label="Lilith Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="7655" end="7668" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q749420" start="7677" end="7693" title="Monsters of Rock" label="Monsters of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="7734" end="7740" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="7745" end="7754" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="7845" end="7857" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="7937" end="7957" title="Billy Graham Crusade" label="Billy Graham Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="7968" end="7986" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="8018" end="8031" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164112" start="8080" end="8097" title="Nitro Circus Live" label="Nitro Circus Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140605" start="8184" end="8192" title="Rat Race (film)" label="Rat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q136209" start="8204" end="8220" title="Cuba Gooding Jr." label="Cuba Gooding Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6565685" start="8304" end="8345" title="List of Canadian Football League stadiums" label="List of Canadian Football League stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q21413764" start="8347" end="8358" title="CalgaryNEXT" label="CalgaryNEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026679" start="8413" end="8431" title="Calgary Stampeders" label="Calgary Stampeders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772463" wikidata="Q1460484" url="?curid=772463" title="Tokyo International Marathon">
<text>The Tokyo International Marathon was a marathon for male elite runners held in Tokyo, Japan, from 1980 until 2006.

It actually consisted of two marathons - the &quot;Tokyo International Marathon&quot; which took place on even years, and &quot;Tokyo-New York Friendship International Marathon&quot; which took place on odd years. In the inaugural year, 1981, both marathons took place. However, because it was not possible to support two marathons a month apart in the same city, from 1982, the alternating format went into effect. The events were replaced in 2007 by the Tokyo Marathon, a race which is open to general runners of both sexes.

Between 1979 and 2008 there was also a Tokyo International Women&#x27;s Marathon for female elite runners in November.

==Winners==
Key: 


==See also==
* Tokyo Marathon

== External links ==
* Tokyo International Women&#x27;s Marathon official site at asahi.com
* Tokyo International Marathon at &quot;arrs.run&quot;
* Tokyo International Marathon at &quot;marathoninfo.free.fr&quot;
* Tokyo Marathon Write-Up III (registration, training, travel...etc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1460484" start="4" end="32" title="Tokyo International Marathon" label="Tokyo International Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="79" end="84" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="86" end="91" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191380" start="572" end="586" title="Tokyo Marathon" label="Tokyo Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476232" start="683" end="724" title="Tokyo International Women&amp;#x27;s Marathon" label="Tokyo International Women&amp;#x27;s Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191380" start="799" end="813" title="Tokyo Marathon" label="Tokyo Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q720503" start="897" end="906" title="Asahi Shimbun" label="asahi.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772468" wikidata="Q6694579" url="?curid=772468" title="Loyola Law School">
<text>Loyola Law School is the law school of Loyola Marymount University, a private Catholic university in Los Angeles, California. Loyola was established in 1920.

== Academics ==
Degrees offered include the Juris Doctor (JD); Master of Science in Legal Studies (MLS); Master of Laws (LLM); Master of Laws in Taxation; Juris Doctor/Master of Business Administration (JD/MBA); and Doctor of Juridical Science (JSD). Loyola has been an American Bar Association (ABA) approved law school since 1935. It is a member of the Association of American Law Schools (AALS).

U.S. News &amp; World Report ranked Loyola Law School 60th in its &quot;America&#x27;s Best Graduate Schools 2024&quot; feature.

Loyola Law School&#x27;s campus is located just west of downtown Los Angeles. It consists of an open central plaza surrounded by several contemporary buildings designed by Frank Gehry. Its library has a collection of nearly 560,000 volumes.

In fall 2022, Loyola’s faculty restructured the Evening Program to feature a hybrid schedule that requires an on-campus commitment of one night a week and one night remotely.

== Bar passage rate ==
Loyola&#x27;s first-time takers of the July 2023 California Bar Exam passed at a rate of 80% in comparison to the 76% average rate for all ABA-approved law schools.

== Post-graduation employment ==

=== Class of 2022 ===
Loyola&#x27;s required disclosures for the class of 2022 showed 93% were employed in 2023, with 80% in jobs requiring bar admission. Furthermore, 97% of employed alumni were in long-term employment.

=== Class of 2018 ===
According to Loyola&#x27;s official ABA-required disclosures for the class of 2018, 90% of graduates were employed within 10 months of graduation. About 85% were employed in full-time, long-term, bar-admission-required or JD-advantage jobs.
=== Class of 2017 ===
According to Loyola&#x27;s official ABA-required disclosures for the class of 2017, 87% of graduates were employed within 10 months of graduation. About 70% were employed in full-time, long-term, bar-admission-required or JD-advantage jobs.
=== Class of 2016 ===
According to Loyola&#x27;s official ABA-required disclosures for the class of 2016, 83% of graduates were employed within 10 months of graduation. About 72% were employed in full-time, long-term, bar-admission-required or JD-advantage jobs. The National Association for Law Placement created the term &quot;JD Advantage&quot; to &quot;describe a category of jobs for which bar passage is not required but for which a JD degree provides a distinct advantage.&quot;
=== Classes prior to 2016 ===
According to Loyola&#x27;s official ABA-required disclosures for the class of 2015, 87.7% of graduates were employed within 10 months of graduation. About 79.5% were employed in full-time, long-term, bar-admission-required or JD-advantage jobs.

According to Loyola&#x27;s official ABA-required disclosures for the class of 2014, 81.06% of graduates were employed within 10 months of graduation. About 71% were employed in full-time, long-term, bar-admission-required or JD-advantage jobs.

According to Loyola&#x27;s official 2013 ABA-required disclosures, 50.1% of the class of 2013 obtained full-time, long-term, JD-required employment nine months after graduation (excluding solo practitioners).

== Costs ==
The total cost of attendance (indicating the cost of tuition, fees, and living expenses) at Loyola Law School for the 2018–19 academic year is $89,326. The Law School Transparency estimated debt-financed cost of attendance for three years is $340,071.

== Programs and clinics ==

=== Loyola&#x27;s clinics ===
Loyola Law School&#x27;s 21 clinics include:

* Center for Conflict Resolution, which provides mediation, conciliation, and facilitation services, as well as conflict resolution training.
* Center for Juvenile Law and Policy, serves as a holistic law firm representing youths in juvenile court. A small group of students each year are selected for a year-long clinic, receiving trial advocacy and procedure training from its staff of attorneys and social workers. The CJLP includes the Juvenile Justice Clinic, the Juvenile Innocence &amp; Fair Sentencing Clinic and the Youth Justice Education Clinic. On Nov. 20, 2017, the Everychild Foundation announced that the CJLP was awarded its 2017 annual $1 million competitive grant to develop a program to train law students to represent foster youth involved in both dependency and delinquency courts.
* Loyola&#x27;s International Human Rights Clinic pursues human rights claims by citizens against countries, tribunals and more. Its work has included seeking to establish domestic violence as cause for refugee status. The clinic has more than two dozen matters pending before regional and international courts and tribunals.
* The Loyola Immigrant Justice Clinic has conducted more than 10,000 client consultations since its 2012 client-intake event.
* In Loyola&#x27;s Street Law Teaching Practicum, a legal non-profit that helps clients extricate themselves from abusive relationships, students teach survivors of domestic violence about essential legal skills useful to rebuilding their lives.
* The Workers&#x27; Rights Clinic partners Loyola students with workers&#x27; rights lawyers from Asian Americans Advancing Justice-Los Angeles (AAJLA) and the Wage Justice Center to provide holistic services to low-wage immigrant workers in the areas of wage theft, employment discrimination, labor trafficking and retaliation 

=== Other programs ===
* Civil Justice Program, which convenes periodic conferences, seminars, and presentations, promotes and publishes scholarly research, and initiates cross-disciplinary projects.
* Cybersecurity &amp; Data Privacy Law program, an interdisciplinary program run jointly with LMU&#x27;s Seaver College of Science &amp; Engineering, offers both lawyers and non-lawyers advanced skills training in compliance, incident response, risk assessment and more. Media reports have noted that the program will draw on the school&#x27;s traditional strengths in intellectual property, digital privacy and cybercrime, as well as its connections to nearby Silicon Beach. The program is the first of its kind on the west coast.
* Entertainment Law Practicum, which provides students with hands-on experience in the entertainment industry while earning units toward their degree.
* Journalist Law School, providing fellowships to journalists for a legal study practicum. The program has been cited as an important way for journalists to grow vital skills.
* The Master of Science in Legal Studies is a program for working professionals to develop critical thinking and essential legal skills. There are six specializations: Corporate Law, Criminal Justice, Cybersecurity &amp; Data Privacy, Entertainment Law, Intellectual Property and International Business Law.
* Public Interest Law Foundation (PILF), a student-run organization focused on getting students involved in public interest causes and raising money for public interest grants.

=== Law reviews ===
Loyola currently has three student-run and edited law reviews:
* Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review is a publication devoted to the advancement of legal scholarship. Publishing articles on all legal topics, the Review seeks to identify and advance new legal research by scholars, practitioners, and students. Authors have included former President Jimmy Carter and NPR Legal Affairs Nina Totenberg. The Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review celebrated its 50th anniversary in the 2017–18 academic year.
* Loyola of Los Angeles International &amp; Comparative Law Review is dedicated to the advancement of legal scholarship in the field of international law In April 2008, ILR held a symposium entitled Transformation in Iraq: From Ending a Modern War to Creating a Modern Peace. Using Iraq as a test case, the symposium sought to assess the legitimacy and viability of modern occupation law against contemporary realities and recent developments in moral and political thought.
* Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review publishes scholarly articles which frequently cover topics in constitutional law, sports law, intellectual property rights, communications regulation, antitrust law, employment law, contract law, corporate law, as well as computer and Internet law. ELR has also featured symposia on such topics as independent filmmaking, international rights of publicity, and the use of law and identity to script cultural production.

=== Trial advocacy and moot court ===
Loyola&#x27;s trial advocacy and moot court programs are ranked No. 4 nationally by U.S. News &amp; World Report&#x27;s &quot;2020 Best Graduate Schools&quot; rankings.

== Notable people ==

=== Faculty ===

==== Current faculty ====
*Simona Grossi, Professor and civil procedure expert
*Allan Ides, Professor (Loyola Law alumnus who served as U.S. Supreme Court Clerk)
*Justin Hughes, Professor, former senior advisor to the Under Secretary of Commerce in the Obama Administration
*Laurie Levenson, criminal law professor and media commentator
*Jessica Levinson, Professor, President, LA Ethics Commission
*Justin Levitt, Professor, former deputy assistant attorney general in the U.S. Justice Department, Civil Rights Division
*Yxta Maya Murray, legal scholar and novelist
*Cesare P.R. Romano, international law expert and human rights litigator

==== Former faculty ====
*Nina Appel, legal scholar and first female dean 

*Richard L. Hasen, election law expert
*Terry J. Hatter Jr., Senior United States district judge of the United States District Court for the Central District of California.
*Gerald Uelmen, part of the &quot;dream team&quot; assembled to defend O. J. Simpson

=== Staff ===

====Former staff====
*Gotabaya Rajapaksa, 8th President of Sri Lanka, who formerly worked at Loyola Law as a systems integrator and Unix Solaris administrator.

=== Alumni ===
== See also ==
*Law school rankings in the United States 
*List of law schools in the United States

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6694579" start="0" end="17" title="Loyola Law School" label="Loyola Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503531" start="25" end="35" title="Law school in the United States" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="39" end="66" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="78" end="86" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="101" end="112" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="203" end="215" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="222" end="239" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="243" end="256" title="Jurisprudence" label="Legal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="264" end="278" title="Master of Laws" label="Master of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="327" end="360" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033568" start="375" end="402" title="Doctor of Juridical Science" label="Doctor of Juridical Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="429" end="453" title="American Bar Association#Accreditation of U.S. law schools since 1923" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809608" start="514" end="549" title="Association of American Law Schools" label="Association of American Law Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="559" end="587" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="861" end="872" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603078" start="1179" end="1198" title="State Bar of California" label="California Bar Exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683816" start="1470" end="1483" title="Admission to practice law" label="bar admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174781" start="3317" end="3335" title="cost of attendance" label="cost of attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q382310" start="8572" end="8582" title="moot court" label="moot court"/>
<link wikidata="Q125874966" start="8775" end="8788" title="Simona Grossi" label="Simona Grossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730714" start="8828" end="8838" title="Allan Ides" label="Allan Ides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317706" start="8911" end="8924" title="Justin Hughes (law professor)" label="Justin Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501645" start="9023" end="9038" title="Laurie Levenson" label="Laurie Levenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187321" start="9086" end="9102" title="Jessica Levinson" label="Jessica Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017113" start="9148" end="9161" title="Justin Levitt" label="Justin Levitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062540" start="9270" end="9286" title="Yxta Maya Murray" label="Yxta Maya Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q26800665" start="9316" end="9334" title="Cesare P.R. Romano" label="Cesare P.R. Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q54810645" start="9415" end="9425" title="Nina Appel" label="Nina Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327186" start="9466" end="9482" title="Richard L. Hasen" label="Richard L. Hasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704556" start="9505" end="9524" title="Terry J. Hatter Jr." label="Terry J. Hatter Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2548931" start="9526" end="9532" title="Senior Status" label="Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="9533" end="9561" title="United States federal judge" label="United States district judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889764" start="9569" end="9636" title="United States District Court for the Central District of California" label="United States District Court for the Central District of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23696662" start="9639" end="9652" title="Gerald Uelmen" label="Gerald Uelmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="9709" end="9722" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538702" start="9761" end="9779" title="Gotabaya Rajapaksa" label="Gotabaya Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="9798" end="9807" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949116" start="9931" end="9971" title="Law school rankings in the United States" label="Law school rankings in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625169" start="9974" end="10014" title="List of law schools in the United States" label="List of law schools in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772472" wikidata="Q3246652" url="?curid=772472" title="School colors">
<text>School colors, also known as university colors or college colors, are the colors chosen by a school, academy, college, university or institute as part of its brand identity, used on building signage, web pages, branded apparel, and the uniforms of sports teams. They can promote connection to the school, known as &quot;school spirit&quot;, and help differentiate it from other institutions.

==Background==

The tradition of school colors appears to have started in England in the 1830s. The University of Cambridge chose Cambridge blue for the Boat Race against the University of Oxford in 1836, Westminster School have used pink as their color since a boat race against Eton School in 1837, and Durham University adopted palatinate purple for its MA hood some time before that degree was first awarded in 1838.

Many US colleges adopted school colors between 1890 and 1910. These were generally chosen to be distinctive, something that grew harder as more colors and color combinations were taken, although many Presbyterian colleges chose to imitate Princeton University&#x27;s black and orange. Some American schools have adopted one or more of the colors of red, white or blue from the national flag.

The most popular colors among US colleges ranked in the 2012 Forbes Top 50 or in the 2012–13 NCAA basketball or cross-country rankings were white, blue, red, black, and gold. These same five colors were the most popular five colors among colleges in each of the three rankings individually.

==Sports==
The use of colors to identify university sports teams dates back at least to the second Boat Race between Oxford and Cambridge in 1836. While most universities use the same color(s) for their sports and other university branding, Cambridge Blue is only one of twelve colors in the supporting palette for the university, not one of their six core colors. The University of Nottingham uses green and gold for its sports, but the rest of the university uses blue as its brand color. Roger Williams University changed its athletics colors in 2018 to match the university colors, in order to &quot;foster a strong, unified visual identity for RWU Athletics that is more cohesive with the overall University&quot;, stating that &quot;this combination will be powerful in strengthening RWU&#x27;s brand identity and awareness&quot;.

Most competitive teams keep two sets of uniforms in different colors so the two teams in a match can be distinguished. In some sports, such as American football, a darker color, often the school&#x27;s main color is emphasized on home uniforms, with the away team wearing a lighter color or white, while in other sports, such as basketball, a lighter color is used for the home team and a darker color for the away team. A third option used for some sports, such as association football, is that the home team gets to chose their color and the away team plays in a contrasting strip.

In addition, various groups that generate support for athletic teams, including cheerleaders and marching bands, wear uniforms with the colors of their school. At many private schools, or more traditional state schools, &quot;colors&quot; are awards presented for achievement in a sport.

===Nicknames===

The university color can sometimes become a nickname for the sports program. For example, the Palatinate (Durham) and the African Violet (Loughborough) in the UK, and the Harvard Crimson and Cornell Big Red in the US.

==Academic dress==
School colors are also used in the academic dress of many institutions. The first school color adopted by a university for its academic dress was palatinate purple at Durham University, England, some time between 1835 and 1838. Schools in the US that award an academic hood to their students and abide by the American Council on Education guidelines use hoods lined with their school colors and trimmed with velvet in a color indicating the discipline of the degree. Some US doctoral robes will also be in the colors of the university which granted the degree, departing from the Academic Costume Code color of black.

==Academic scarves==

Many British, Irish and Commonwealth universities and some American universities have an academic scarf in the university&#x27;s colors, usually long, woollen and patterned only with lengthwise stripes of varying widths. At collegiate universities such as the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Durham, and Lancaster, each college has its own colors and scarf. Other non-collegiate universities such as Glasgow and Newcastle have scarf colors for each faculty.

==Notable school colors==
* Cambridge blue – University of Cambridge
* Carolina blue – University of North Carolina
* Columbia blue – Columbia University
* Duke blue – Duke University
* Eton blue – Eton College
* Oxford blue – University of Oxford
* Palatinate – Durham University
* Yale blue – Yale University

==See also==
*Gang colors
*Colors (motorcycling)
*Sports uniform
*Varsity letter
*Couleur

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3246652" start="0" end="13" title="School colors" label="School colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246652" start="29" end="46" title="School colors" label="university colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246652" start="50" end="64" title="School colors" label="college colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="74" end="79" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="158" end="163" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432637" start="320" end="333" title="school spirit" label="school spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="493" end="516" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025363" start="523" end="537" title="Cambridge Blue (colour)" label="Cambridge blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="546" end="555" title="Boat Race" label="Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="568" end="588" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="598" end="616" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="673" end="684" title="Eton School" label="Eton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="698" end="715" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126798" start="724" end="741" title="Palatinate (colour)" label="palatinate purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1054" end="1074" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="1192" end="1205" title="Flag of the United States" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="1599" end="1608" title="Boat Race" label="Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1617" end="1623" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1628" end="1637" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928811" start="1741" end="1755" title="Cambridge Blue" label="Cambridge Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="1869" end="1893" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940116" start="1991" end="2016" title="Roger Williams University" label="Roger Williams University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2481" end="2498" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="2667" end="2677" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2804" end="2824" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="3003" end="3015" title="Cheerleading" label="cheerleaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="3020" end="3033" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579602" start="3149" end="3155" title="sporting colours" label="colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q618779" start="3166" end="3172" title="awards" label="awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316577" start="3335" end="3341" title="Team Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573151" start="3400" end="3415" title="Harvard Crimson" label="Harvard Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902329" start="3420" end="3435" title="Cornell Big Red" label="Cornell Big Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126798" start="3613" end="3630" title="Palatinate (colour)" label="palatinate purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="3634" end="3651" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349227" start="3727" end="3740" title="academic hood" label="academic hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842325" start="3776" end="3805" title="American Council on Education" label="American Council on Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349227" start="3942" end="3956" title="academic regalia" label="doctoral robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059201" start="4197" end="4211" title="academic scarf" label="academic scarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354859" start="4332" end="4355" title="Collegiate university" label="collegiate universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4384" end="4390" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4392" end="4401" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="4403" end="4409" title="Durham University" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q262854" start="4415" end="4424" title="Lancaster University" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="4511" end="4518" title="University of Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="4523" end="4532" title="Newcastle University" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025363" start="4598" end="4612" title="Cambridge Blue (colour)" label="Cambridge blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044918" start="4641" end="4654" title="Carolina blue" label="Carolina blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149928" start="4688" end="4701" title="Columbia blue" label="Columbia blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312932" start="4726" end="4735" title="Duke blue" label="Duke blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404819" start="4756" end="4765" title="Eton blue" label="Eton blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115244" start="4783" end="4794" title="Oxford Blue (colour)" label="Oxford blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126798" start="4820" end="4830" title="Palatinate (colour)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047350" start="4853" end="4862" title="Yale blue" label="Yale blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520942" start="4896" end="4907" title="Gang colors" label="Gang colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794704" start="4909" end="4930" title="Colors (motorcycling)" label="Colors (motorcycling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="4932" end="4946" title="Sports uniform" label="Sports uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916171" start="4948" end="4962" title="Varsity letter" label="Varsity letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136952" start="4964" end="4971" title="Couleur" label="Couleur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772474" wikidata="Q16827558" url="?curid=772474" title="Blakely v. Washington">
<text>Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004), held that, in the context of mandatory sentencing guidelines under state law, the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial prohibited judges from enhancing criminal sentences based on facts other than those decided by the jury or admitted by the defendant. The landmark nature of the case was alluded to by Justice Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor, who characterized the decision as a &quot;Number 10 earthquake&quot;.

==Background of the case==
Ralph Howard Blakely was born in 1936; he started his criminal career in 1954. Blakely married his wife in 1973. During the Blakely&#x27;s 20-plus-year marriage, Mr. Blakely was involved in 80 or more lawsuits covering irrigation water rights, as well as crimes of assault, shoplifting, and many others. When his wife filed for divorce in 1996, Blakely kidnapped her from her home in rural Grant County, Washington, at knifepoint, forced her into a wooden box in the back of his pickup truck, and took her to Montana. He ordered their 13-year-old son to follow in another car, threatening to shoot his estranged wife with a shotgun if he did not comply. En route to Montana, their son escaped in Moses Lake, Washington, and alerted the police. FBI agents and sheriffs arrested Blakely in Montana near the town of Three Forks.

Blakely was charged with first-degree kidnapping, but ultimately pleaded guilty to second-degree kidnapping involving domestic violence and the use of a firearm. If one is convicted of first-degree kidnapping of a minor in Washington state, one must register as a sex offender upon release from prison. To avoid this, Mr. Blakely negotiated a plea of a longer sentence while pleading guilty only to second-degree kidnapping. At the plea hearing, Blakely admitted the facts necessary to support these charges but no others. Under Washington law, second-degree kidnapping was a class B felony, punishable by a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison. However, under Washington&#x27;s mandatory sentencing guidelines, the judge was required to sentence Blakely to no less than 49 and no more than 53 months in prison, unless he had &quot;substantial and compelling&quot; reasons to impose a sentence outside that range. These reasons could not take into account factors used to compute the standard range for the sentence. If the judge did not articulate specific findings of fact and conclusions of law justifying an exceptional sentence, an appellate court would have to reverse the sentence.

Despite these requirements, the trial judge sentenced Blakely to 90 months, finding that Blakely had acted with &quot;deliberate cruelty.&quot; Blakely appealed, arguing that this unexpected additional factfinding on the judge&#x27;s part violated his Sixth Amendment right under &quot;Apprendi v. New Jersey&quot;, , to have the jury determine beyond a reasonable doubt all the facts legally necessary to his sentence. The Washington Court of Appeals rejected his claim, and the Washington Supreme Court declined to review it. Blakely then asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the case, and it agreed to do so.

In an unusual turn of events, the local county prosecutor, John Knodell III, asked Washington&#x27;s governor for permission to personally argue the case before the U.S. Supreme Court. During oral argument, Justice Scalia challenged Knodell for attempting to impose a prison sentence much longer than what state law authorized.

==Majority opinion==
In order to resolve this case, the Court had to apply the rule set forth in &quot;Apprendi v. New Jersey&quot;: &quot;Other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.&quot; This rule promoted the historic concerns of the jury-trial requirement — to subject all accusations against a criminal defendant to the &quot;unanimous suffrage of twelve of his equals and neighbors,&quot; and to confirm the existence of those facts essential to the punishment under the law. In this case, the finding of &quot;deliberate cruelty&quot; had not been submitted to a jury, and Blakely had not admitted acting with &quot;deliberate cruelty.&quot; The State contended that this was not problematic under &quot;Apprendi&quot; because the statutory maximum was 10 years, not 53 months. The Court read &quot;Apprendi&quot; as having held that the &quot;statutory maximum&quot; punishment was &quot;the maximum sentence [the judge] may impose &quot;without&quot; any additional findings.&quot; Accordingly, because &quot;deliberate cruelty&quot; was not an element of the crimes to which Blakely had pleaded guilty, the judge could not have used that fact to enhance Blakely&#x27;s sentence above the 53-month statutory maximum.

The Court&#x27;s &quot;commitment to &quot;Apprendi&quot; in this context reflects not just respect for longstanding precedent, but the need to give intelligible content to the right of jury trial. That right is no procedural formality, but a fundamental reservation of power in our constitutional structure.&quot; Just as citizens participate in the legislative process by electing representatives to the legislature, they participate in the judicial process by serving on juries. The &quot;Apprendi&quot; rule ensures that &quot;the judge&#x27;s authority to sentence derives wholly from the jury&#x27;s verdict. Without that restriction, the jury would not exercise the control that the Framers intended.&quot; Justice Scalia, as the author of the majority opinion, reasoned that those who reject &quot; Apprendi&quot; &quot;are resigned to one of two alternatives.&quot; First, a jury might be allowed only to pass on a small part of criminal activity, and then allow the judge to determine the punishment for the full range of conduct the government seeks to punish, as by letting the jury determine whether an accused murderer illegally possessed a firearm and then allowing the judge to impose a life sentence because the defendant had used the firearm to kill someone. Second, the legislature could establish judicial limits that were not &quot;too&quot; excessive, a necessarily subjective standard that would be hard for the Court to monitor and adjust as necessary. But this claim was not plausible, since the entire purpose of the jury-trial requirement was to check judicial authority.

Scalia insisted that the result of the case would not signal the end of determinate sentencing altogether. Rather, it merely required states to implement determinate sentencing in a manner consistent with the Sixth Amendment.

==Dissenting opinions==
===Justice O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s dissent===
Justice O&#x27;Connor feared dire consequences as a result of the Court&#x27;s ruling. Before Washington enacted its guidelines scheme, there was remarkable disparity among sentences meted out for similar offenses. Guidelines schemes have the effect of reducing this disparity by channeling the discretion of sentencing judges, who are told how to weigh what factors when computing a sentence. By enacting its sentencing guidelines, Washington did not intend to &quot;manipulate the statutory elements of criminal offenses or circumvent the procedural protections of the Bill of Rights. Rather, lawmakers were trying to bring some much-needed uniformity, transparency, and accountability to an otherwise &#x27;labyrinthine sentencing and corrections system that &#x27;lacked any principle except unbridled discretion.

Far from &quot;disregarding principles of due process and the jury trial right,&quot; O&#x27;Connor argued, the guidelines system honored them. Under the former sentencing scheme, a defendant like Blakely could have received anything from probation to 10 years in prison. Under the guidelines, he knows what range of sentence he might receive based on the conduct in which he engaged. &quot;Criminal defendants still face the same statutory maximum sentences, but they now at least know, much more than before, the real consequences of their actions.&quot; The guidelines also reduce disparities, particularly those based on race, which was a concern of some critics of the pre-guidelines system.

O&#x27;Connor foresaw a &quot;substantial constitutional tax&quot; in applying the &quot;Apprendi&quot; rule to sentencing guidelines systems. She protested that the traditional sentencing factors would now have to be charged in the indictment and proved to a jury. Bifurcated proceedings may become commonplace in criminal trials, so that a jury might not improperly consider prior bad acts during the guilt phase but properly consider them when it comes time for sentencing. And under some guidelines schemes, such as the federal sentencing guidelines, some facts relevant to sentencing, such as perjury and obstruction of justice, cannot be known until the trial is underway. In any event, all relevant sentencing facts may not be known prior to trial, since prosecutors typically wait until after a guilty verdict is obtained before gathering a full history of the defendant and examining the pertinent facts of the crime in order to recommend a sentence.

Finally, O&#x27;Connor disagreed with the majority&#x27;s interpretation of the &quot;statutory maximum&quot; in a guidelines context. She believed that, despite the mandatory nature of the guidelines, the &quot;statutory maximum&quot; remained (for Blakely) 10 years. For O&#x27;Connor, mere formalism dictated the conclusion that the &quot;statutory maximum&quot; was the greatest sentence the judge could legally impose based on the facts found by the jury or admitted by the defendant, and formalism was not a virtue she felt was worth vindicating. Furthermore, the effects of the decision were not confined to Washington, for every system involving guidelines sentencing, including the federal system, were constitutionally suspect.

===Justice Breyer&#x27;s dissent===
Justice Breyer envisioned three possible responses to the majority&#x27;s decision. First, legislatures could prescribe exactly the same sentence for all possible variations of a crime — an automatic five-year sentence for all robberies, for instance. This system has the &quot;intolerable&quot; effect of imposing the same sentence on people who commit their crimes in vastly different ways. Prosecutors would end up with the real control over defendants&#x27; sentences, since prosecutors ultimately make the decisions regarding how to charge the case. Second, states could return to indeterminate sentencing, in which the authorized range of punishment for crimes is very broad. But such systems were criticized (rightly, in Breyer&#x27;s view) for their excessive disparity and unfairness. There would be less &quot;reason&quot; in an indeterminate sentencing system than in the guidelines system Washington had adopted.

Third, the guidelines systems currently in force would remain, and the jury-trial requirement would be grafted onto them. Breyer predicted this could play out in one of two ways. First, legislatures might redefine crimes with highly specific detail — a robbery statute could enhance punishment based on the value of the goods taken, whether a gun was used, the seriousness of the threat used to obtain the goods, and so on. But the result of this system would be the same as the first option — prosecutors would end up with the discretion to determine the defendant&#x27;s sentence by manipulating the charge. Second, two juries could be assembled for each criminal trial, one for the guilt phase and one for the penalty phase. But this approach would be costly, as the experience with bifurcated trials in capital cases has shown.

Perhaps another solution would be to prescribe overly harsh sentences for crimes, and then define a list of mitigating factors, so that a judge could still retain the discretion to impose sentences (since the jury-trial requirement only applies to increases in the maximum sentence). But &quot;political impediments&quot; make vast revisions of any legislative scheme difficult to implement, and Breyer doubted that the mere fact that the Court ruled the Sixth Amendment demanded a legislative solution would impel many state legislatures to revamp their criminal codes in this way.

Finally, Breyer argued that legislatures needed to retain the constitutional authority to make the labelling decision between an &quot;element&quot; of a crime and a &quot;sentencing factor.&quot; Without the ability to do so, legislatures cannot create &quot;sentencing systems that are consistent with, and indeed may help to advance, the Constitution&#x27;s greater fairness goals.&quot; For Breyer, those greater fairness goals are achieved when a defendant&#x27;s real conduct drives the sentence he receives. Constitutional obstacles that stand in the way of this goal detract from the overall fairness of the criminal justice system.

==Effect on subsequent jurisprudence==
Although the Court expressly stated that it was not addressing the constitutionality of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, it was hard to resist the conclusion that the Guidelines as then constituted were in jeopardy in light of the tremendous similarity between the structure of the federal Guidelines and the Washington Guidelines at issue in &quot;Blakely&quot;. Six weeks after the decision in this case, the Court agreed to review two cases involving the constitutionality of sentence enhancements under the federal Guidelines — &quot;United States v. Booker&quot; and a companion case, &quot;United States v. Fanfan&quot; — an extraordinary step for the Court to take during the summer months. The Court ordered the briefs in &quot;Booker&quot; to be submitted during the month of September 2004, and scheduled oral argument in &quot;Booker&quot; for the first day of the 2004 Term, Monday, October 4. The Court&#x27;s opinion in &quot;Booker&quot; came out on January 12, 2005, and drastically changed the legal framework within which federal sentencing takes place.

Also, many states had to decide how &quot;Blakely&quot; applied to their sentencing systems. California, notably, concluded it did not affect its sentencing scheme in a case decided by the California Supreme Court called &quot;People v. Black&quot;. The U.S. Supreme Court later concluded that &quot;Blakely&quot; did apply in California, thereby overruling &quot;Black&quot; with its decision in &quot;Cunningham v. California&quot;.

==Subsequent developments==
One week before release of the opinion which invalidated Blakely&#x27;s sentence, John Knodell III, the Grant County prosecutor who lost the prior case before the U.S. Supreme Court, obtained authorization for a new warrant alleging Blakely solicited a planted prison informant for the murder of Blakely&#x27;s wife and daughter. Blakely is now serving 35 years in prison due to this separate case. Knodell personally prosecuted this second case against Blakely. Blakely made a claim of prosecutorial vindictiveness, asserting Knodell vindictively filed the criminal solicitation charge in retaliation for Blakely&#x27;s successful appeal of his sentence in Blakely, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S. Ct. 2531, 159 L. Ed. 2d 403, but the court of appeals rejected Blakely&#x27;s claim.

==See also==
*List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
*List of United States Supreme Court cases

==References==
==Further reading==
*WASHINGTON VS BLAKELY appeal denying legal papers for defense https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/memoranda/2018/12/03/18-35647.pdf

==External links==
*State sentencing commission responses to &quot;Blakely&quot;, compiled by the United States Sentencing Commission
*Transcript of the oral argument
*Amicus brief of the ACLU
*Response of the Department of Justice to &quot;Blakely&quot;
*Amicus brief of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
*Sentencing Law and Policy Blog by Prof. Douglas Berman, Ohio State University Moritz College of Law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3374310" start="73" end="93" title="mandatory sentencing" label="mandatory sentencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q64127645" start="111" end="120" title="state law" label="state law"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="126" end="141" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="153" end="163" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="175" end="180" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="197" end="205" title="Crime" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="206" end="215" title="Sentence (law)" label="sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="225" end="230" title="Question of fact" label="facts"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="263" end="267" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="287" end="296" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="356" end="380" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q281681" start="870" end="894" title="Grant County, Washington" label="Grant County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="989" end="996" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065526" start="1176" end="1198" title="Moses Lake, Washington" label="Moses Lake, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q966283" start="1293" end="1304" title="Three Forks, Montana" label="Three Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="2751" end="2766" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781695" start="2785" end="2807" title="Apprendi v. New Jersey" label="Apprendi v. New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971796" start="2923" end="2950" title="Washington Court of Appeals" label="Washington Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167888" start="2979" end="3003" title="Washington Supreme Court" label="Washington Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="5538" end="5552" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Justice Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="6718" end="6739" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Justice O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="9971" end="9985" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Justice Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111187" start="11838" end="11855" title="mitigating factor" label="mitigating factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889881" start="13087" end="13116" title="Federal Sentencing Guidelines" label="Federal Sentencing Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893229" start="13535" end="13558" title="United States v. Booker" label="United States v. Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893229" start="13593" end="13616" title="United States v. Fanfan" label="United States v. Fanfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893229" start="13937" end="13943" title="United States v. Booker" label="Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="14259" end="14283" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14297" end="14312" title="People v. Black" label="People v. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194345" start="14473" end="14497" title="Cunningham v. California" label="Cunningham v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245991" start="15322" end="15375" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542" label="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646863" start="15377" end="15418" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases" label="List of United States Supreme Court cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495435" start="15690" end="15725" title="United States Sentencing Commission" label="United States Sentencing Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="15974" end="15995" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772483" wikidata="Q5124334" url="?curid=772483" title="Civic Stadium">
<text>Civic Stadium may refer to:

* Civic Stadium (Eugene, Oregon) in Eugene, Oregon

Other places formerly called Civic Stadium:
* Oshawa Civic Auditorium in Oshawa, Ontario 
* Ivor Wynne Stadium in Hamilton, Ontario 
* Providence Park in Portland, Oregon
* War Memorial Stadium (Buffalo, New York) in Buffalo, New York</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5124335" start="31" end="61" title="Civic Stadium (Eugene, Oregon)" label="Civic Stadium (Eugene, Oregon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106581" start="127" end="150" title="Oshawa Civic Auditorium" label="Oshawa Civic Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978036" start="173" end="191" title="Ivor Wynne Stadium" label="Ivor Wynne Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q262291" start="216" end="231" title="Providence Park" label="Providence Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968482" start="254" end="294" title="War Memorial Stadium (Buffalo, New York)" label="War Memorial Stadium (Buffalo, New York)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772491" wikidata="Q248341" url="?curid=772491" title="Ignition">
<text>Ignition may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Firelighting, the human act of creating a fire for warmth, cooking and other uses
* Combustion, an exothermic chemical reaction between a fuel and an oxidant
* Fusion ignition, the point at which a nuclear fusion reaction becomes self-sustaining
* Ignition SCADA, software by Inductive Automation
* &quot;Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants&quot;, a book by John Drury Clark

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (video game), a top-down racing game for PC published in 1997
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (2001 film), directed by Yves Simoneau
* Ignition Entertainment, a computer video games company founded in 2002
* &quot;Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants&quot;, (1972) by John Drury Clark

===Music===
====Albums and EPs====
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (B1A4 album), 2012
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (Darude album), 2001
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (John Waite album), 1982
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (Mark Boals album), 1998
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (Nicky Romero album), 2014
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (The Offspring album), 1992
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (The Music Machine album)
* &quot;Ignition!&quot;, album by Brian Setzer, 2001
* &quot;Ignition&quot;, an album by American rapper X-Raided, 2007
* &quot;Ignition&quot; (EP), a 2012 EP by Unisonic

===Songs===
* &quot;Ignition&quot;, a 2001 song by Nebula from the album &quot;Charged&quot;
* &quot;Ignition (Remix)&quot;, a 2002 song by R. Kelly
* &quot;Ignition&quot;, a song by Trivium from the album &quot;The Crusade&quot;, 2006
* &quot;Ignition&quot;, a song by tobyMac from the album &quot;Portable Sounds&quot;, 2007–08
* &quot;Ignition&quot;, a 2013 song by Dutch DJ and producer Nicky Romero.

==Vehicles==
* Ignition system, a method for activating and controlling the combustion of fuel in an internal combustion engine.
* Ignition switch, a switch in the control system of a motor vehicle that activates the main electrical systems for the vehicle.

==Other uses==
* Ignition (event), a Burning Man regional event held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada

==See also==
* National Ignition Facility, fusion research facility at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California, US
* Ignition coil, an induction coil in an automobile&#x27;s ignition system that raises the battery&#x27;s voltage to the levels necessary for a spark to ignite the fuel
* High energy ignition, an electronic ignition system used by General Motors from 1974 to the mid-1980s
* Ignition interlock device, a method for preventing a vehicle&#x27;s engine starting if a driver is over the legal alcohol limit
* Ignite (disambiguation)
* Flammability limit
* Lower flammable limit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248341" start="0" end="8" title="Ignition" label="Ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192478" start="53" end="65" title="Firelighting" label="Firelighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="137" end="147" title="Combustion" label="Combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510277" start="213" end="228" title="Fusion ignition" label="Fusion ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029130" start="301" end="315" title="Ignition SCADA" label="Ignition SCADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q899453" start="434" end="450" title="John Drury Clark" label="John Drury Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411602" start="481" end="514" title="Ignition (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657613" start="566" end="598" title="Ignition (2001 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (2001 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657624" start="628" end="650" title="Ignition Entertainment" label="Ignition Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q899453" start="707" end="765" title="Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants" label="Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992983" start="838" end="871" title="Ignition (B1A4 album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (B1A4 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q360591" start="880" end="915" title="Ignition (Darude album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (Darude album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992978" start="924" end="963" title="Ignition (John Waite album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (John Waite album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108654" start="972" end="1011" title="Ignition (Mark Boals album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (Mark Boals album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q260214" start="1020" end="1061" title="Ignition (Nicky Romero album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (Nicky Romero album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45727" start="1070" end="1112" title="Ignition (The Offspring album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (The Offspring album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813515" start="1121" end="1167" title="Ignition (The Music Machine album)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (The Music Machine album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992981" start="1176" end="1185" title="Ignition!" label="Ignition!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817269" start="1273" end="1281" title="X-Raided" label="X-Raided"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283544" start="1290" end="1315" title="Ignition (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Ignition&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957745" start="1419" end="1426" title="Charged (Nebula album)" label="Charged"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510189" start="1441" end="1457" title="Ignition (Remix)" label="Ignition (Remix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385638" start="1552" end="1563" title="The Crusade (album)" label="The Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285400" start="1639" end="1654" title="Portable Sounds" label="Portable Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q260214" start="1731" end="1743" title="Nicky Romero" label="Nicky Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q248382" start="1761" end="1776" title="Ignition system" label="Ignition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993268" start="1877" end="1892" title="Ignition switch" label="Ignition switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636227" start="2022" end="2038" title="Ignition (event)" label="Ignition (event)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431014" start="2118" end="2144" title="National Ignition Facility" label="National Ignition Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q248339" start="2248" end="2261" title="Ignition coil" label="Ignition coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627909" start="2417" end="2437" title="High energy ignition" label="High energy ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416572" start="2521" end="2546" title="Ignition interlock device" label="Ignition interlock device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170331" start="2651" end="2674" title="Ignite (disambiguation)" label="Ignite (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899502" start="2677" end="2695" title="Flammability limit" label="Flammability limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069421" start="2698" end="2719" title="Lower flammable limit" label="Lower flammable limit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772494" wikidata="Q953156" url="?curid=772494" title="Węgrów">
<text>Węgrów (; ) is a town in eastern Poland with 12,796 inhabitants (2013), capital of Węgrów County in the Masovian Voivodeship.

== History ==

First mentioned in historical records in 1414, Węgrów received its city charter in 1441. Between 16th and 18th centuries it was an important centre for Reformation movements in Poland. It was a private town owned by various Polish nobles, including the Kiszka, Radziwiłł and Krasiński families, administratively located in the Podlaskie Voivodeship in the Lesser Poland Province of the Kingdom of Poland. The local Basilica of the Assumption houses the so-called Twardowski Mirror, a Renaissance mirror from the 16th century associated with the legend of Sir Twardowski.

After the Third Partition of Poland it was annexed by Austria in 1795. It was regained by Poles following the Austro–Polish War of 1809, and included within the short-lived Duchy of Warsaw. After the duchy&#x27;s dissolution, in 1815, it passed to so-called Congress Poland in the Russian Partition of Poland. It was the site of four battles between Polish insurgents and Russian troops during the Polish November Uprising of 1830–1831. During the January Uprising, on February 3, 1863, it was the site of the Battle of Węgrów, in which Polish insurgents defeated Russian troops and captured the town. From 1867 to 1912, Węgrów was part of Siedlce Governorate and from 1912 to 1915 of Łomża Governorate.

It became part of independent Poland again when the country regained its independence in 1918. From 1919 to 1938, Węgrów was part of Lublin Voivodeship and from 1938 to 1939 of Warsaw Voivodeship. During the Polish–Soviet War, on August 19, 1920, it was the site of a battle between Poles and the retreating Russian 16th Army.

Throughout most of its history, the town had a thriving Jewish community, present at least since the 16th century. It numbered about 6,000 in 1939. The entire community was exterminated during the Holocaust by the occupying forces of Nazi Germany, during which time the Nazis also created the Węgrów Ghetto.

The town was liberated from German occupation by the Polish underground Home Army in August 1944 during the Operation Tempest.

==Demographics==

==Economy==
Węgrów is home to Odlewnia dzwonów Braci Kruszewskich (Kruszewski Brothers Bell Foundry), founded in the 19th century, which has cast more than 2,500 bells that have been installed in Poland and other countries, even as distant as Rwanda and Papua New Guinea.

== People from Węgrów ==
* Krzysztof Filipek (born 1961), politician
* Piotr z Goniądza (–1573), religious leader and writer
* Stanisław Kosior (1889–1939), Soviet politician
* Samuel Rajzman (1902–1979), Holocaust survivor and court witness

==References==
==External links==
*Official homepage of Węgrów 
* Jewish Community in Węgrów on Virtual Shtetl
*Górczyk Wojciech Jerzy, BRIEF HISTORY OF THE CHURCH AND FORMER REFORMATI ORDER&#x27;S MONASTERY IN WĘGRÓW, Węgrów 2020.
*Górczyk Wojciech Jerzy, The Former Reformati Order’s Monasteries Route, Węgrów 2020.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q953156" start="0" end="6" title="Węgrów" label="Węgrów"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="33" end="39" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939532" start="83" end="96" title="Węgrów County" label="Węgrów County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="104" end="124" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="294" end="305" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878951" start="336" end="348" title="private town" label="private town"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="366" end="379" title="szlachta" label="Polish nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304142" start="395" end="401" title="Kiszka family" label="Kiszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q260388" start="403" end="412" title="Radziwiłł family" label="Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q450500" start="417" end="426" title="Krasiński family" label="Krasiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662340" start="469" end="490" title="Podlaskie Voivodeship (1513–1795)" label="Podlaskie Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763782" start="498" end="520" title="Lesser Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Lesser Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903045" start="626" end="637" title="Renaissance in Poland" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q551320" start="697" end="711" title="Sir Twardowski" label="Sir Twardowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="724" end="749" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="768" end="775" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q306150" start="824" end="841" title="Austro–Polish War" label="Austro–Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="887" end="902" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="972" end="987" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="995" end="1012" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="1119" end="1136" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="1162" end="1178" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024053" start="1224" end="1240" title="Battle of Węgrów" label="Battle of Węgrów"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473698" start="1354" end="1373" title="Siedlce Governorate" label="Siedlce Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479621" start="1399" end="1416" title="Łomża Governorate" label="Łomża Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121840" start="1552" end="1570" title="Lublin Voivodeship (1919–1939)" label="Lublin Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025277" start="1596" end="1614" title="Warsaw Voivodeship (1919–1939)" label="Warsaw Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="1627" end="1644" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574892" start="1735" end="1744" title="16th Army (RSFSR)" label="16th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1940" end="1953" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1981" end="1993" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006234" start="2040" end="2053" title="Węgrów Ghetto" label="Węgrów Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="2084" end="2101" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="2128" end="2137" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="2164" end="2181" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="2445" end="2451" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="2456" end="2472" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440129" start="2502" end="2519" title="Krzysztof Filipek" label="Krzysztof Filipek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550818" start="2546" end="2562" title="Piotr z Goniądza" label="Piotr z Goniądza"/>
<link wikidata="Q725267" start="2602" end="2618" title="Stanisław Kosior" label="Stanisław Kosior"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388787" start="2652" end="2666" title="Samuel Rajzman" label="Samuel Rajzman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772495" wikidata="Q261229" url="?curid=772495" title="Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy">
<text>The Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) was an 80/20 joint project of NASA and the German Aerospace Center (DLR) to construct and maintain an airborne observatory. NASA awarded the contract for the development of the aircraft, operation of the observatory and management of the American part of the project to the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) in 1996. The DSI (German SOFIA Institute; ) managed the German parts of the project which were primarily science-and telescope-related. SOFIA&#x27;s telescope saw first light on May 26, 2010. SOFIA was the successor to the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. During 10-hour, overnight flights, it observed celestial magnetic fields, star-forming regions, comets, nebulae, and the Galactic Center.

Science flights have now concluded, after the landing of the 921st and last flight in the early morning of September 29, 2022. The Boeing 747SP used to carry the telescope has been preserved and put on display at the Pima Air &amp; Space Museum near Tucson, Arizona.

== Facility ==
SOFIA was based on a Boeing 747SP, a factory shortened version of the wide-body aircraft that had been modified to include a large door in the aft fuselage that could be opened in flight to allow a diameter reflecting telescope access to the sky. This telescope was designed for infrared astronomy observations in the stratosphere at altitudes of about . SOFIA&#x27;s flight capability allowed it to rise above almost all of the water vapor in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, which blocks some infrared wavelengths from reaching the ground. At the aircraft&#x27;s cruising altitude, 85% of the full infrared range was available. The aircraft could also travel above almost any point on the Earth&#x27;s surface, allowing observation from the northern and southern hemispheres.

Observing flights were flown three or four nights a week. The SOFIA Observatory was based at NASA&#x27;s Armstrong Flight Research Center at Palmdale Regional Airport, California, while the SOFIA Science Center was based in Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California.

=== The telescope ===

SOFIA uses a reflector telescope, which has an oversized, diameter primary mirror, as was common with most large infrared telescopes. The optical system uses a Cassegrain reflector design with a parabolic primary mirror and a remotely configurable hyperbolic secondary. In order to fit the telescope into the fuselage, the primary was shaped to an f-number as low as 1.3, while the resulting optical layout has an f-number of 19.7. A flat, tertiary, dichroic mirror was used to deflect the infrared part of the beam to the Nasmyth focus where it can be analyzed. An optical mirror located behind the tertiary mirror was used for a camera guidance system.

The telescope looked out of a large door in the port side of the fuselage near the airplane&#x27;s tail, and initially carried nine instruments for infrared astronomy at wavelengths from 1–655 micrometres (μm) and high-speed optical astronomy at wavelengths from 0.3 to 1.1 μm. The main instruments were FLITECAM, a near-infrared camera covering 1–5 μm; FORCAST, covering the mid-infrared range of 5–40 μm; and HAWC, which spans the far-infrared in the range 42–210 μm. The other four instruments include an optical photometer and infrared spectrometers with various spectral ranges. During its time in service, SOFIA&#x27;s telescope was by far the largest placed in an aircraft. For each mission one interchangeable science instrument was attached to the telescope. Two groups of general-purpose instruments were available. In addition, an investigator can also design and build a special purpose instrument. On April 17, 2012, two upgrades to HAWC were selected by NASA to increase the field of view with new transition edge sensor bolometer detector arrays and to add the capability of measuring the polarization of dust emission from celestial sources.

The open cavity housing the telescope was exposed to high-speed turbulent winds. In addition, the vibrations and motions of the aircraft introduce observing difficulties. The telescope was designed to be very lightweight, with a honeycomb shape milled into the back of the mirror and polymer composite material used for the telescope assembly. The mount includes a system of bearings in pressurized oil to isolate the instrument from vibration. Tracking was achieved through a system of gyroscopes, high-speed cameras, and magnetic torque motors to compensate for motion, including vibrations from airflow and the aircraft engines. The telescope cabin was cooled prior to aircraft takeoff to ensure that the telescope matched the external temperature it would experience at altitude to prevent thermally induced shape changes. Prior to landing, the compartment was flooded with nitrogen gas to prevent condensation of moisture on the chilled optics and instruments.

DLR was responsible for the entire telescope assembly and design, along with two of the nine scientific instruments used with the telescope; NASA was responsible for the aircraft. The manufacturing of the telescope was subcontracted to the European industry. The telescope was German-made; the primary mirror was cast by Schott AG in Mainz, Germany with lightweight improvements, with grinding and polishing completed by the French company SAGEM-REOSC. The secondary silicon carbide-based mirror mechanism was manufactured by the Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology (CSEM). A reflective surface coating was reapplied to the primary mirror 1–2 times per year, first at a contract facility in Louisiana, until the consortium established its own coating facility at Moffett Field.

=== The SOFIA aircraft ===


The SOFIA aircraft was a modified Boeing 747SP. Boeing developed the SP or &quot;Special Performance&quot; version of the 747 for ultra long range flights, modifying the design of the 747-100 by removing sections of the fuselage and heavily modifying others to reduce weight, thus allowing the 747SP to fly higher, faster and farther non-stop than any other 747 model of the time.

Boeing assigned serial number 21441 to the airframe that would eventually become SOFIA; it was the 306th 747 to be built. The first flight of this aircraft was on April 25, 1977, and Boeing delivered the aircraft to Pan American World Airways on May 6, 1977. The aircraft received its first aircraft registration, N536PA and Pan Am placed the aircraft into commercial passenger service. Pan Am named the aircraft in honor of aviator Charles Lindbergh. At the invitation of Pan Am, Lindbergh&#x27;s widow, Anne, christened the aircraft &quot;Clipper Lindbergh&quot; on May 20, 1977, the 50th anniversary of the beginning of her husband&#x27;s historic flight from New York to Paris in 1927.

United Airlines purchased the plane from Pan Am on February 13, 1986, and the aircraft received a new aircraft registration, N145UA. The aircraft also received a new livery without Lindbergh&#x27;s name. The aircraft remained in service until December 1995, when United Airlines placed it into storage near Las Vegas.

On April 30, 1997, the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) purchased the aircraft from United for use as an airborne observatory. On October 27, 1997, NASA purchased the aircraft from USRA. NASA conducted a series of &quot;baseline&quot; flight tests that year, prior to any heavy modification of the aircraft by E-Systems (later Raytheon Intelligence and Information Systems then L-3 Communications Integrated Systems of Waco, Texas). To ensure successful modification, Raytheon purchased a section from another 747SP, registration number N141UA, which was being scrapped in early 1998 to use as a full-size mock-up.

Commencing work in 1998, Raytheon designed and installed a tall (arc length) by wide door in the aft left side of the aircraft&#x27;s fuselage that could be opened in-flight to give the telescope access to the sky. The telescope was mounted in the aft end of the fuselage behind a pressurized bulkhead. The telescope&#x27;s focal point is located at a science instruments suite in the pressurized, center section of the fuselage, requiring part of the telescope to pass through the pressure bulkhead. In the center of the aircraft was the mission control and science operations section, while the forward section hosts the education and public outreach area. The open fuselage has no significant influence on the aerodynamics and flight qualities of the airplane.

At NASA&#x27;s invitation, Lindbergh&#x27;s grandson, Erik Lindbergh, re-christened the aircraft as &quot;Clipper Lindbergh&quot;, on May 21, 2007, the 80th anniversary of the completion of Charles Lindbergh&#x27;s trans-Atlantic flight.

During December 2012 the aircraft received a glass cockpit flight-deck upgrade along with new avionics systems and software updates.

On April 28, 2022, the project announced it was retiring the aircraft as of September 30, 2022. Its 921st and last mission was over the North Pacific Ocean off the coast of California, taking off from Palmdale and returning there to land 7 hours and 57 minutes later at 04:41 PDT (11:41 UTC).

The final flight of the aircraft occurred on December 13, 2022, when the aircraft departed from Palmdale and landed at Davis–Monthan Air Force Base, to be donated to the Pima Air &amp; Space Museum located near Tucson, Arizona, where it has been placed on display.

== Project development ==

The first use of an aircraft for performing infrared observations was in 1965 when Gerard P. Kuiper used NASA&#x27;s Galileo Airborne Observatory to study Venus. Three years later, Frank J. Low used the Ames Learjet Observatory for observations of Jupiter and nebulae. In 1969, planning began for mounting a telescope on an airborne platform. The goal was to perform astronomy from the stratosphere, where there was a much lower optical depth from water-vapor-absorbed infrared radiation. This project, named the Kuiper Airborne Observatory, was dedicated on May 21, 1975. The telescope was instrumental in numerous scientific studies, including the discovery of the ring system around the planet Uranus.

The proposal for a larger aircraft-mounted telescope was officially presented in 1984 and called for a Boeing 747 to carry a three-meter telescope. The preliminary system concept was published in 1987 in a &quot;Red Book&quot;. It was agreed that Germany would contribute 20% of the total cost and provide the telescope. However, the reunification of Germany and budget cuts at NASA led to a five-year slide in the project. NASA then contracted the work out to the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), and in 1996, NASA and the German Aerospace Center (DLR) signed a memorandum of understanding to build and operate SOFIA.

The SOFIA telescope&#x27;s primary mirror was 2.5 meters in diameter and was manufactured of Zerodur, a glass-ceramic composite produced by Schott AG that has almost zero thermal expansion. REOSC, the optical department of the SAGEM Group in France, reduced the weight by milling honeycomb-shaped pockets out of the back. They finished polishing the mirror on December 14, 1999, achieving an accuracy of 8.5 nanometres (nm) over the optical surface. The hyperbola-shaped secondary mirror was made of silicon carbide,
with polishing completed by May 2000.
During 2002, the main components of the telescope were assembled in Augsburg, Germany. These consisted of the primary mirror assembly, the main optical support and the suspension assembly. After successful integration tests were made to check the system, the components were shipped to Waco, Texas on board an Airbus Beluga aircraft. They arrived on September 4, 2002. SOFIA completed its first ground-based &quot;on-sky&quot; test on August 18–19, 2004 by taking an image of the star Polaris.

The project was further delayed in 2001 when three subcontractors tasked with development of the telescope door went out of business in succession. United Airlines also entered bankruptcy protection and withdrew from the project as operator of the aircraft. The telescope was transported from Germany to the United States where it was installed in the airframe in 2004 and initial observations were made from the ground.

In February 2006, after cost increases from $185 million to $330 million,
NASA placed the project &quot;under review&quot; and suspended funding by removing the project from its budget. On June 15, 2006, SOFIA passed the review when NASA concluded that there were no insurmountable technical or programmatic challenges to the continued development of SOFIA.

The maiden flight of SOFIA took place on April 26, 2007, at the L-3 Integrated Systems&#x27; (L-3 IS) Waco, Texas facility. After a brief test program in Waco to partially expand the flight envelope and perform post-maintenance checks, the aircraft was moved on May 31, 2007, to NASA&#x27;s Armstrong Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base. The first phase of loads and flight testing was used to check the aircraft characteristics with the external telescope cavity door closed. This phase was successfully completed by January
2008 at NASA- Armstrong Flight Research Center.

On December 18, 2009, the SOFIA aircraft performed the first test flight in which the telescope door was fully opened. This phase lasted for two minutes of the 79-minute flight. SOFIA&#x27;s telescope saw first light on May 26, 2010, returning images showing M82&#x27;s core and heat from Jupiter&#x27;s formation escaping through its cloud cover. Initial &quot;routine&quot; science observation flights began in December 2010 and the observatory was slated for full capability by 2014 with about 100 flights per year.

Since 2011, SOFIA missions were chosen amongst several proposals. Successful missions were scheduled according to yearly cycles, with the first cycle corresponding to 2013. During each cycle, the aircraft and instruments were shared between a few different missions.

The astrophysics decadal survey for the 2020s recommended that NASA end SOFIA operations by 2023. &quot;The survey committee has significant concerns about SOFIA, given its high cost and modest scientific productivity,&quot; the report stated.

== Scientific research and observations ==

The primary science objectives of SOFIA were to study the composition of planetary atmospheres and surfaces; to investigate the structure, evolution and composition of comets; to determine the physics and chemistry of the interstellar medium; and to explore the formation of stars and other stellar objects. While SOFIA aircraft operations were managed by the NASA Armstrong Flight Research Center in Palmdale, California, the NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, was home to the SOFIA Science Center which managed mission planning for the program. On June 29, 2015, the dwarf planet Pluto passed between a distant star and the Earth producing a shadow on the Earth near New Zealand that allowed SOFIA to study the atmosphere of Pluto.
In early 2016, SOFIA detected atomic oxygen in the Atmosphere of Mars for the first time in 40 years. In early 2017, its observations of 1 Ceres in the mid-infrared helped determine the large asteroid/dwarf planet was coated with a layer of asteroid dust from other bodies.
In July 2017, SOFIA observed a star occultation of the distant Kuiper belt object 486958 Arrokoth while ground based observatories failed this observation, preparing the probe New Horizons visiting this asteroid.

Sofia has been used also for Astrobiology missions, focusing amongst other goals on the observation of new planetary systems and the detection of complex molecules.

In October 2020, astronomers reported detecting molecular water on the sunlit surface of the Moon by several independent spacecraft, including the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA).

Between January and May of 2022, using the FORCAST instrument aboard SOFIA, the detection of water on asteroids was performed for the first time. The discovery was described in a paper published in February 2024.

== Airborne Astronomy Ambassadors Program (AAA) ==
SOFIA was designed from the beginning to support a robust public education and outreach effort that can, during the planned 20-year mission lifetime, directly involve more than a thousand educators of all types — K-12 teachers, science museum and planetarium educators, and public outreach specialists — as partners with the scientist, and reach hundreds of thousands of people across the nation through these educators.

The &quot;SOFIA Six&quot; were the first set of educators selected in the United States to participate in SOFIA&#x27;s AAA &quot;Pilot&quot; program, and flew during the summer of 2011. Germany had a separate application process, but also flew two teachers that summer. Educator teams plus alternates were selected in a highly competitive application process. NASA and DLR (German Space Agency) selected educators who came from a variety of backgrounds, and their institutions included a school for the deaf, an alternative education site (developmentally challenged), highly underserved student populations, rural schools, and a Native American school. Since the &quot;Pilot&quot; cycle the AAA program has flown over 20 teams and was now in its Cycle 5 phase.

&quot;Star Trek&quot; actress Nichelle Nichols flew aboard SOFIA on September 17, 2015.

== See also ==
* List of largest infrared telescopes
* Kuiper Airborne Observatory
* Infrared astronomy
** Far-infrared astronomy

== References ==
== External links ==

* SOFIA Science Center, USRA &amp; DSI
* SOFIA mission, NASA
* SOFIA Mission Profile by Solar System Exploration at NASA
* DLR&#x27;s SOFIA Website 
* Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics at University of Chicago
* SOFIA: Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy, Moonfest 2009 by NASA

=== Multimedia ===
* SOFIA Photo Collection, Dryden Flight Research Center
* SOFIA Movie Collection, Dryden Flight Research Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261229" start="4" end="52" title="Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy" label="Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261229" start="54" end="59" title="Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy" label="SOFIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="91" end="95" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="104" end="127" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875651" start="163" end="183" title="airborne observatory" label="airborne observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894455" start="335" end="374" title="Universities Space Research Association" label="Universities Space Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306940" start="545" end="556" title="first light (astronomy)" label="first light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501126" start="605" end="632" title="Kuiper Airborne Observatory" label="Kuiper Airborne Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="738" end="744" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="755" end="770" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421517" start="904" end="916" title="Boeing 747SP" label="Boeing 747SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062422" start="990" end="1017" title="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="1023" end="1038" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421517" start="1077" end="1089" title="Boeing 747SP" label="Boeing 747SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="1126" end="1144" title="wide-body aircraft" label="wide-body aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="1203" end="1211" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="1263" end="1283" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="1335" end="1353" title="infrared astronomy" label="infrared astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="1374" end="1386" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="1936" end="1968" title="Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="Armstrong Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456919" start="1972" end="1997" title="Palmdale Regional Airport" label="Palmdale Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="2055" end="2075" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="2144" end="2163" title="reflector telescope" label="reflector telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048295" start="2291" end="2311" title="Cassegrain reflector" label="Cassegrain reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="2326" end="2335" title="Parabolic reflector" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2379" end="2389" title="hyperbolic reflector" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q862169" start="2479" end="2487" title="f-number" label="f-number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195643" start="2581" end="2596" title="Dichroism" label="dichroic mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q899003" start="2654" end="2667" title="Nasmyth telescope" label="Nasmyth focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="2852" end="2860" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="2935" end="2953" title="infrared astronomy" label="infrared astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="2957" end="2967" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2980" end="2990" title="micrometre" label="micrometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q913588" start="3012" end="3029" title="optical astronomy" label="optical astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="3033" end="3043" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q690868" start="3303" end="3313" title="photometer" label="photometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="3327" end="3339" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834409" start="3799" end="3821" title="transition edge sensor" label="transition edge sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q852212" start="3822" end="3831" title="bolometer" label="bolometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="3891" end="3903" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q565558" start="5234" end="5243" title="Schott AG" label="Schott AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347160" start="5353" end="5358" title="SAGEM" label="SAGEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q869759" start="5443" end="5491" title="Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology" label="Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565247" start="5689" end="5702" title="Moffett Federal Airfield" label="Moffett Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421517" start="5768" end="5780" title="Boeing 747SP" label="Boeing 747SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="6332" end="6358" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="6407" end="6428" title="aircraft registration" label="aircraft registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="6549" end="6566" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q443096" start="6621" end="6625" title="Anne Morrow Lindbergh" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="6807" end="6822" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894455" start="7149" end="7188" title="Universities Space Research Association" label="Universities Space Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228437" start="7450" end="7459" title="E-Systems" label="E-Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228437" start="7467" end="7512" title="Raytheon Intelligence and Information Systems" label="Raytheon Intelligence and Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781428" start="7518" end="7536" title="L-3 Communications" label="L-3 Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="7559" end="7570" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933427" start="7746" end="7753" title="mock-up" label="mock-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="8080" end="8091" title="Focus (optics)" label="focal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038173" start="8805" end="8818" title="glass cockpit" label="glass cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q847142" start="9170" end="9173" title="Pacific Time Zone" label="PDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="9181" end="9184" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177897" start="9307" end="9335" title="Davis–Monthan Air Force Base" label="Davis–Monthan Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062422" start="9358" end="9385" title="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="9399" end="9414" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="9564" end="9580" title="Gerard P. Kuiper" label="Gerard P. Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875651" start="9598" end="9626" title="Galileo Airborne Observatory" label="Galileo Airborne Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443510" start="9662" end="9674" title="Frank J. Low" label="Frank J. Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875651" start="9689" end="9708" title="Learjet Observatory" label="Learjet Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="9867" end="9879" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q890809" start="9910" end="9923" title="optical depth" label="optical depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="9950" end="9958" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501126" start="9994" end="10021" title="Kuiper Airborne Observatory" label="Kuiper Airborne Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="10290" end="10300" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="10726" end="10749" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q191967" start="10915" end="10922" title="Zerodur" label="Zerodur"/>
<link wikidata="Q565558" start="10962" end="10971" title="Schott AG" label="Schott AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="10993" end="11010" title="Coefficient of thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347160" start="11049" end="11054" title="SAGEM" label="SAGEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="11230" end="11239" title="nanometre" label="nanometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="11322" end="11337" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="11445" end="11453" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="11663" end="11674" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486" start="11687" end="11700" title="Airbus Beluga" label="Airbus Beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="11862" end="11869" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="12020" end="12035" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="12944" end="12976" title="Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="Armstrong Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="12980" end="13002" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306940" start="13446" end="13457" title="first light (astronomy)" label="first light"/>
<link wikidata="Q14026" start="13500" end="13503" title="Messier 82" label="M82"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="13530" end="13537" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="14391" end="14397" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="14401" end="14411" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="14486" end="14491" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="14511" end="14518" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="14523" end="14532" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="14540" end="14559" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="14593" end="14597" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="14750" end="14770" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="14908" end="14920" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="14921" end="14926" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="14965" end="14970" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="15008" end="15019" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628984" start="15052" end="15071" title="atmosphere of Pluto" label="atmosphere of Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q428653" start="15103" end="15116" title="atomic oxygen" label="atomic oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q218860" start="15124" end="15142" title="Atmosphere of Mars" label="Atmosphere of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="15210" end="15217" title="1 Ceres" label="1 Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="15383" end="15394" title="occultation" label="occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="15410" end="15428" title="Kuiper belt object" label="Kuiper belt object"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325885" start="15429" end="15444" title="486958 Arrokoth" label="486958 Arrokoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48461" start="15523" end="15535" title="New Horizons" label="New Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="15775" end="15790" title="Water" label="molecular water"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="15820" end="15824" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16411" end="16415" title="K-12#K–14, K–16, K–18 and K–20" label="K-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="17389" end="17398" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q254038" start="17413" end="17429" title="Nichelle Nichols" label="Nichelle Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625015" start="17489" end="17524" title="List of largest infrared telescopes" label="List of largest infrared telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501126" start="17527" end="17554" title="Kuiper Airborne Observatory" label="Kuiper Airborne Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="17557" end="17575" title="Infrared astronomy" label="Infrared astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434481" start="17579" end="17601" title="Far-infrared astronomy" label="Far-infrared astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894455" start="17666" end="17670" title="Universities Space Research Association" label="USRA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17677" end="17680" title="Deutsches SOFIA Institut" label="DSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="17698" end="17702" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="17758" end="17762" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="17895" end="17916" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="17993" end="17997" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="18044" end="18073" title="Dryden Flight Research Center" label="Dryden Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="18100" end="18129" title="Dryden Flight Research Center" label="Dryden Flight Research Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772503" wikidata="Q654559" url="?curid=772503" title="Howell E. Jackson">
<text>Howell Edmunds Jackson (April 8, 1832 – August 8, 1895) was an American attorney, politician, and jurist who served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1893 until his death in 1895. His brief tenure on the Supreme Court is most remembered for his opinion in &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot;, in which Jackson argued in dissent that a federal income tax was constitutional. Republican President Benjamin Harrison appointed Jackson, a Democrat, to the Court. His rulings demonstrated support for broad federal power, a skepticism of states&#x27; rights and an inclination toward judicial restraint. Jackson&#x27;s unexpected death after only two years of service prevented him from having a substantial impact on American history.

Born in Paris, Tennessee, in 1832, Jackson earned a law degree from Cumberland Law School and was admitted to the bar in 1856. He briefly practiced law in Jackson before moving to Memphis, Tennessee, in 1857. Although he had initially opposed secession, he took a position as a receiver of sequestered property in the Confederate civil service after the Civil War broke out and later made several unsuccessful attempts to secure a judicial commission in the Confederate Army. He returned to the practice of law after the war, but he also took an interest in politics. After an unsuccessful run for the Tennessee Supreme Court, he was elected to a seat in the Tennessee House of Representatives in 1880. When the legislature deadlocked over the selection of a U.S. Senator, Jackson was selected as a consensus candidate, garnering bipartisan support. Despite being a loyal Democrat, he was held in high regard by fellow officeholders of both political parties, including Democrat Grover Cleveland and Republican Benjamin Harrison. When Cleveland became president, he appointed Jackson to a seat on the federal circuit court for the Sixth Circuit. While on the circuit court, he sided with businesses in a major antitrust dispute and supported an expansive view of constitutional freedoms in a civil rights case.

Shortly after President Harrison – Jackson&#x27;s former Senate colleague – lost reelection, Supreme Court Justice Lucius Q. C. Lamar died. Harrison wanted to select a Republican replacement for Lamar, but he realized Democratic senators would likely stall the nomination until he left office. He chose Jackson, whom he viewed both as a close friend and a well-regarded jurist. The Senate unanimously confirmed Jackson just before Harrison left office in 1893. Not long after assuming office, Jackson developed tuberculosis, preventing him from playing a major role in Supreme Court affairs. He authored only forty-six opinions, many of which were in patent disputes or other insignificant cases. He left Washington hoping that a better climate would aid his health but returned to the capital after the remaining eight justices split 4–4 in &quot;Pollock&quot;. Yet Jackson ended up dissenting in the landmark income tax case, likely because of a change in another justice&#x27;s vote. While Jackson&#x27;s opinion in &quot;Pollock&quot; kept him from total obscurity in the annals of history, the journey to Washington also worsened his health considerably: he died on August 8, 1895, only eleven weeks after the ruling was handed down.

==Early life and career==

Jackson was born in Paris, Tennessee, on April 8, 1832. His parents, natives of Virginia, moved to Tennessee in 1827. Jackson&#x27;s father, Alexander, was a university-trained physician in a time when professional medical training was rare. A Whig, Alexander later served in the Tennessee legislature and as mayor of Jackson, Tennessee. The Jackson family moved to Madison County, Tennessee, in 1840. Howell Jackson enrolled at Western Tennessee College, where he studied Greek and Latin. After graduating in 1850, he pursued post-graduate studies at the University of Virginia for two years. Jackson then read law with A. W. O. Totten, a justice of the Tennessee Supreme Court, and with attorney and former U.S. Congressman Milton Brown. He next entered Cumberland Law School, graduating in 1856 after one year&#x27;s study. Jackson was admitted to the bar that same year and began practicing law in the town of Jackson. His work there appears to have been largely unsuccessful, and he moved to the larger city of Memphis, Tennessee, in 1857. There he established a joint legal practice with David M. Currin, who later served as a Confederate congressman. The firm was successful, and it provided Jackson with experience in corporate litigation.

Tennessee seceded from the Union in 1861. Although Jackson had opposed secession, he supported the Southern side in the war that followed. Judge West H. Humphreys appointed Jackson to enforce Confederate sequestration law in western Tennessee, placing him in charge of confiscating and selling the property of Union loyalists. Extant newspaper accounts show Jackson auctioned off a wide variety of property, including almonds, pickles, chairs, alcohol, tobacco and dried peaches. Just before the Union recaptured Memphis in 1862, Jackson fled with his family to LaGrange, Georgia. He attempted unsuccessfully to secure a position in the Confederate military judiciary. After the Civil War ended in 1865, Jackson returned to Memphis. Since he had served in the Confederate government, he had to secure a presidential pardon before he could continue the practice of law. Arguing that his role in the Confederate civil service was small, Jackson claimed in his petition that no formal sequestration orders had ever been issued under his tenure. Scholar Terry Calvani has contended these statements in Jackson&#x27;s application &quot;simply were not true&quot;, characterizing them as perjury. President Andrew Johnson initially rejected Jackson&#x27;s petition, but he granted a second request in 1866.

Since Currin had died during the war, Jackson started a new legal practice with a former colleague. Their clients consisted mainly of banks and other business enterprises. The firm was successful, arguing numerous cases before the Memphis courts. Jackson&#x27;s political sympathies had by this time moved toward the Democratic Party. A Redeemer, he was against Reconstruction-era policies and efforts toward racial equality. After his first wife died in 1873, he returned to the town of Jackson, where he started a law practice with General Alexander W. Campbell. Their firm litigated many cases involving property and criminal law. Jackson was well regarded as a lawyer: he sat as a judge on the local courts and served as a law professor at Southwestern Baptist University (now Union University).

== Service in state government ==
Jackson practiced law in Jackson until 1880. In 1875, however, he was appointed a judge of the temporary Court of Arbitration for Western Tennessee, which heard cases stemming from the large backlog created by the Civil War. When that court was dissolved, Jackson sought the Democratic nomination for a seat on the Tennessee Supreme Court, running against incumbent Thomas J. Freeman. At the convention, Jackson lost by a single vote; he refused the entreaties of his supporters to challenge the result. Jackson then became involved in what was then Tennessee&#x27;s key political dispute: whether to pay back the state debt. Republicans generally supported its repayment, while Democrats were split between a state-credit faction, which was supportive of fulfilling the state&#x27;s financial obligations and a low-tax faction, which favored repudiating the debt. Jackson, who viewed repudiation to be immoral, was firmly on the state-credit side of this debate. After giving a speech on the debt, he was urged to run for a seat in the Tennessee House of Representatives. Jackson reluctantly agreed, and he was elected in 1880 to represent Madison County following a contentious campaign. After the legislature&#x27;s session began in January 1881, he was appointed by Speaker Henry B. Ramsey to the finance, ways and means; judiciary; penitentiary; public grounds and buildings; incorporations; and privileges and elections committees. He was given the chairmanship of the committee on public grounds and buildings, but his prompt elevation to the U.S. Senate prevented him from making any substantial impact in that position.

The most urgent task before the legislature during Jackson&#x27;s tenure was the election of a U.S. Senator. Incumbent Senator James E. Bailey&#x27;s state-credit policies alienated the low-tax faction of the Democratic caucus, but Republican candidate Horace Maynard also failed to garner majority support. Jackson, who was considered capable of obtaining bipartisan support, refused to enter the race because he favored Bailey. A week of balloting failed to break the gridlock. Bailey then withdrew from consideration and urged Jackson to enter the race in his stead. On the thirtieth ballot, Republican R. R. Butler announced his support for Jackson, saying he had given up any hope that a Republican would be chosen. The Speaker of the House, a Maynard loyalist, followed suit, arguing that Jackson was the best choice among the Democrats. A number of Democratic legislators, many of whom were afraid that a Republican could be elected if they did not unite behind a candidate, backed Jackson as well. Convinced by Butler, other Republicans did the same, and Jackson was elected, receiving sixty-eight votes of the ninety-eight cast. He telegraphed his resignation from the state house, effective immediately, to Governor Alvin Hawkins on February 9, 1881. After a special election, he was succeeded later in the month by Hugh C. Anderson, who represented the district composed of Haywood, Hardeman, and Madison counties in the previous legislative session.

==Senate tenure==
Jackson took his seat in the Senate on March 4, 1881. He was a member of four committees: the Post Office, Pensions, Claims, and Judiciary panels. Despite his loyalty to the Democratic platform, Republicans and Democrats alike held him in high regard. In the Senate, Jackson advocated for civil service reform and for the creation of the Interstate Commerce Commission. He supported further restrictions on Chinese immigration and argued for lower tariffs and higher infrastructure spending. Jackson&#x27;s views on legal issues were influential among his colleagues: many important bills on the judiciary were referred to the subcommittee on which he sat. More important than his legislative accomplishments, however, were the personal relationships that he forged. Jackson became a friend of President Grover Cleveland, whose tariff policies he supported. He also established a friendly relationship with his colleague Benjamin Harrison, whom he was seated next to on the Senate floor. Jackson held a reputation for being a hard-working and committed legislator.

==Circuit judge==

The 1886 death of Tennessee federal judge John Baxter created a vacancy for President Cleveland to fill on the circuit court for the Sixth Circuit. Cleveland asked his friend Jackson, who was still serving in the Senate, to recommend potential replacements, but the President ignored his advice and instead offered the seat to him. The senator attempted to decline, but Cleveland&#x27;s insistence eventually led him to agree to be nominated. The Senate unanimously confirmed Jackson. During his seven-year tenure, he heard a variety of cases, a number of which pertained to patent issues. In 1889, Jackson urged his friend Harrison – who by then had become president – to appoint his judicial colleague Henry Billings Brown to the Supreme Court; although Harrison declined to appoint Brown that year, he elevated him to fill a subsequent vacancy the next year. Jackson&#x27;s most noteworthy opinion on the circuit court was &quot;In re Greene&quot; (1892), the first case in which a federal court applied the Sherman Antitrust Act. The ruling in &quot;Greene&quot; rejected a Sherman Act indictment against whiskey producers on the basis that the defendants were not preventing other firms from entering the whiskey market. Jackson&#x27;s narrow interpretation of the Act set the stage for later consequential antitrust cases, including &quot;United States v. E. C. Knight Co.&quot; (1895), and it continued to influence interstate commerce law for half a century.

In other cases, Jackson took a broader view of constitutional provisions. His 1893 ruling in &quot;United States v. Patrick&quot; interpreted the Civil Rights Act of 1870 expansively. The defendants in &quot;Patrick&quot;, who were residents of Tennessee, had been charged with killing several federal officers while they were searching for an illegal still. A lower federal court threw out the indictments, holding the officers were not exercising any legally protected civil right while they were carrying out their duties. Jackson rejected these arguments. In his view, federal officers have a constitutionally protected right &quot;of accepting the public employment, and engaging in the administration of its functions&quot;. On that basis, Jackson concluded the prosecution under the Civil Rights Act could go forward since the officers&#x27; civil rights had been violated. Some Southerners denounced the ruling, objecting that it expanded the scope of an already loathed law. Jackson&#x27;s decision also showed that his stances were sufficiently moderate to coalesce with the Republican agenda.

== Supreme Court nomination ==
On January 23, 1893, Supreme Court Justice Lucius Q. C. Lamar died. At this point, President Harrison was a lame duck: Grover Cleveland had won the 1892 presidential election and would take office in six weeks. Although Harrison wanted to appoint a fellow Republican to fill the vacancy, he recognized that the Democrat-controlled Senate would likely refuse to act on the nomination since it could simply wait for Cleveland to make a more favorable appointment. Not long after Lamar&#x27;s death, Justice Brown, whom Jackson had recommended to Harrison a few years prior, paid a visit to the White House. Wishing to return the favor, the Republican Brown suggested that the Democratic Jackson would be an ideal candidate for Harrison to select. Jackson indeed checked all the boxes for Harrison: he was a conservative and well-regarded jurist and came from the South, as Lamar had. The two had also served in the Senate together and were close friends. Harrison agreed to nominate Jackson, doing so on February 2. The decision surprised both Republicans and Democrats, who expected Harrison to choose someone from his own party. Jackson&#x27;s nomination was held up initially in committee, but senators unanimously confirmed their ex-colleague on February 18. Most had expected some objections on the floor, and a contemporaneous &quot;New York Times&quot; report noted that many were left &quot;wondering...what became of the opposition&quot;. Professor Richard D. Friedman concludes their acquiescence was understandable: Democrats &quot;could not very well vote against one of their own&quot;, while &quot;Republicans, after initial disgruntlement, understood the logic of Harrison&#x27;s move.&quot; Chief Justice Melville Fuller swore in Jackson on the morning of March 4, just hours before administering the presidential oath to Harrison&#x27;s successor.

==Supreme Court service==

Jackson&#x27;s brief tenure on the Supreme Court lasted from March 4, 1893 until his death on August 8, 1895. He wrote only forty-six opinions. Because of his poor health and his lack of seniority, many of them were rendered in insignificant cases, especially patent disputes.

=== &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot; ===
Scholar Irving Schiffman maintains that Jackson&#x27;s name would have been &quot;buried in [the] coffin of historical neglect&quot; were it not for his participation in a single case: &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot; &quot;Pollock&quot; involved a challenge to a provision of the 1894 Wilson–Gorman Tariff Act that had imposed a two percent personal income tax on all revenue over four thousand dollars. According to the plaintiff, the law imposed a direct tax without apportioning it among the states, in violation of a provision of the Constitution. In practice, it would be impossible to apportion such taxes among the states, so a ruling on that basis would doom all federal income taxation. Jackson was ill, but the eight remaining justices heard the case. They struck down certain other provisions of the act but split 4–4 on the constitutionality of the income tax. When Jackson suggested he could return to Washington, the Court agreed to rehear the case to make a more conclusive ruling on the income tax&#x27;s legality.

Because the other eight justices had been evenly split, it was assumed that Jackson&#x27;s vote would determine the case. Experts were uncertain how he would rule: his Southern background suggested he might support the tax, but his pro-business judicial views meant he might be inclined to strike it down. During the three days of arguments, lawyers aimed their contentions at the violently coughing Jackson, often ignoring other justices in their zeal to persuade the swing vote. But when the ruling finally came down on May 20, 1895, Jackson was in dissent. A five-justice majority led by Chief Justice Fuller ruled the tax to be unconstitutional, declaring it was an impermissible unapportioned direct tax. Jackson joined Brown and justices John Marshall Harlan and Edward Douglass White in dissenting from the Court&#x27;s holding. In an impassioned opinion, he wrote &quot;this decision is, in my judgment, the most disastrous blow ever struck at the constitutional power of Congress&quot;. Numerous coughing fits interrupted Jackson&#x27;s ardent turns of phrase, stopping the seriously ill justice several times during his forty-five-minute delivery of the dissent.

Many have attempted to determine how Jackson ended up in the minority. The apparent reason is that one justice switched his vote. Newspapers at the time identified George Shiras as the &quot;vacillating Justice&quot;; biographer Willard King notes that &quot;great obloquy was heaped on him&quot; by outlets that opposed the Court&#x27;s decision. While this suggestion continues to have its adherents, three sources denied Shiras&#x27;s vote changed. Others have argued that Horace Gray or David Brewer changed their votes, but those proposals are difficult to reconcile with primary sources. The remaining possibility is that no justice changed his vote. According to this theory, five justices were averse to the tax from the beginning, but they were unable to unite behind one legal theory initially. Jackson&#x27;s dissent eventually won vindication from the court of history: the Sixteenth Amendment passed eighteen years after &quot;Pollock&quot; revised the Constitution to authorize an income tax.

=== Other cases ===
History has taken little notice of most of Jackson&#x27;s remaining opinions. He was assigned to write a number of opinions involving patent law, a field with which his circuit court tenure had given him experience. A disproportionate number of his rulings drew no dissents, suggesting they were mostly insignificant. His poor health and the fact that he was one of the newest justices for the entirety of his brief tenure likely contributed to this. Jackson&#x27;s few cases display support for the proposition that the judiciary should defer to the legislature. His opinions in &quot;Schurz v. Cook&quot; (1893) and &quot;Columbus Southern Railway v. Wright&quot; (1894) rejected attempts by corporations to strike down various tax laws. Jackson&#x27;s opinions also evidence both his support for broad federal power and his skepticism of states&#x27; decisions. In &quot;Mobile &amp; Ohio R.R. v. Tennessee&quot; (1894), he favored a broad interpretation of the Contract Clause, ruling over four dissenting votes that Tennessee acted illegally in using its state constitution to renege on a promised tax exemption for a railroad company. In the 1893 case of &quot;Brass v. North Dakota&quot;, meanwhile, he exhibited support for the concept of substantive due process, joining a dissent by Justice Brewer that argued that a North Dakota regulation of grain elevators was an unconstitutional infringement upon the freedom of contract. Finally, he joined a five-justice majority in &quot;Fong Yue Ting v. United States&quot; (1893) to hold the federal government could deport Chinese immigrant laborers without providing them with due process protections.

=== Illness and death ===
Despite being apparently healthy at the time of his nomination, Jackson developed tuberculosis within a year of taking the bench. He returned quickly to his duties, but his illness worsened, and he had to leave the capital. In October 1894, he journeyed to the West hoping the climate would improve his condition. He traveled to Thomasville, Georgia, a few months later; his lung ailment started improving, but his health deteriorated substantially when he was afflicted with dropsy. Having no independent source of income, Jackson could not retire without a special act of Congress giving him a pension. Being too unwell to participate, he was unable to cast a vote in the consequential cases of &quot;United States v. E. C. Knight Co.&quot; and &quot;In re Debs&quot;. Jackson returned to his Tennessee home in February; his health began improving, and he expressed the hope that he would be able to return to his judicial duties by fall. His desire to participate in the income tax case led him to return to Washington in May, earlier than he had anticipated. The journey did substantial harm to Jackson&#x27;s health, and Schiffman notes that his failure in &quot;Pollock&quot; &quot;provided little incentive with which to uplift the spirit beyond the pains of the body&quot;. He died in Nashville just eleven weeks after the decision was rendered; his remains were buried in that city&#x27;s Mount Olivet Cemetery. His tenure on the Supreme Court had lasted for less than two and a half years.

== Personal life ==
Jackson married Sophie Malloy, a Memphis banker&#x27;s daughter, in 1859. They had six children (two of whom died during infancy) before her death in 1873. He then married Mary Harding, the daughter of influential Tennessee resident W. G. Harding, the following year. Jackson&#x27;s brother William Hicks Jackson, who had been a brigadier general in the Confederate States Army during the Civil War, was married to another of Harding&#x27;s daughters. When Harding died in 1886, the two Jackson brothers and their wives inherited the Belle Meade Plantation, where thoroughbred horses were raised. Howell&#x27;s role was minimal, and he sold his stake in the horses to his brother in 1890. His thousand acres of property at West Meade (another part of Harding&#x27;s estate) contained his home, which was considered among the finest in the state. Jackson had three children with his second wife. He was a devout Christian, serving as an elder of the First Presbyterian Church of Nashville. His hobbies included hunting foxes and watching horse races.

== Legacy ==
Jackson&#x27;s impact on history was minimal, due in no small part to the brevity of his Supreme Court tenure. A 1972 survey of legal scholars found Jackson was considered a &quot;below average&quot; justice, although the respondents declined to classify him as a &quot;failure&quot;. His participation in &quot;Pollock&quot;, however, prevented him from being entirely covered with what Schiffman called the &quot;shroud of anonymity&quot;. &quot;Pollock&quot; was among the leading cases of the era, and his vote aligned with later public sentiment. While Jackson was well regarded by his contemporaries, Timothy L. Hall writes that he &quot;would probably never have been a great Supreme Court justice&quot;; according to Hall, the &quot;plodding and pedestrian&quot; Jackson &quot;was capable of solid work but not of judicial brilliance&quot;. Scholar Roger D. Hardaway, while conceding that the justice &quot;is not a giant&quot; in the annals of the Supreme Court, argues that Jackson&#x27;s accomplished if brief work deserves a prominent place in Tennessee history. The Liberty ship was named in his honor.

==See also==
* List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q654559" start="0" end="22" title="Howell E. Jackson" label="Howell Edmunds Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="98" end="104" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="122" end="181" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="241" end="254" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="299" end="344" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="433" end="443" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="454" end="471" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="493" end="501" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="591" end="610" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151311" start="637" end="655" title="judicial restraint" label="judicial restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018504" start="798" end="814" title="Paris, Tennessee" label="Paris, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193960" start="858" end="879" title="Cumberland School of Law" label="Cumberland Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="945" end="952" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="970" end="988" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="1033" end="1042" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1108" end="1119" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1144" end="1153" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="1392" end="1415" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="Tennessee Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145213" start="1449" end="1483" title="Tennessee House of Representatives" label="Tennessee House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1549" end="1561" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="1769" end="1785" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892368" start="1899" end="1912" title="United States circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q250472" start="1921" end="1934" title="Sixth Circuit" label="Sixth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549250" start="2217" end="2235" title="Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar" label="Lucius Q. C. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2613" end="2625" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018504" start="3389" end="3405" title="Paris, Tennessee" label="Paris, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="3613" end="3617" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700086" start="3649" end="3670" title="Tennessee General Assembly" label="Tennessee legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="3687" end="3705" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q494755" start="3735" end="3760" title="Madison County, Tennessee" label="Madison County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="3925" end="3947" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="3976" end="3984" title="Reading law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q99472468" start="3990" end="4005" title="Archibald W. O. Totten" label="A. W. O. Totten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="4024" end="4047" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="Tennessee Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616921" start="4095" end="4107" title="Milton Brown (politician)" label="Milton Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193960" start="4125" end="4146" title="Cumberland School of Law" label="Cumberland Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="4385" end="4403" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175470" start="4463" end="4478" title="David Maney Currin" label="David M. Currin"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="4502" end="4525" title="Confederate States Congress" label="Confederate congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="4628" end="4635" title="Secession in the United States" label="seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985425" start="4763" end="4780" title="West Hughes Humphreys" label="West H. Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q661356" start="4822" end="4839" title="Sequestration (law)" label="sequestration law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387983" start="5120" end="5138" title="First Battle of Memphis" label="recaptured Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q593529" start="5180" end="5197" title="LaGrange, Georgia" label="LaGrange, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5297" end="5306" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457084" start="5421" end="5440" title="Pardons for ex-Confederates" label="presidential pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704192" start="5668" end="5681" title="Terry Calvani" label="Terry Calvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="5800" end="5807" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="5819" end="5833" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6237" end="6253" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="6257" end="6265" title="Redeemers" label="Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="6282" end="6300" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720371" start="6462" end="6483" title="Alexander William Campbell (general)" label="Alexander W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886376" start="6664" end="6695" title="Union University" label="Southwestern Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700202" start="7070" end="7093" title="Tennessee Supreme Court" label="Tennessee Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229173" start="7121" end="7138" title="Thomas J. Freeman" label="Thomas J. Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145213" start="7792" end="7826" title="Tennessee House of Representatives" label="Tennessee House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8033" end="8048" title="Henry B. Ramsey" label="Henry B. Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8480" end="8492" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680314" start="8512" end="8527" title="James E. Bailey" label="James E. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132330" start="8638" end="8652" title="Horace Maynard" label="Horace Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489759" start="8991" end="9003" title="Roderick R. Butler" label="R. R. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q169307" start="9611" end="9624" title="Alvin Hawkins" label="Alvin Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17352676" start="9711" end="9727" title="Hugh C. Anderson" label="Hugh C. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q502069" start="9770" end="9777" title="Haywood County, Tennessee" label="Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q502437" start="9779" end="9787" title="Hardeman County, Tennessee" label="Hardeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891261" start="9960" end="9971" title="United States Senate Committee on Post Office and Civil Service" label="Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747952" start="9973" end="9981" title="United States Senate Committee on Pensions" label="Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891262" start="9983" end="9989" title="United States Senate Committee on Claims" label="Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="9995" end="10004" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="10204" end="10234" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516704" start="10273" end="10292" title="Chinese immigration to the United States" label="Chinese immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="10314" end="10320" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="10670" end="10686" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="10787" end="10804" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451841" start="10993" end="11004" title="John Baxter (judge)" label="John Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892368" start="11062" end="11075" title="United States circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q250472" start="11084" end="11097" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit" label="Sixth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="11526" end="11532" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606519" start="11655" end="11675" title="Henry Billings Brown" label="Henry Billings Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="11962" end="11983" title="Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893274" start="12296" end="12329" title="United States v. E. C. Knight Co." label="United States v. E. C. Knight Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="12374" end="12393" title="interstate commerce" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377349" start="12565" end="12589" title="Civil Rights Act of 1870" label="Civil Rights Act of 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436130" start="12771" end="12776" title="still" label="still"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549250" start="13598" end="13616" title="Lucius Q. C. Lamar" label="Lucius Q. C. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q948290" start="13663" end="13672" title="Lame duck (politics)" label="lame duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q72472" start="13703" end="13729" title="1892 United States presidential election" label="1892 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="14892" end="14906" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q943046" start="15274" end="15289" title="Melville Fuller" label="Melville Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="15981" end="16026" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q17148550" start="16101" end="16125" title="Wilson–Gorman Tariff Act" label="Wilson–Gorman Tariff Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="16157" end="16176" title="Income tax" label="personal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="16266" end="16276" title="direct tax" label="direct tax"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16335" end="16366" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clauses 4–7: Apportionment of direct taxes" label="a provision of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700972" start="17592" end="17612" title="John Marshall Harlan" label="John Marshall Harlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706463" start="17617" end="17638" title="Edward Douglass White" label="Edward Douglass White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508251" start="18186" end="18199" title="George Shiras Jr." label="George Shiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627868" start="18498" end="18509" title="Horace Gray" label="Horace Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235764" start="18513" end="18525" title="David Josiah Brewer" label="David Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="18908" end="18927" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19636" end="19650" title="Schurz v. Cook" label="Schurz v. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19674" end="19709" title="Columbus Southern Railway v. Wright" label="Columbus Southern Railway v. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19924" end="19959" title="Mobile &amp;amp; Ohio R.R. v. Tennessee" label="Mobile &amp;amp; Ohio R.R. v. Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165650" start="20015" end="20030" title="Contract Clause" label="Contract Clause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20217" end="20238" title="Brass v. North Dakota" label="Brass v. North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632092" start="20297" end="20320" title="substantive due process" label="substantive due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520009" start="20404" end="20418" title="grain elevator" label="grain elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q119184" start="20466" end="20485" title="freedom of contract" label="freedom of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q19030529" start="20539" end="20569" title="Fong Yue Ting v. United States" label="Fong Yue Ting v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="20682" end="20693" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="20816" end="20828" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192860" start="21063" end="21083" title="Thomasville, Georgia" label="Thomasville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="21210" end="21216" title="dropsy" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893274" start="21437" end="21470" title="United States v. E. C. Knight Co." label="United States v. E. C. Knight Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q15147969" start="21487" end="21497" title="In re Debs" label="In re Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062117" start="22132" end="22153" title="Mount Olivet Cemetery (Nashville)" label="Mount Olivet Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009879" start="22488" end="22501" title="William Giles Harding" label="W. G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012314" start="22546" end="22567" title="William Hicks Jackson" label="William Hicks Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="22584" end="22601" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="22609" end="22632" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267741" start="22789" end="22811" title="Belle Meade Plantation" label="Belle Meade Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="22819" end="22838" title="Thoroughbred" label="thoroughbred horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035795" start="22978" end="22988" title="West Meade" label="West Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="23191" end="23196" title="Elder (Christianity)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303550" start="23204" end="23242" title="Downtown Presbyterian Church (Nashville)" label="First Presbyterian Church of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="23265" end="23278" title="Fox hunting" label="hunting foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="23292" end="23303" title="Horse racing" label="horse races"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="24398" end="24410" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780882" start="24451" end="24509" title="List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772514" wikidata="Q108349" url="?curid=772514" title="Pandora (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Pandora]] is a character in Greek mythology, the first human woman created by the gods.

Pandora may also refer to:
==Mythology==

* Pandora&#x27;s box, mythological artifact connected with the myth of Pandora
* Pandora (daughter of Deucalion), a character in Greek mythology, daughter of King Deucalion and Pyrrha and granddaughter of the above figure
* Pandora, a character in Greek mythology, the second eldest daughter of King Erechtheus of Athens

==Places==
===Extraterrestrial===
* Pandora (moon), one of the satellites of Saturn
* 55 Pandora, an asteroid

===Terrestrial===
* Pandora, Colorado, an unincorporated community in the United States
* Pandora, Ohio, a village in the United States
* Pandora, Pennsylvania, an unincorporated community in the United States
* Pandora, Texas, an unincorporated community in the United States
* Pandora Island, Nunavut, Canada
* Pandora – The World of Avatar, a themed area at Disney&#x27;s Animal Kingdom, Walt Disney World

* Pandora Reef, Queensland, Australia
* Pandora River, Fiordland, New Zealand
* Pandora&#x27;s or Pandoras Pass, a mountain pass in New South Wales, Australia

* Pandora, Punjab, a village in Pakistan also known as Pindorah
* Pandora Islet, part of Ducie Island in the South Pacific Ocean
* Pandora mine, which supplied Klondyke mill in the Gwydyr Forest of north Wales in the United Kingdom
* Pandora Spire, a rock Needle in Victoria Land, Antarctica

==People==
* Pandora (singer), Swedish Eurodance artist
* Pandora, a pseudonym of American clairvoyant Edith Hyde Robbins Macartney
* Pandora, a pseudonym of Polish writer Stefania Zahorska
* Pandora Boxx, American drag queen and comedian
* Pandora Clifford, British actress 
* Pandora Gibson, Bahamian comedian, storyteller and actress
* Pandora Peaks, retired exotic dancer

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Fictional entities and places===
* Pandora (&quot;Avatar&quot;), a fictional moon, and the setting for James Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Avatar&quot; film and video game
* Pandora (comics), a comic book character from Avatar Press
* Pandora (DC Comics), a comic book interpretation of her namesake in Greek mythology
* Pandora (&quot;Re:Zero&quot;), a character in the light novel series &quot;Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World&quot; 
* Pandora, the main character in the anime &quot;Because I&#x27;m the Goddess&quot;
* Pandora, the barren planet of the &quot;Borderlands&quot; universe
* Pandora, the artificially-created human key to opening Pandora&#x27;s Box in &quot;God of War III&quot;
* Pandora, a character in the &quot;Guitar Hero&quot; series of video games
* Pandora, an antagonist in the anime &quot;Futari wa Pretty Cure&quot; (originally named Poisony)
* Pandora, a character in the &quot;Kid Icarus&quot; series of video games
* Pandora, one of the antagonists in the &quot;Mega Man ZX&quot; series
* Pandora, a fictional planet in the Noon Universe by Soviet authors Arkady and Boris Strugatsky
* Pandora, the sister of the god Hades in the &quot;Saint Seiya&quot; anime and manga series
* Pandora, a fictional planet created by Frank Herbert, first introduced in &quot;The Jesus Incident&quot;
* Pandora Braithwaite, a fictional character in the &quot;Adrian Mole&quot; books
* Pandora Moon, a fictional character in the British drama &quot;Skins&quot;
* Pandora Pann, a DC Comics character
* Pandora the Brat, a character in the children&#x27;s series &quot;The Electric Company&quot;
* Pandora, a character in &quot;The Vampire Chronicles&quot; novel series
* Pandora, a character in the &quot;Gallifrey&quot; &quot;Doctor Who&quot; audio drama series
* Pandora, a character in the &quot;Pandora&quot; comic strip in the magazine &quot;Kerrang!&quot;

===Film and television===
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (2016 film), a South Korean film
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (TV series), a 2019 sci-fi television series.
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (&quot;Skins&quot; episode), an episode of the teen drama &quot;Skins&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (&quot;Smallville&quot; episode), an episode from the 9th season of the superhero series &quot;Smallville&quot;
* Pandora Film, a German film producer and distributor
* Pandora International, an English producer of telecine controllers and film colour correction tools

===Gaming===
* Pandora (console), a hand held video game console with open-source software
* Pandora (Interceptor Software), a game publishing label established in 1986
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a video game released in 1988 on the Amiga and Atari ST, by Firebird Games
* &quot;Pandora: First Contact&quot;, a 4X game

===Literature===
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (novel), by Anne Rice in &quot;The Vampire Chronicles&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a novel by Jilly Cooper
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a novel by Sylvia Fraser based on her own childhood
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a short story by Henry James, published in 1884
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a drama fragment by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
* &quot;Pandora, by Holly Hollander&quot;, a novel by Gene Wolfe
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a comic strip in the magazine &quot;Kerrang!&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a book series from Insel Verlag (1920-1921)
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a German science fiction and fantasy magazine
* Pandora Press, UK feminist publishing imprint founded in 1983

===Music===
====Groups====
* Pandora (musical group), a Mexican music group
* The Pandoras, an all-female rock and roll band from Los Angeles, California

====Albums====
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (Angela Zhang album), 2006
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (SiM album), 2013
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (Kara EP), 2012
* Pandora (Wisp EP), 2024
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, 2007 compilation album by D&#x27;erlanger

====Songs====
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by Madina Lake from their album &quot;From Them, Through Us, to You&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by Róisín Murphy, the B-side of her single &quot;You Know Me Better&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by Parkway Drive from their album &quot;Killing with a Smile&quot;
* &quot;Pandora (For Cindy)&quot;, a song by the Cocteau Twins from their album &quot;Treasure&quot; (Cocteau Twins album)
* &quot;潘朵拉&quot; (Pandora)&quot;, a song by Angela Zhang on &quot;Pandora&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by SiM on &quot;Pandora&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by Kara on &quot;Pandora&quot;
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, a song by &quot;Al Stewart&quot; on his 1981 album &quot;Live/Indian Summer&quot;

====Other uses in music====
* Pandora (service), a music streaming service
* Pandora, alternate spelling for the bandora, a stringed musical instrument

===Other uses in arts and entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (painting), a c. 1896 painting by John William Waterhouse
* &quot;Pandora&quot; (sculpture), an 1819 marble by Jean-Pierre Cortot
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, episode 2.3 of the &quot;Gallifrey&quot; &quot;Doctor Who&quot; audio drama series

==Biological organisms==
*&quot;Pandora&quot; (fungus), a genus of fungi
* &quot;Pandora&quot;, an invalid name of the butterfly genus &quot;Panacea&quot;, established by Doubleday around 1848,
*&quot;Pandora&quot; (bivalve), a genus of bivalves in the family Pandoridae
*Pandora moth (&quot;Coloradia pandora&quot;)
* Pandoras, several ray-finned fish species in the genus &quot;Pagellus&quot;

==Technology==
* Pandora (marketplace), a defunct darknet marketplace
* Pandora archive, an online archive run by the National Library of Australia
* Pandora FMS, software for monitoring computer networks
* , several ships of the Royal Navy
* Pandora, a civil transport version of the Argentine DINFIA IA 35 1950s airplane
* Pandora, a HBC vessel operated by the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company from 1846–1851
* Pandora, former British car brand
* Pandora Mission, space telescope for NASA

==Other uses==
* Pandora Papers, a leak of over 11.9 million documents pertaining to offshore finance
* Pandora (doll), a French fashion doll in the 17th and 18th centuries
* Pandora (jewelry), a global jewelry manufacturing company founded in Denmark
*Operation PANDORA, 1971 KGB plan
*Pandora, the yearbook of the Washington &amp; Jefferson College, Washington, Pennsylvania

==See also==
* Pandora Project (disambiguation)
* Pandora&#x27;s box (disambiguation)
* Pandorica, a prison in the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; universe</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108349" start="0" end="11" title="Pandora (disambiguation)" label="[[Pandora]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q108349" start="91" end="98" title="Pandora (disambiguation)" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q937164" start="135" end="153" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085116" start="214" end="245" title="Pandora (daughter of Deucalion)" label="Pandora (daughter of Deucalion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="433" end="443" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17746" start="491" end="505" title="Pandora (moon)" label="Pandora (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107177" start="541" end="551" title="55 Pandora" label="55 Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130713" start="586" end="603" title="Pandora, Colorado" label="Pandora, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q386856" start="656" end="669" title="Pandora, Ohio" label="Pandora, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130714" start="704" end="725" title="Pandora, Pennsylvania" label="Pandora, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362048" start="778" end="792" title="Pandora, Texas" label="Pandora, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130728" start="845" end="859" title="Pandora Island" label="Pandora Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827807" start="879" end="908" title="Pandora – The World of Avatar" label="Pandora – The World of Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130732" start="978" end="990" title="Pandora Reef" label="Pandora Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130730" start="1016" end="1029" title="Pandora River" label="Pandora River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130734" start="1074" end="1087" title="Pandoras Pass" label="Pandoras Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130716" start="1138" end="1153" title="Pandora, Punjab" label="Pandora, Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122663" start="1202" end="1215" title="Pandora Islet" label="Pandora Islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421293" start="1296" end="1309" title="Klondyke mill" label="Klondyke mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281892" start="1370" end="1383" title="Pandora Spire" label="Pandora Spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q441279" start="1442" end="1458" title="Pandora (singer)" label="Pandora (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37688539" start="1532" end="1560" title="Edith Hyde Robbins Macartney" label="Edith Hyde Robbins Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606374" start="1601" end="1618" title="Stefania Zahorska" label="Stefania Zahorska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130724" start="1621" end="1633" title="Pandora Boxx" label="Pandora Boxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130725" start="1670" end="1686" title="Pandora Clifford" label="Pandora Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130726" start="1707" end="1721" title="Pandora Gibson" label="Pandora Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q274609" start="1768" end="1781" title="Pandora Peaks" label="Pandora Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617247" start="1879" end="1907" title="Pandora (Avatar)" label="Pandora (&amp;quot;Avatar&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130721" start="2009" end="2025" title="Pandora (comics)" label="Pandora (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013376" start="2070" end="2089" title="Pandora (DC Comics)" label="Pandora (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2156" end="2185" title="Pandora (Re:Zero)" label="Pandora (&amp;quot;Re:Zero&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878474" start="2328" end="2356" title="Because I&amp;#x27;m the Goddess" label="Because I&amp;#x27;m the Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820462" start="2405" end="2416" title="Borderlands (series)" label="Borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129452" start="2517" end="2531" title="God of War III" label="God of War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q116578" start="2574" end="2585" title="Guitar Hero (video game)" label="Guitar Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151646" start="2658" end="2679" title="Futari wa Pretty Cure" label="Futari wa Pretty Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740851" start="2749" end="2759" title="Kid Icarus (series)" label="Kid Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319030" start="2835" end="2846" title="Mega Man ZX" label="Mega Man ZX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2873" end="2910" title="Minor Planets of Noon Universe#Pandora" label="fictional planet in the Noon Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q275956" start="3009" end="3020" title="Saint Seiya" label="Saint Seiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204093" start="3132" end="3150" title="The Jesus Incident" label="The Jesus Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130722" start="3159" end="3178" title="Pandora Braithwaite" label="Pandora Braithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362051" start="3241" end="3253" title="Pandora Moon" label="Pandora Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130729" start="3318" end="3330" title="Pandora Pann" label="Pandora Pann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234691" start="3422" end="3442" title="The Electric Company" label="The Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q840516" start="3481" end="3503" title="The Vampire Chronicles" label="The Vampire Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808669" start="3575" end="3616" title="List of Doctor Who spin off audio plays by Big Finish" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot; audio drama series"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="3701" end="3709" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q27954163" start="3745" end="3776" title="Pandora (film)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65054525" start="3800" end="3831" title="Pandora (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130719" start="3868" end="3915" title="Pandora (Skins episode)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Skins&amp;quot; episode)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600907" start="3966" end="4018" title="Pandora (Smallville episode)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Smallville&amp;quot; episode)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362049" start="4100" end="4112" title="Pandora Film" label="Pandora Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130727" start="4155" end="4176" title="Pandora International" label="Pandora International"/>
<link wikidata="Q225009" start="4271" end="4288" title="Pandora (console)" label="Pandora (console)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045669" start="4349" end="4379" title="Pandora (Interceptor Software)" label="Pandora (Interceptor Software)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4508" end="4522" title="Telecomsoft#Firebird" label="Firebird Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q603555" start="4563" end="4570" title="4X game" label="4X game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600763" start="4591" end="4618" title="Pandora (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689012" start="4705" end="4717" title="Jilly Cooper" label="Jilly Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660914" start="4752" end="4765" title="Sylvia Fraser" label="Sylvia Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="4833" end="4844" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="4907" end="4933" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q361149" start="4988" end="4998" title="Gene Wolfe" label="Gene Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="5058" end="5066" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q301609" start="5115" end="5127" title="Insel Verlag" label="Insel Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739966" start="5211" end="5224" title="Pandora Press" label="Pandora Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q266940" start="5303" end="5326" title="Pandora (musical group)" label="Pandora (musical group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q938134" start="5352" end="5364" title="The Pandoras" label="The Pandoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123516" start="5446" end="5486" title="Pandora (Angela Zhang album)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (Angela Zhang album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785269" start="5495" end="5526" title="Pandora (SiM album)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (SiM album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q487421" start="5535" end="5564" title="Pandora (Kara EP)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (Kara EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547497" start="5573" end="5590" title="Pandora (Wisp EP)" label="Pandora (Wisp EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503544" start="5646" end="5661" title="D&amp;#x27;erlanger" label="D&amp;#x27;erlanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q725025" start="5745" end="5774" title="From Them, Through Us, to You" label="From Them, Through Us, to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462747" start="5860" end="5878" title="You Know Me Better" label="You Know Me Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613701" start="5955" end="5975" title="Killing with a Smile" label="Killing with a Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q782511" start="6062" end="6104" title="Treasure (Cocteau Twins album)" label="&amp;quot;Treasure&amp;quot; (Cocteau Twins album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123516" start="6172" end="6179" title="Pandora (Angela Zhang album)" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785269" start="6232" end="6239" title="Pandora (SiM album)" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q487421" start="6293" end="6300" title="Pandora (Kara EP)" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206071" start="6387" end="6405" title="Live/Indian Summer" label="Live/Indian Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196431" start="6443" end="6460" title="Pandora (service)" label="Pandora (service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950185" start="6526" end="6533" title="bandora (instrument)" label="bandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059617" start="6622" end="6652" title="Pandora (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947608" start="6702" end="6733" title="Pandora (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808669" start="6836" end="6877" title="List of Doctor Who spin off audio plays by Big Finish" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot; audio drama series"/>
<link wikidata="Q10615874" start="6905" end="6933" title="Pandora (fungus)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (fungus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715869" start="7014" end="7033" title="Panacea (butterfly)" label="&amp;quot;Panacea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053564" start="7074" end="7103" title="Pandora (bivalve)" label="&amp;quot;Pandora&amp;quot; (bivalve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542275" start="7151" end="7163" title="Pandora moth" label="Pandora moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654733" start="7259" end="7267" title="Pagellus" label="Pagellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18620277" start="7292" end="7313" title="Pandora (marketplace)" label="Pandora (marketplace)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887925" start="7347" end="7362" title="Pandora archive" label="Pandora archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q847799" start="7425" end="7436" title="Pandora FMS" label="Pandora FMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389231" start="7570" end="7582" title="DINFIA IA 35" label="DINFIA IA 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872266" start="7615" end="7663" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company vessels" label="vessel operated by the Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767308" start="7717" end="7732" title="Pandora Mission" label="Pandora Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q108782773" start="7777" end="7791" title="Pandora Papers" label="Pandora Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q673218" start="7864" end="7878" title="Pandora (doll)" label="Pandora (doll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241604" start="7935" end="7952" title="Pandora (jewelry)" label="Pandora (jewelry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97657171" start="8013" end="8030" title="Operation PANDORA" label="Operation PANDORA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971641" start="8076" end="8110" title="Washington &amp;amp; Jefferson College" label="Washington &amp;amp; Jefferson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100987" start="8153" end="8185" title="Pandora Project (disambiguation)" label="Pandora Project (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q419269" start="8188" end="8223" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box (disambiguation)" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669002" start="8226" end="8235" title="Pandorica" label="Pandorica"/>
</links>
</doc>
