<doc id="758319" wikidata="Q1509537" url="?curid=758319" title="Takalik Abaj">
<text>Tak&#x27;alik Ab&#x27;aj (; ; ) is a pre-Columbian archaeological site in Guatemala. It was formerly known as Abaj Takalik; its ancient name may have been Kooja. It is one of several Mesoamerican sites with both Olmec and Maya features. The site flourished in the Preclassic and Classic periods, from the 9th century BC through to at least the 10th century AD, and was an important centre of commerce, trading with Kaminaljuyu and Chocolá. Investigations have revealed that it is one of the largest sites with sculptured monuments on the Pacific coastal plain. Olmec-style sculptures include a possible colossal head, petroglyphs and others. The site has one of the greatest concentrations of Olmec-style sculpture outside of the Gulf of Mexico, and was made a World Heritage Site in 2023 because of its long history of occupation. 

Takalik Abaj is representative of the first blossoming of Maya culture that had occurred by about 400 BC. The site includes a Maya royal tomb and examples of Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions that are among the earliest from the Maya region. Excavation is continuing at the site; the monumental architecture and persistent tradition of sculpture in a variety of styles suggest the site was of some importance.

Finds from the site indicate contact with the distant metropolis of Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico and imply that Takalik Abaj was conquered by it or its allies. Takalik Abaj was linked to long-distance Maya trade routes that shifted over time but allowed the city to participate in a trade network that included the Guatemalan highlands and the Pacific coastal plain from Mexico to El Salvador.

Takalik Abaj was a sizeable city with the principal architecture clustered into four main groups spread across nine terraces. While some of these were natural features, others were artificial constructions requiring an enormous investment in labor and materials. The site featured a sophisticated water drainage system and a wealth of sculptured monuments.

==Etymology==
&quot;Tak&#x27;alik Ab&#x27;aj&#x27;&quot; means &quot;standing stone&quot; in the local Kʼicheʼ Maya language, combining the adjective &quot;tak&#x27;alik&quot; meaning &quot;standing&quot;, and the noun &quot;abäj&quot; meaning &quot;stone&quot; or &quot;rock&quot;. It was initially named &quot;Abaj Takalik&quot; by the American archaeologist Suzanna Miles, using Spanish word order. This was grammatically incorrect in Kʼicheʼ; the Guatemalan government has now officially corrected this to &quot;Tak&#x27;alik Ab&#x27;aj&quot;&#x27;. Anthropologist Ruud Van Akkeren has proposed that the ancient name of the city was Kooja, the name of one of the highest-ranking elite lineages of the Mam Maya; &quot;Kooja&quot; means &quot;Moon halo&quot;.

==Location==

The site lies in the southwest of Guatemala, about from the border with the Mexican state of Chiapas and from the Pacific Ocean.

Takalik Abaj is located in the north of the municipality of El Asintal, in the extreme north of Retalhuleu department, some from Guatemala City. The site lies among five coffee plantations in the lower foothills of the Sierra Madre mountains; the Santa Margarita, San Isidro Piedra Parada, Buenos Aires, San Elías and Dolores plantations. Takalik Abaj sits upon a ridge running north–south, descending in a southwards direction. This ridge is bordered on the west by the Nimá River and on the east by the Ixchayá River, both flowing down from the Guatemalan Highlands. The Ixchayá flows in a deep ravine but a suitable crossing point is located near to the site. The situation of Takalik Abaj at this crossing point was probably important in the founding of the city, since this channeled important trade routes through the site and controlled access to them.

Takalik Abaj sits at an altitude of approximately above sea level in an ecoregion classed as subtropical moist forest. The temperature normally varies between and the potential evapotranspiration ratio averages 0.45. The area receives high annual rainfall, varying between , with an average annual rainfall of . Local vegetation includes the Pascua de Montaña (&quot;Pogonopus speciosus&quot;), Chichique (&quot;Aspidosperma megalocarpon&quot;), Tepecaulote (&quot;Luehea speciosa&quot;), Caulote or West Indian Elm (&quot;Guazuma ulmifolia&quot;), Hormigo (&quot;Platymiscium dimorphandrum&quot;), Mexican Cedar (&quot;Cedrela odorata&quot;), Breadnut (&quot;Brosimum alicastrum&quot;), Tamarind (&quot;Tamarindus indica&quot;) and Papaturria (&quot;Coccoloba montana&quot;).

A road, denominated 6W, passes the site running from the town of Retalhuleu to Colomba Costa Cuca in the department of Quetzaltenango.

Takalik Abaj is located at an approximate distance of from the contemporary archaeological site of Monte Alto, from Kaminaljuyu and from Izapa in Mexico.

==Ethnicity==

The changing styles of architecture and iconography at Takalik Abaj suggest that the site has been occupied by changing ethnic groups. The archaeological finds of the Middle Preclassic period suggest that the population of Takalik Abaj may have been affiliated with the Olmec culture of the Gulf Coast lowlands region who are thought to have been speakers of a Mixe–Zoquean language. In the Late Preclassic period, Olmec art styles were exchanged for Maya styles and presumably this shift was accompanied by an influx of ethnic Maya, speaking a Mayan language. There are some hints from the indigenous chronicles that the inhabitants of the site may have been the Yoc Cancheb, a branch of the Mam Maya. The Kooja lineage of the Mam, an ancient noble line, may have had a Classic Period origin in Takalik Abaj.

==Economy and trade==

Takalik Abaj was one of a series of early sites on or near the Pacific coastal plain that were important commercial, ceremonial and political centres. It is apparent that it prospered from the production of cacao and from the trade routes that crossed the region. At the time of the Spanish Conquest in the 16th century the area was still important for its cacao production.

Study of obsidian recovered at Takalik Abaj indicates that the majority originated from the El Chayal and San Martín Jilotepeque sources in the Guatemalan highlands. Lesser quantities of obsidian originated from other sources such as Tajumulco, Ixtepeque and Pachuca. Obsidian is a natural volcanic glass that was used across Mesoamerica to make durable tools and weapons including knives, spearheads, arrowheads, bloodletters for ritual autosacrifice, prismatic blades for woodwork and many other day-to-day tools. The use of obsidian by the Maya has been likened to steel use in the modern world and it was widely traded throughout the Maya region and beyond. The proportion of obsidian from different sources varied over time:


==History==

The site had a long and continuous settlement history, with the period of principal occupation stretching from the Middle Preclassic down to the Postclassic. The earliest known occupation at Takalik Abaj dates towards the end of the Early Preclassic, ca. 1000 BC. However, it was not until the Middle to Late Preclassic that its first real florescence began with a noted surge in architectural constructions. From this period onwards a continuity of culture and population settlement is in evidence, as represented by the persistence of a local ceramic style (called &quot;Ocosito&quot;) that remained in use until the Late Classic. The Ocosito style was typically made with red paste and pumice and extended westwards at least as far as Coatepeque, southwards to the Ocosito River and eastwards to the Samalá River. By the Terminal Classic, pottery associated with a highland Kʼicheʼ ceramic style had begun to appear intermixed with Ocosito ceramic complex deposits. Ocosito ceramics were replaced entirely by the Kʼicheʼ ceramic tradition by the Early Postclassic period.

===Early Preclassic===
Takalik Abaj was first occupied at the end of the Early Preclassic period. The remains of an Early Preclassic residential area have been found to the west of the Central Group, on the bank of the El Chorro stream. These first houses were built with floors made from river cobbles and reed-thatched roofs supported on timber poles. Pollen analysis has revealed that the first inhabitants entered the area when it was still thick forest, which they began to clear in order to cultivate maize and other plants. Over 150 pieces of obsidian have been recovered from this area, known as El Escondite, mostly originating from the San Martín Jilotepeque and El Chayal sources.

===Middle Preclassic===
Takalik Abaj was reoccupied at the beginning of the Middle Preclassic. This was probably by Mixe–Zoquean inhabitants, as evidenced by the plentiful Olmec-style sculpture at the site dating to this period. The construction of public architecture had probably begun by the Middle Preclassic; the earliest structures were made of clay, which was sometimes partially burned in order to harden it. Ceramics from this period belonged to the local Ocosito tradition. This ceramic tradition, although it was local, showed strong affinities with the ceramics of the coastal plain and foothills of the Escuintla region.

The Pink Structure (&quot;Estructura Rosada&quot; in Spanish) was built as a low platform during the first part of the Middle Preclassic, at a time when the city was producing Olmec-style sculpture and La Venta was flourishing on the Gulf coast of Mexico (c.800–700 BC). During the latter part of the Middle Preclassic (c.700–400 BC), the Pink Structure was buried under the first version of the enormous Structure 7. It was at this time that the use of Olmec ceremonial structures was discontinued and Olmec sculpture was destroyed, signalling an intermediate period prior to the beginning of the city&#x27;s Early Maya phase. The transition between the two phases was a gradual one, without abrupt changes.

===Late Preclassic===
During the Late Preclassic (300 BC – AD 200) various sites in the Pacific coastal region developed into true cities; Takalik Abaj was one of these, with an area greater than . The cessation of Olmec influence upon the Pacific coastal zone occurred at the beginning of the Late Preclassic. At this time Takalik Abaj emerged as an important centre with an apparently local style of art and architecture; the inhabitants began to make boulder sculptures and to erect stelae and associated altars. At this time, between 200 BC and 150 AD, Structure 7 reached its maximum dimensions. Monuments were erected with both political and religious significance, some of which bore Maya-style dates and depictions of rulers. These early Maya monuments are carved with what may be among the earliest Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions and use of the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar. The early dates on Stelae 2 and 5 allow this style of sculpture to be more securely fixed in time within the late 1st century to the early 2nd century AD. The so-called potbelly style of sculpture also appeared at this time. The appearance of Maya sculpture and the cessation of Olmec-style sculpture may represent a Maya intrusion into the area previously occupied by Mixe–Zoquean inhabitants. One possibility holds that Maya elites entered the area in order to take control of the cacao trade. However, given the evident continuity in local ceramic styles from the Middle to Late Preclassic, the change in attributes from Olmec to Maya may have been more an ideological than a physical transition. If they &quot;had&quot; arrived from elsewhere, the finds of Maya stelae and a Maya royal tomb suggest that the Maya were in a dominant position, whether they arrived as traders or conquerors.

There is evidence of increasing contact with Kaminaljuyu, which emerged as a principal centre at this time, linking the Pacific coastal trade routes with the Motagua River route, as well as increased contact with other sites along the Pacific coast. Within this extended trade route, Takalik Abaj and Kaminaljuyu appear to have been the two principal foci. The early Maya style of sculpture spread throughout this network.

During the Late Preclassic structures were built using volcanic stone held together with clay, as in the Middle Preclassic. However, they evolved to include stepped structures with indented corners and stairways dressed with rounded pebbles. At the same time, old Olmec-style sculptures were moved from their original positions and placed in front of the new-style buildings, sometimes reusing sculpture fragments in the stone facing.

Although the Ocosito ceramic tradition continued in use, the Late Preclassic ceramics in Takalik Abaj were strongly related to the Miraflores Ceramic Sphere that included Escuintla, the Valley of Guatemala and western El Salvador. This ceramic tradition consists of fine red wares that are particularly associated with Kaminaljuyu and are found throughout the southeastern Guatemalan highlands and the adjacent Pacific slope.

===Early Classic===

In the Early Classic, from around the 2nd century AD, the stela style that developed at Takalik Abaj and was associated with the portrayal of historic figures was adopted across the Maya lowlands, particularly in the Petén Basin. During this period some of the pre-existing monuments were deliberately destroyed.

In this period, the ceramics showed a change with the entry of the highland Solano style, This ceramic tradition is most associated with the Solano site in the southeastern Valley of Guatemala and the most characteristic type is a brick-red ware covered with a bright orange micaceous slip, sometimes painted with pink or purple decoration. This style of ceramics has been associated with the highland Kʼicheʼ Maya. These new ceramics did not replace the pre-existing Ocosito complex but rather became mingled with them.

Archaeological investigations have shown that the destruction of monuments and interruption of new construction at the site occurred simultaneously with the arrival of so-called Naranjo style ceramics, which appear to be linked to styles from the great metropolis of Teotihuacan in the distant Valley of Mexico. The Naranjo ceramic tradition is particularly characteristic of the western Pacific coast of Guatemala between the Suchiate and Nahualate rivers. The most common forms are pitchers and bowls with a surface that has been smoothed with a cloth, leaving parallel marks, and usually coated with a white or yellow wash. At the same time, the use of local Ocosito ceramics waned. This Teotihuacan influence places the destruction of monuments in the second half of the Early Classic. The presence of the conquerors linked to the Naranjo-style ceramics was not of long duration and suggests that the conquerors exerted long-distance control of the site, replacing the local rulers with their own governors while leaving the local population intact.

The conquest of Takalik Abaj broke the ancient trade routes running along the Pacific coast from Mexico to El Salvador, these were replaced by a new route running up the Sierra Madre and into the northwestern Guatemalan highlands.

===Late Classic===
In the Late Classic the site appears to have recovered from its earlier defeat. Naranjo-style ceramics diminished greatly in quantity and there was a surge in new large-scale construction. Many monuments broken by the conquerors were re-erected at this time.

===Postclassic===
Although use of the local Ocosito-style ceramics continued, there was a marked intrusion of Kʼicheʼ ceramics from the highlands in the Postclassic period, concentrated particularly in the northern part of the site but extending to cover the whole. The indigenous accounts of the Kʼicheʼ themselves claim that they conquered this region of the Pacific coast, suggesting that the presence of their ceramics is associated with their conquest of Takalik Abaj.

The Kʼicheʼ conquest appears to have taken place around AD 1000, some four centuries earlier than had been supposed using calculations based on the indigenous accounts. After the initial arrival of the Kʼicheʼ activity continued at the site without pause, and the local styles were simply replaced by styles associated with the conquerors. This suggests that the original inhabitants abandoned the city they had occupied for almost two millennia.

===Modern history===
The first published account appeared in 1888, written by Gustav Bruhl. The German ethnologist and naturalist Karl Sapper described Stela 1 in 1894 after he saw it beside the road he was travelling. Max Vollmberg, a German artist, drew Stela 1 and noted some other monuments, which attracted the interest of Walter Lehmann.

In 1902 the eruption of the nearby Santiaguito volcano covered the site in a layer of volcanic ash that varies between thick.

Walter Lehmann began the study of the sculptures of Takalik Abaj in the 1920s. In January 1942 J. Eric S. Thompson visited the site with Ralph L. Roys and William Webb on behalf of the Carnegie Institution while undertaking a study of the Pacific Coast, publishing his accounts in 1943. Further investigations were undertaken by Suzanna Miles, Lee Parsons and Edwin M. Shook. Miles bestowed the name Abaj Takalik to the site, which appeared in her contributed chapter in volume 2 of the &quot;Handbook of Middle American Indians&quot; published 1965. Previously it had been known by various names, including San Isidro Piedra Parada and Santa Margarita, after the names of the plantations in which the site lies, and also by the name of Colomba, a village to the north in the department of Quetzaltenango.

Excavations at the site in the 1970s were sponsored by the University of California, Berkeley. They began in 1976 and were undertaken by John A. Graham, Robert F. Heizer and Edwin M. Shook. This first season uncovered 40 new monuments, including Stela 5, to add to the dozen or so already known. Excavations by the University of California at Berkeley continued until 1981 and uncovered even more monuments in that time. From 1987 excavations have been continued by the Guatemalan Instituto de Antropología e Historia (IDAEH) under the direction of Miguel Orrego and Christa Schieber, and new monuments continue to be uncovered. The site has been declared a national park.

In 2002 Takalik Abaj was entered on the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative Lists, under the heading of &quot;The Mayan-Olmecan Encounter&quot;. It was officially designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2023 under the name &quot;National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj&quot;. Some of the artifacts found at the site are on display at the National Museum of Guatemalan Art.

==Site description and layout==

The core of the site covers about and includes remains of some 70 monumental structures positioned around a dozen plazas. Takalik Abaj has 2 ballcourts and over 239 known stone monuments, including impressive stelae and altars. The granite used to make monuments in Olmec and early Maya styles is much different from the soft limestone used in the Petén cities. The site is also noted for its hydraulic systems, including a &quot;temazcal&quot; or sauna bath with a subterranean drainage, and Preclassic tombs found in excavations from the late 1990s onwards by Drs. Marion Popenoe de Hatch, Christa Schieber de Lavarreda and Miguel Orrego, from the Ministerio de Cultura y Deportes.

The structures at Takalik Abaj are spread among four groups; the Central, North and West Groups are clustered together but the South Group is located about to the south. The site is naturally defensible, being bordered by steep ravines. The site is spread over a series of nine terraces, which vary in width from and have faces varying in height from . These terraces are not uniformly oriented, instead the direction of their retaining faces depends upon the lie of the local terrain. The three main terraces supporting the city are artificial, with over of fill being used in places.

When Takalik Abaj was at its greatest extent, major architecture in the city covered an area of approximately , although the area occupied by residential construction has not been determined.
*The Central Group occupies Terraces 1 to 5, which were artificially levelled. The group contains 39 structures arranged around plazas that are open on the north and south sides. The Central Group was first occupied in the Middle Preclassic and contains a concentration of more than 100 stone monuments.
*The West Group consists of 21 structures on Terrace 6, which was also artificially levelled. The structures are arranged around plazas that were left open on the east side. Seven monuments have been found in this group. The West Group is bordered by the rivers Nima on the west and the San Isidro on the east. A notable find in the West Group was the discovery of some jade masks there. The West Group was occupied from the Late Preclassic through to at least the Late Classic.
*The North Group was occupied from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic. This group&#x27;s structures were built using a different method from those in the Central Group, and were made out of compacted clay without stone construction or facing. The group occupies Terraces 7 through 9, which follow the contours of the natural terracing present and show no evidence of significant artificial levelling. In combination with a noted absence of sculptured monuments, the different construction methods and ceramic assemblages associated with this group imply an occupation of the North Group by a new settlement community who arrived in the Late Classic period, most probably Kʼicheʼ Maya from the highlands.
*The South Group is located outside the site core, some south of the Central Group, about west of El Asintal, it consists of 13 structure mounds forming a dispersed group.

===Water control===
The hydraulic system included stone canals, which were not used for irrigation but rather to channel runoff and maintain the structural integrity of the principal architecture. These channels were also used to carry water to the residential areas of the city, and it is possible that the channels also served a ritual purpose linked to the rain god. So far, the remains of 25 channels have been found at the site. The larger channels measure wide by high, secondary channels measure about half that.

There are two methods of construction used for the water channels. Clay channels date from the Middle Preclassic while stone-lined channels date from the Late Preclassic through to the Classic, with stone-lined channels from the Late Classic being the largest channels built at the site. It is presumed that the clay channels were not sufficiently effective, thus leading to the switch in construction materials and the implementation of stone-lined channels. In the Late Classic pieces of broken stone monuments were reused in the construction of the water channels.

===Terraces===

Terrace 2 is in the Central Group. Structures on this terrace date as far back as the Middle Preclassic and include an early example of a ballcourt.

Terrace 3 is in the Central Group. The facade represented a major construction project and dates to the Late Preclassic. The southeastern portion of Terrace 3 is believed to have been the most sacred plaza in the city, based on its concentration of sculpture and especially upon the presence of Structure 7 on the east side of the plaza. This area of the ancient city has been called &quot;Tanmi T&#x27;nam&quot; (&quot;Heart of the People&quot; in Mam Maya) by the mayor of El Asintal. A north-south row of 5 monuments was erected at the base of Structure 8, on the southwest side of the plaza, and another row of 5 sculptures runs east–west parallel to the southern edge of the terrace, with an additional 2 sculptures slightly south of them.

Terrace 5 is on the eastern side of the site immediately to the north of the Central Group. It measures east to west and north to south. Terrace 5 is on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation and is currently used for the cultivation of coffee. The retaining face of the terrace was built of compacted clay during the Late Preclassic and represented an enormous inversion of labour. This terrace continued in use until the Postclassic.

Terrace 6 supports the 16 structures of the West Group. It measures from east to west and from north to south. The terrace shows various phases of construction, it overlies a substructure built from large worked blocks of basalt, which dates to the Late Preclassic, later phases of construction date to the Late Classic and the terrace has traces of the Postclassic Kʼicheʼ occupation of the site. The terrace lies within the San Isidro Piedra Parada and Buenos Aires plantations and the land is currently dedicated to the cultivation of rubber and coffee. A modern road cuts the eastern corner of Terrace 6.

Terrace 7 is a natural terrace that supports a part of the North Group. It runs east–west and is long. It supports 15 structures dating from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic and associated with the Kʼicheʼ occupation of the site. This terrace lies between the Buenos Aires and San Elías plantations and the eastern part has been cut by a modern road.

Terrace 8 is another natural terrace in the North Group. It also runs east west and is long. A modern road has cut the eastern part of the terrace and the western side of Structure 46 upon its edge. The terrace supports only this structure and one other to the north (Structure 54). The terrace was probably a residential area with cultivated land associated with the North Group. This terrace is associated with the Kʼicheʼ occupation of the site from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic.

Terrace 9 is the largest terrace at Takalik Abaj and supports part of the North Group. It is approximately running east–west and from north to south. The retaining face of the terrace runs immediately to the north of the main North Group complex on the western half of Terrace 7 for , at the eastern extreme of this section it turns north above Terrace 8 for before changing to run another east, limiting Terrace 8 on its west and north sides. Terrace 9 supports only two major structures (Structures 66 and 67). A modern road cuts the eastern side of the Terrace 9, excavations where the road has cut the terrace have revealed the possible remains of a ballcourt.

===Structures===
The Ballcourt is located in the southwest of Terrace 2 and dates to the Middle Preclassic. It has a north–south alignment with the sides of the wide playing area formed by Structures Sub-2 and Sub-4. The ballcourt is just over long with a playing area of . The southern limit of the ballcourt is formed by Structure Sub-1, just over to the south of Structures Sub-2 and Sub-4, creating a southern end-zone that runs east–west and measures with a surface area of .

Structure 5 is a large pyramid on the west side of Terrace 3. It was largely built during the Middle Preclassic. It forms the western end of an alignment of three structures, the others being Structures 6 and 7.

Structure 6 is a stepped rectangular platform forming the middle of the alignment on Terrace 3. It was first built in the Middle Preclassic but reached is greatest extent during the Late Preclassic and the beginning of the Early Classic. It is one of the most important ceremonial structures in the Central Group.

Structure 7 is a large platform located to the east of the plaza on Terrace 3 in the Central Group and is considered to have been one of the most sacred buildings at Takalik Abaj due to a series of important finds associated with it. Structure 7 measures and dates to the Middle Preclassic, although it did not attain its final form until the latter part of the Late Preclassic. Built upon the northern part of Structure 7 are two smaller structures, designated as Structures 7A and 7B. In the Late Classic, Structures 7, 7A and 7B were all refaced with stone. Structure 7 supports three rows of monuments aligned north–south that may have served as an astronomical observatory. One of these rows was aligned with the constellation Ursa Major in the Middle Preclassic, another aligned with Draco in the Late Preclassic, while the middle row was aligned with Structure 7A. Another important find in Structure 7 was a Late Classic cylindrical incensario given the name &quot;La Niña&quot; by archaeologists due to its prominent female appliqué figure. It dates to the earliest levels of Kʼicheʼ occupation of the site and is high and wide at the base. It was found together with a large quantity of other offerings including further ceramics and fragments of broken sculptures.

The Pink Structure (&quot;Estructura Rosada&quot;) was a small ceremonial platform built upon the central axis of Structure 7 before the latter was erected over it. It is believed that this substructure was in use at the same time as Olmec sculpture was being produced both at Takalik Abaj and at La Venta in the Olmec heartland of Veracruz in Mexico.

Structure 7A is a small structure sitting on top of the northern part of Structure 7. It dates to the Middle Preclassic and has been excavated. The Late Preclassic royal tomb known as Burial 1 was found in its centre. A large offering of hundreds of ceramic vessels was found in the base of the structure and is associated with the burial. Structure 7A underwent substantial rebuilding in the Early Classic and was again modified in the Late Classic. Structure 7A measures and stands almost high. Its four sides were dressed with standing stones surrounded by a pavement.

Structure 7B is a small structure situated on the eastern side of Structure 7. Like Structure 7A, the four sides were dressed with standing stones and were surrounded by a pavement.

Structure 8 is located to the southwest of the plaza on Terrace 3, immediately to the west of the access stairway. Five sculpted monuments were erected in a row at the base of the east side of the building; the four that have been excavated are Monument 30, Stela 34, Stela 35 and Altar 18.

Structure 11 has been excavated. It was covered with rounded boulders held together with clay. It is located to the west of the plaza in the southern area of the Central Group.
Structure 12 lies to the east of Structure 11. It has also been excavated and, like Structure 11, it is covered with rounded boulders held together with clay. It lies to the east of the plaza in the southern area of the Central Group. The structure is a three-tiered platform with stairways on the east and west sides. The visible remains date to the Early Classic but they overlie Late Preclassic construction. A row of sculptures lines the west side of the structure, including six monuments, a stela and an altar. Further monuments line the east side, one of which may be the head of a crocodilian, the others are plain. Sculpture 69 is located on the south side of the structure.

Structure 17 is located in the South Group, on the Santa Margarita plantation. It contained a Late Preclassic cache of 13 prismatic obsidian blades.

Structure 32 is located near the western edge of the West Group.

Structure 34 is in the West Group, at the eastern corner of Terrace 6.

Structures 38, 39, 42 and 43 are joined by low platforms on the east side of a plaza on Terrace 7, aligned north–south. Structures 40, 47 and 48 are on south, west and north sides of this plaza. Structures 49, 50, 51, 52 and 53 form a small group on the west side of the terrace, bordered on the north by Terrace 9. Structure 42 is the tallest structure in the North Group, measuring about high. All of these structures are mounds.

Structure 46 is a mound at the edge of Terrace 8 in the North Group and dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic. The west side of the structure has been cut by a modern road.

Structure 54 is built upon Terrace 8, to the north of Structure 46, in the North Group. It is surrounded by an open area without mounds that was probably a mixed residential and agricultural area. It dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic.

Structure 57 is a large mound at the southern limit of the Central Group with an excellent view across the coastal plain. The structure was built in the Late Preclassic and underwent a second phase of construction in the Late Classic. It may have served as a look-out point.
Structure 61, Mound 61A and Mound 61B are all on the east side of Terrace 5, on the San Isidro plantation. Structure 61 was built during the Early Classic and is dressed with stone, it was built upon an earlier construction dating to the Late Preclassic. Stela 68 was found at the base of Mound 61A near to a broken altar. Structure 61 and its associated mounds may have been used to control access to the city during the height of its power, Mound 61A was reused during the Postclassic occupation of the site. Early Classic finds from Mound 61A include four ceramic vessels and four obsidian prismatic blades.

Structure 66 is located on Terrace 9, at the northern extreme of the North Group. It had an excellent view across the entire city and may have served as a sentry post controlling access to the site. It dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic.

Structure 67 is a large platform on Terrace 9 that may have been associated with a possible residential area upon that terrace and located to the north of the North Group.

Structure 68 is in the West Group. A part of the western side of the structure has been cut by a modern road. This has revealed a sequence of superimposed clay substructures dating to the Late Preclassic, the structure was then dressed with stone in the Early Classic.

Structure 86 is to the west of Structure 32, at the western edge of the West Group. The first phase of construction dates to the Early Classic, between 150 and 300 AD, when it took the form of a sunken patio, with stairways descending in the middle of its perimeter walls. At the centre of the patio were placed a clay altar and a stone, around which and across the rest of the patio were deposited an enormous number of offerings consisting of ceramic vessels, mostly from the Solano tradition.

North Ballcourt. The possible remains of a second ballcourt were found to the north of the North Group and may have been associated with the occupation of that group from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic. It was built from compacted clay and runs east–west, the North Structure was tall and the South Structure had a height of , the playing area was wide.

===Stone monuments===
As of 2006, 304 stone monuments have been found at Takalik Abaj, mostly carved from local andesite boulders. Of these monuments 124 are carved with the remainder being plain; they are mostly found in the Central and Western Groups. The worked monuments can be divided into four broad classifications: Olmec-style sculptures, which represent 21% of the total, Maya-style sculptures representing 42% of the monuments, potbelly monuments (14% of the total) and the local style of sculpture represented by zoomorphs (23% of the total).

Most of the monuments at Takalik Abaj are not in their original positions but rather have been moved and reset at a later date, therefore the dating of monuments at the site often depends upon stylistic comparisons. An example is a series of four monuments found in a plaza in front of a Classic period platform, with at least two of the four (Altar 12 and Monument 23) dating to the Preclassic.

There are several stelae sculpted in the early Maya style that bear hieroglyphic texts with Long Count dates that place them in the Late Preclassic. This style of sculpture is ancestral to the Classic style of the Maya lowlands.

Takalik Abaj has various so-called Potbelly monuments representing obese human figures sculpted from large boulders, of a type found throughout the Pacific lowlands, extending from Izapa in Mexico to El Salvador. Their precise function is unknown but they appear to date from the Late Preclassic.

====Olmec style sculptures====
The many Olmec-style sculptures, including Monument 23, a colossal head that was recarved into a niche figure, seem to indicate a physical Olmec presence and control, possibly under an Olmec governor. Archaeologist John Graham states that:


Others are less sure: the Olmec-style sculptures may simply imply a common iconography of power on the Pacific and Gulf coasts. In any case, Takalik Abaj was certainly a place of importance for Olmecs. The Olmec-style sculptures at Takalik Abaj all date to the Middle Preclassic. Except for Monuments 1 and 64, the majority were not found in their original locations.

====Maya style sculptures====
There are more than 30 monuments in the early Maya style, which dates to the Late Preclassic, making it the most common style represented at Takalik Abaj. The great quantity of early Maya sculpture and the presence of early examples of Maya hieroglyphic writing suggest that the site played an important part in the development of Maya ideology. The origins of the Maya sculptural style may have developed in the Preclassic on the Pacific coast and Takalik Abaj&#x27;s position at the nexus of key trade routes could have been important in the dissemination of the style across the Maya area. The early Maya style of monument at Takalik Abaj is closely linked to the style of monument at Kaminaljuyu, showing mutual influence. This interlinked style spread to other sites that formed part of the extended trade network of which these two cities were the twin foci.

====Potbelly style sculptures====

Sculptures of the Potbelly style are found all along the Pacific Coast from southern Mexico to El Salvador, as well as further afield at sites in the Maya lowlands. Although some investigators have suggested that this style is pre-Olmec, archaeological excavations on the Pacific Coast, including those at Takalik Abaj, have shown that this style began to be used at the end of the Middle Preclassic and reached its height during the Late Preclassic. The potbelly sculptures at Takalik Abaj all date to the Late Preclassic and are very similar to those at Monte Alto in Escuintla and Kaminaljuyu in the Valley of Guatemala.
Potbelly sculptures are generally rough sculptures that show considerable variation in size and the position of the limbs. They depict obese human figures, usually sat cross-legged with their arms upon their stomach. They have puffed out or hanging cheeks, closed eyes and are of indeterminate gender.

====Local style sculptures====
Local style sculptures are generally boulders carved into zoomorphic shapes, including three-dimensional representations of frogs, toads and crocodilians.

====Olmec-Maya transition: &quot;El Cargador del Ancestro&quot;====

The &quot;Cargador del Ancestro&quot; (&quot;Ancestor Carrier&quot;) consists of four fragments of sculpture that had been reused in the facades of four different buildings during the latter part of the Late Preclassic. Monuments 215 and 217 were discovered in 2008 during excavations of Structure 7A, while Stela Fragments 53 and 61 had been unearthed in previous excavations. Archaeologists discovered that although Monuments 215 and 217 possessed different themes and were executed in differing styles, they in fact fitted together perfectly to form part of a single sculpture that was still incomplete. This prompted a revision of previously found sculpture fragments and resulted in the discovery of two further pieces, originally found in Structures 12 and 74.

The four pieces were found to make up a single monumental high column with an unusual combination of sculptural characteristics. The extreme upper and lower portions are damaged and incomplete and the sculpture comprises three sections. The lowest section is a rectangular column with an early hieroglyphic text on both faces and a richly dressed Early Maya figure on the front. The figure is wearing a headdress in the form of a crocodile or crocodile-feline hybrid with the jaws agape and the face of an ancestor emerging. The lower portion of this section is damaged and a part of both the text and the figure is missing.

The middle section of the column, forming a type of capital, is a high-relief sculpture of the head of a bat executed in the curved lines of the Maya style, with small eyes and eyebrows formed by two small volutes. The leaf-shaped nose is characteristic of the Common Vampire Bat (&quot;Desmodus rotundus&quot;). The mouth is open, exposing the partly preserved fangs, and a prominent tongue extends downwards. A band of double triangles runs around the sculpture with a carved cord or rope and may symbolise the bat&#x27;s wings.

The upper section of the column is the sculpted figure of a squat, bare-footed individual standing upon the bat&#x27;s head. The figure wears a loincloth bound by a belt and decorated with a large U symbol. An elaborately carved chest ornament with interlace pattern descends from the neck across the waste. The style is somewhat rigid and is reminiscent of formal Olmec sculpture, and various costume elements resemble those found on Olmec sculptures from the Gulf Coast of Mexico. The figure has oval eyes and large earspools, the nose and mouth of the figure are damaged. It wears two bands that cross on the back and are joined to the belt and the shoulders, they support a small human figure facing backwards. The position and characteristics of this smaller figure are very similar to those of Olmec sculptures of infants, although the face is elderly. This secondary figure is wearing a type of long skirt or train that is almost identical to one worn by an Olmec-style dancing jaguar figure found at Tuxtla Chico in Chiapas, Mexico. This train extends down into the middle section of the column, continuing halfway down the back of the bat&#x27;s head. The position of the shoulders and the face of the principal figure are not anatomically correct, leading the archaeologists to conclude that the &quot;face&quot; is actually a chest ornament and that the actual head of the main figure is missing. Although the upper section of the column contains many Olmec elements, it also lacks some distinctive features that are found in true Olmec art, such as the feline expression that is often depicted.

The sculpture predates 300 BC, based on the style of the hieroglyphic text, and is thought to be an Early Maya monument that was intended to represent an Early Maya ruler (at the base) who carried the underworld (i.e. the bat) and his ancestors (the main figure above carrying a smaller figure on its back). The Maya sculptor used half-remembered Olmec stylistic elements upon the ancestor figure in a form of Maya-Olmec syncretism, producing a hybrid sculpture. As such it represents the transition from one cultural phase to the next, at a point where the earlier Olmec inhabitants had not yet been forgotten and were viewed as powerful ancestors.

====Inventory of altars====

Altar 1 is found at the base of Stela 1. It is rectangular in shape with carved molding on its side.

Altar 2 is of unknown provenance, having been moved to outside the administrator&#x27;s house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation. It is long, about wide and about high. It represents an animal variously identified as a toad and a jaguar. The body of the animal was sculptured to form a hollow across and deep. The sculpture was broken into three pieces.

Altar 3 is a roughly worked flat, circular altar about across and high. It was probably associated originally with a stela but its original location is unknown, it was moved near to the manager&#x27;s house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation.

Altar 5 is a damaged plain circular altar associated with Stela 2.

Altar 7 is near the southern edge of the plaza on Terrace 3, where it is one of five monuments in a line running east–west.

Altar 8 is a plain monument associated with Stela 5, positioned on the west side of Structure 12.

Altar 9 is a low four-legged throne placed in front of Structure 11.

Altar 10 was associated with Stela 13 and was found on top of the large offering of ceramics associated with that stela and the royal tomb in Structure 7A. The monument was originally a throne with cylindrical supports that was reused as an altar in the Classic period.

Altar 12 is carved in the early Maya style and archaeologists consider it to be an especially early example dating to the first part of the Late Preclassic. Because of the carvings on the upper face of the altar, it is supposed that the monument was originally erected as a vertical stela in the Late Preclassic, and was reused as a horizontal altar in the Classic. At this time 16 hieroglyphs were carved around the outer rim of the altar. The carving on the upper face of the altar represents a standing human figure portrayed in profile, facing left. The figure is flanked by two vertical series of four glyphs. A smaller profile figure is depicted facing the first figure, separated from it by one of the series of glyphs. The central figure is depicted standing upon a horizontal band representing the earth, the band is flanked by two earth monsters. Above the figure is a celestial band with part of the head of a sacred bird visible in the centre. The 16 glyphs on the rim of the monument are formed by anthropomorphic figures mixed with other elements.
Altar 13 is another early Maya monument dating to the Late Preclassic. Like Altar 12 it was probably originally erected as a vertical stela. At some point it was deliberately broken, with severe damage inflicted upon the main portion of the sculpture, obliterating the central and lower portions. At a later date it was reused as a horizontal altar. The remains of two figures can be seen flanking the damage lower portion of the monument and the large head of the sacred bird survives above the area of damage. The right hand figure is wearing an interwoven skirt and is probably female.

Altar 18 was one of five monuments forming a north–south row at the base of Structure 8 on Terrace 3.

Altar 28 is located near Structure 10 in the Central Group. It is a circular basalt altar just over in diameter and thick. On the front rim of the altar is a carving of a skull. On the upper surface are two relief carvings of human feet.

Altar 30 is embedded in the fourth step of the access stairway to Terrace 3 in the Central Group. It has four low legs supporting it and is similar to Altar 9.

Altar 48 is a very early example of the Early Maya style of sculpture, dating to the first part of the Late Preclassic, between 400 and 200 BC. Altar 48 is fashioned from andesite and measures and is thick. It is located near the southern extreme of Terrace 3, where it is one of a row of 5 monuments running east–west. It is carved on its upper face and upon all four sides. The upper surface bears the intricate design of a crocodile with its body in the form of a symbol representing a cave and containing the figure of a seated Maya wearing a loincloth. The sides of the monument are carved with an early form of Maya hieroglyphs, the text appears to refer directly to the person depicted on the upper surface. Altar 48 had been carefully covered by Stela 14. The emergence of a Maya ruler from the body of the crocodile parallels the myth of the birth of the Maya maize god, who emerges from the shell of a turtle. As such, Altar 48 may be one of the earliest depictions of Maya mythology used for political ends.

====Inventory of monuments====

Monument 1 is a volcanic boulder with the bas-relief sculpture of a ballplayer, probably representing a local ruler. This figure is facing to the right, kneeling on one knee with both hands raised. The sculpture was found near the riverbank at a crossing point of the river Ixchayá, some to the west of the Central Group. It measures about in height. Monument 1 dates to the Middle Preclassic and is distinctively Olmec in style.

Monument 2 is a potbelly sculpture found from the road running between the San Isidro and Buenos Aires plantations. It is about high and in diameter. The head is badly eroded and inclined slightly forwards, its arms are slightly bent with the hands doubled downwards and the fingers marked. Monument 2 dates to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 3 also dates to the Late Preclassic. It was relocated in modern times to the coffee-drying area of the Santa Margarita plantation. It is not known where it was originally found. It is a potbelly figure with a large head; it wears a necklace or pendant that hangs to its chest. It is about high and wide at the shoulders. The monument is damaged and missing the lower part.

Monument 4 appears to be a sculpture of a captive, leaning slightly forward and with the hands tied behind its back. It was found on the lands of the San Isidro plantation but it is not known exactly where. It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología in Guatemala City. This monument probably dates to the Late Preclassic. It is high and about wide.

Monument 5 was moved to the administrator&#x27;s house of the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation; the place where it was originally found is unknown. It measures in height and is wide at the widest point. It is a sculpture of a captive with the arms bound with a strip of cloth that falls across the hips.

Monument 6 is a zoomorph sculpture discovered during the construction of the road that passes the site. It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología in Guatemala City. The sculpture is just over in height and is wide. It is a boulder carved into the form of an animal head, probably that of a toad, and is likely to date to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 7 is a damaged sculpture in the form of a giant head. It stands and was found in the first half of the 20th century on the site of the electricity generator of the Santa Margarita plantation and moved close to the administration office. The sculpture has a large, flat face with prominent eyebrows. Its style is very similar to that of a monument found at Kaminaljuyu in the highlands.

Monument 8 is found on the west side of Structure 12. It is a zoomorphic sculpture of a monster with feline characteristics disgorging a small anthropomorphic figure from its mouth.

Monument 9 is a local style sculpture representing an owl.

Monument 10 is another monument that was moved from its original location; it was moved to the estate of the Santa Margarita plantation and the place where it was originally found is unknown. It is about high and wide. This is a damaged sculpture representing a kneeling captive with the arms tied.
Monument 11 is located in the southwestern area of Terrace 3, to the east of Structure 8. It is a natural boulder carved with a vertical series of five hieroglyphs. Further left is a single hieroglyph and the glyphs for the number 11. This sculpture is considered to be in an especially early Maya style and dates to the first part of the Late Preclassic. It is one of a row of 5 monuments running east–west along the southern edge of Terrace 3.

Monument 14 is an eroded Olmec-style sculpture dating to the Middle Preclassic. It represents a squatting human figure, possibly female, wearing a headdress and earspools. Under one arm it grips a jaguar cub, under the other it carries a fawn.

Monument 15 is a large boulder with an Olmec-style relief sculpture of the head, shoulders and arms of an anthropomorphic figure emerging from a shallow niche, the arms bent inwards at the elbow. The back of the boulder is carved with the hindquarters of a feline, probably a jaguar.

Monument 16 and Monument 17 are two parts of the same broken sculpture. This sculpture is classically Olmec in style and is heavily eroded but represents a human head wearing a headdress in the form of a secondary face wearing a helmet.

Monument 23 dates to the Middle Preclassic period. It appears that it was an Olmec-style colossal head that was recarved into a niche figure sculpture. If this was originally a colossal head then it would be the only example known from outside the Olmec heartland. Monument 23 is sculpted from andesite and falls in the middle of the size range for confirmed Olmec colossal heads. It stands high and measures wide by deep. Like the examples from the Olmec heartland, the monument features a flat back. Lee Parsons contested John Graham&#x27;s identification of Monument 23 as a recarved colossal head; he viewed the side ornaments that Graham identified as ears as instead being the scrolled eyes of an open-jawed monster gazing upwards. Countering this, James Porter has claimed that the recarving of the face of a colossal head into a niche figure is clearly evident. Monument 23 was damaged in the mid-20th century by a local mason who attempted to break its exposed upper portion using a steel chisel. As a result, the top is fragmented, although the broken pieces were recovered by archaeologists and have been put back into place.

Monument 25 is a heavily eroded relief sculpture of a figure seated in a niche.

Monument 27 is located near the southern edge of Terrace 3, just south of a row of 5 sculptures running east–west.

Monument 28 is situated near Monument 27 at the southern edge of Terrace 3.

Monument 30 is located on Terrace 3, in a row of 5 monuments at the base Structure 8.

Monument 35 is a plain monument on Terrace 6, it dates to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 40 is a potbelly monument dating to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 44 is a sculpture of a captive.

Monument 47 is a local style monument representing a frog or toad.

Monument 55 is an Olmec-style sculpture of a human head. It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología (National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology).

Monument 64 is an Olmec-style bas-relief carved onto the south side of a natural andesite rock and stylistically dates to the Middle Preclassic, although it was found in a Late Preclassic archaeological context. It was found &quot;in-situ&quot; on the eastern bank of the El Chorro stream, some to the west of the South-Central Group. It represents an anthropomorphic figure with some feline characteristics. The figure is portrayed in profile and is wearing a belt. It holds a zigzag staff in its extended left hand.

Monument 65 is a badly damaged depiction of a human head in Olmec style, dating to the Middle Preclassic. Its eyes are closed and the mouth and nose are completely destroyed. It is wearing a helmet. It is located to the west of Structure 12.

Monument 66 is a local style sculpture of a crocodilian head that may date to the Middle Preclassic. It is located to the west of Structure 12.

Monument 67 is a badly eroded Olmec-style sculpture showing a figure emerging from the mouth of a jaguar, with one hand raised and gripping a staff. Traces of a helmet are visible. It is located to the west of Structure 12 and dates to the Middle Preclassic.

Monument 68 is a local style sculpture of a toad located on the west side of Structure 12. It is believed to date to the Middle Preclassic.

Monument 69 is a potbelly monument dating to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 70 is a local style sculpture of a frog or toad.

Monument 93 is a rough Olmec-style sculpture dating from the Middle Preclassic. It represents a seated anthropomorphic jaguar with a human head.

Monument 99 is a colossal head in potbelly style, dating to the Late Preclassic.

Monument 100, Monument 107 and Monument 109 are small potbelly monuments dating to the Late Preclassic. They are all near the access stairway to Terrace 3 in the Central Group.
Monument 108 is an altar placed in front of the main stairway giving access to Terrace 3, in the Central Group.

Monument 113 is located outside of the site core, some south of the Central Group, about west of El Asintal, in a secondary site known as the South Group, which consists of six structure mounds. It is carved from an andesite boulder and bears a relief carving of a jaguar lying on its left side. Its eyes and mouth are open and various jaguar pawprints are carved upon the body of the animal.

Monument 126 is a large basalt rock bearing bas-relief carvings of life-size human hands. It is found upon the bank of a small stream near the Central Group.

Monument 140 is a Late Preclassic sculpture of a toad, it is located in the West Group, on Terrace 6.

Monument 141 is a rectangular altar dating to the Late Preclassic. It is located in the West Group on Terrace 6.

Monuments 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149 and 156 are among 19 natural stone monuments that line the course of the Nima stream, some west of the West Group, within the Buenos Aires and San Isidro plantations. They are basalt and andesite boulders that have deep circular depressions with polished sides that are perhaps the result of some kind of working activity.

Monument 154 is a large basalt rock, it bears two petroglyphs representing childlike faces. It is located on the west side of the Nima stream, on the Buenos Aires plantation.

Monument 157 is a large andesite rock on the west side of the Nima stream, on the San Isidro plantation. It bears the petroglyph of a face with eyes and eyebrows, nose and mouth.

Monument 161 lies within the North Group, on the San Elías plantation. It is a basalt outcrop measuring high by wide on the side of the Ixchayá ravine. It bears a petroglyph of a face carved onto the upper part of the rock, looking upwards. The face has cheekbones, a prominent chin and a slightly open mouth. It has some stylistic similarity to Early Classic jade masks, although it lacks certain features associated with these.

Monument 163 dates from the Late Preclassic. It was found reused in the construction of a Late Classic water channel beside Structure 7. It represents a seated figure with prominent male genitals and is badly damaged, with the head and shoulders missing.

Monument 215 is a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture. It was found embedded in the east face of Structure 7A, where it was carefully placed at the same time as the royal burial was interred in the centre of the structure.

Monument 217 is another part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture. It was embedded in the east face of Structure 7A in the same manner, and at the same time, as Monument 215.

====Inventory of stelae====

Stelae are carved stone shafts, often sculpted with figures and hieroglyphs. A selection of the most notable stelae at Takalik Abaj follows:

Stela 1 was found near to Stela 2 and moved near to the administrator&#x27;s house of the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation. It is high, wide and thick. It bears the sculpture of a standing figure facing to the left, holding a sceptre in the form of a serpent with a dragon mask at the lower end; a feline is on top of the serpent&#x27;s body. It is similar in style to Stela 1 at El Baúl. A badly eroded hieroglyphic text is to the left of the figure&#x27;s face, which is now completely illegible. This stela is early Maya in style, dating to the Late Preclassic.

Stela 2 is a monument in the early Maya style that is inscribed with a damaged Long Count date. Due to its only partial preservation, this date has at least three possible readings, the latest of which would place it in the 1st century BC. Flanking the text are two standing figures facing each other, the sculpture probably represents one ruler receiving power from his predecessor. Above the figures and the text is an ornate figure depicted in profile looking down at the left-hand figure below. Stela 2 is located in front of the retaining wall of Terrace 5.

Stela 3 is badly damaged, being broken into three pieces. It was found somewhere on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation although its exact original location is not known. It was moved to a museum in Guatemala City. The lower portion of the stela depicts two legs facing to the left standing upon a horizontal band divided into three sections, each section containing a symbol or glyph.

Stela 4 was uncovered in 1969 and moved near to the administrator&#x27;s house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation. It is of a style very similar to the stelae at Izapa and stands high. The stela bears a complex design representing an undulating vision serpent rising toward the sky from the water flowing from two earth monsters, the jaws of the serpent are open wide towards the sky and from them emerges a characteristically Maya face. Several glyphs appear among the imagery. This stela is early Maya in style and dates to the Late Preclassic.
Stela 5 is reasonably well preserved and is inscribed with two Long Count dates flanked by representations of two standing figures portraying rulers. The latest of these two dates is AD 126. The right-hand figure is holding a snake, while the left-hand figure is holding what is probably a jaguar. This monument probably represents one ruler passing power to the next. A small seated figure is carved onto each of the sides of this stela along with a badly eroded hieroglyphic inscription. The style is early Maya and has affinities with sculptures at Izapa.

Stela 12 is located near Structure 11. It is badly damaged, having been broken into fragments, of which two remain. The largest fragment is from the lower portion of the stela and depicts the legs and feet of a figure, both facing in the same direction. They stand upon a panel divided into geometric sections, each containing a further design. In front of the legs are the remains of a glyph that appears to be a number in the bar-and-dot format. A smaller fragment lies nearby.

Stela 13 dates to the Late Preclassic. It is badly damaged, having been broken in two parts. It is carved in early Maya style and bears a design representing a stylised serpentine head, very similar to a monument found at Kaminaljuyu. Stela 13 was erected at the base of the south side of Structure 7A. At the base of the stela was found a massive offering of more than 600 ceramic vessels, 33 prismatic obsidian blades, as well as other artifacts. The stela and the offering are associated with the Late Preclassic royal tomb known as Burial 1.
Stela 14 is on the southern edge of Terrace 3, in the Central Group, where it is one of 5 monuments in an east–west row. It is fashioned from andesite and has 26 cup-like depressions upon the upper surface. It is one of the few such monuments found within the ceremonial centre of the city. Altar 48 was found underneath Stela 14 in 2008, having been carefully covered by it in antiquity. Stela 14 measures by thick and weighs more than . The lower surface of the stela had been sculpted completely flat with 6 small cupmarks and a series of marks forming a design reminiscent of the discarded skin of a snake or of a vertebral column.

Stela 15 is another monument on the southern edge of Terrace 3, one of a row of five.

Stela 29 is a smooth andesite monument at the southeast corner of Structure 11 with seven steps carved into its upper portion.

Stela 34 was found at the base of Structure 8, where it was one of a row of five monuments.

Stela 35 was another of the five monuments found at the base of Structure 8.

Stela 53 is a fragment of sculpture that was found in the latter Early Preclassic phase of Structure 12, directly behind Stela 5. Stela 53 forms a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture. Stela 5 was placed at the same time that Stela 53 was embedded in Structure 12, and the long count date on the former also allows the placing of Stela 53 to be fixed in time at Late Preclassic–Early Classic transition.

Stela 61 is a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture. In the Late Preclassic–Early Classic transition it had been embedded in the east access stairway to Terrace 3.

Stela 66 is a plain stela dating to the Late Preclassic. It is found in the West Group, on Terrace 6.

Stela 68 was found at the southeast corner of Mound 61A on Terrace 5. This stela was broken in two and the remaining fragments appear to belong to two separate monuments. The stela, or stelae, once bore early Maya sculpture but this appears to have been deliberately destroyed, leaving only a few sculptured symbols.

Stela 71 is an early Maya carved fragment reused in the construction of a water channel by Structure 7.

Stela 74 is a fragment of Olmec-style sculpture that was found in the Middle Preclassic fill of Structure 7, where it was placed when that structure replaced the Pink Structure. It bears a foliated maize design topped with a U-symbol within a cartouche and has other, smaller, U-symbols at its base. It is very similar to a design found on Monument 25/26 from La Venta.

Stela 87, discovered in 2018 and dating back to 100 BC, shows a king viewed from the side and holding a ceremonial bar with a maize deity emerging. To the right is a column of originally five cartouches holding what appear to be hieroglyphs, two of these showing elderly men, one of them bearded.

===Royal burials===

A Late Preclassic tomb has been excavated, believed to be a royal burial. This tomb has been designated Burial 1; it was found during excavations of Structure 7A and was inserted into the centre of this Middle Preclassic structure. The burial is also associated with Stela 13 and with a massive offering of more than 600 ceramic vessels and other artifacts found at the base of Structure 7A. These ceramics date the offering to the end of the Late Preclassic. No human remains have been recovered but the find is assumed to be a burial due to the associated artifacts. The body is believed to have been interred upon a litter measuring , which was probably made of wood and coated in red cinnabar dust. Grave goods include an 18-piece jade necklace, two earspools coated in cinnabar, various mosaic mirrors made from iron pyrite, one consisting of more than 800 pieces, a jade mosaic mask, two prismatic obsidian blades, a finely carved greenstone fish, various beads that presumably formed jewellery such as bracelets and a selection of ceramics that date the tomb to AD 100–200.

In October 2012, a tomb carbon-dated between 700 BC and 400 BC was reported to have been found in Takalik Abaj of a ruler nicknamed K&#x27;utz Chman (&quot;Grandfather Vulture&quot; in Mam) by archaeologists, a sacred king or &quot;big chief&quot; who &quot;bridged the gap between the Olmec and Mayan cultures in Central America,&quot; according to Miguel Orrego. The tomb is suggested to be the oldest Maya royal burial to have been discovered so far.

==See also==
*Balberta
*Bilbao (Mesoamerican site)
*Kʼicheʼ Kingdom of Qʼumarkaj
*Ujuxte

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Tarpy, Cliff (2004) &quot;Place of the Standing Stones&quot;, in &quot;National Geographic&quot;, May 2004.
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*Authenticmaya.com: Takalik Abaj description and gallery
*Takalik Abaj at &quot;The Guatemala Times&quot; online. Information and news in English, some by investigating archaeologists.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1509537" start="0" end="24" title="Takalik Abaj" label="Tak&amp;#x27;alik Ab&amp;#x27;aj"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="37" end="50" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="51" end="65" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="74" end="83" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509537" start="110" end="122" title="Takalik Abaj" label="Abaj Takalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509537" start="155" end="160" title="Takalik Abaj" label="Kooja"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="183" end="194" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="212" end="217" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="222" end="226" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964" start="264" end="274" title="Mesoamerican chronology" label="Preclassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964" start="279" end="286" title="Mesoamerican chronology" label="Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12911066" start="382" end="400" title="Trade in Maya civilization" label="centre of commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081581" start="415" end="426" title="Kaminaljuyu" label="Kaminaljuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675331" start="431" end="438" title="Chocolá" label="Chocolá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476533" start="510" end="530" title="monumental sculpture" label="sculptured monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062269" start="603" end="616" title="Olmec colossal heads" label="colossal head"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="618" end="628" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="730" end="744" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="761" end="780" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q211248" start="992" end="1022" title="Maya script" label="Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005167" start="1126" end="1138" title="Maya architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="1310" end="1321" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="1329" end="1345" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12911066" start="1450" end="1467" title="trade in Maya civilization" label="Maya trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614263" start="1564" end="1584" title="Guatemalan highlands" label="Guatemalan highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1620" end="1626" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="1630" end="1641" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650380" start="1696" end="1708" title="Mesoamerican architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36494" start="2105" end="2126" title="Kʼicheʼ language" label="Kʼicheʼ Maya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650738" start="2363" end="2376" title="Suzanna Miles" label="Suzanna Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563726" start="2707" end="2710" title="Mam people" label="Mam"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="2813" end="2822" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="2872" end="2879" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872284" start="2953" end="2965" title="Municipalities of Guatemala" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402509" start="2969" end="2979" title="El Asintal" label="El Asintal"/>
<link wikidata="Q888307" start="3005" end="3026" title="Retalhuleu Department" label="Retalhuleu department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="3038" end="3052" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q27036" start="3128" end="3140" title="Sierra Madre de Chiapas" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037806" start="3380" end="3390" title="Nimá River" label="Nimá River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101054" start="3414" end="3427" title="Ixchayá River" label="Ixchayá River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614263" start="3456" end="3476" title="Guatemalan Highlands" label="Guatemalan Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="3842" end="3851" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="3863" end="3887" title="subtropical moist forest" label="subtropical moist forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3937" end="3971" title="Evapotranspiration#Potential evapotranspiration" label="potential evapotranspiration ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4137" end="4156" title="Pogonopus speciosus" label="Pogonopus speciosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808036" start="4182" end="4207" title="Aspidosperma megalocarpon" label="Aspidosperma megalocarpon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4235" end="4250" title="Luehea speciosa" label="Luehea speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281935" start="4293" end="4310" title="Guazuma ulmifolia" label="Guazuma ulmifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4334" end="4360" title="Platymiscium dimorphandrum" label="Platymiscium dimorphandrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q163004" start="4390" end="4405" title="Cedrela odorata" label="Cedrela odorata"/>
<link wikidata="Q990886" start="4430" end="4449" title="Brosimum alicastrum" label="Brosimum alicastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="4458" end="4466" title="Tamarind" label="Tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4521" end="4538" title="Coccoloba montana" label="Coccoloba montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023393" start="4613" end="4623" title="Retalhuleu" label="Retalhuleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426806" start="4627" end="4645" title="Colomba, Quetzaltenango" label="Colomba Costa Cuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q844502" start="4667" end="4681" title="Quetzaltenango (department)" label="Quetzaltenango"/>
<link wikidata="Q212080" start="4783" end="4793" title="Monte Alto culture" label="Monte Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081581" start="4800" end="4811" title="Kaminaljuyu" label="Kaminaljuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334607" start="4821" end="4826" title="Izapa" label="Izapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="5124" end="5129" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321023" start="5145" end="5171" title="Olmec heartland" label="Gulf Coast lowlands region"/>
<link wikidata="Q954016" start="5215" end="5236" title="Mixe–Zoque languages" label="Mixe–Zoquean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="5399" end="5413" title="Mayan languages" label="Mayan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269745" start="5751" end="5772" title="Soconusco" label="Pacific coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="5895" end="5900" title="Cocoa bean" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q12911066" start="5914" end="5926" title="trade in Maya civilization" label="trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993582" start="5971" end="5987" title="Spanish conquest of Guatemala" label="Spanish Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552752" start="6073" end="6081" title="Obsidian use in Mesoamerica" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6156" end="6165" title="El Chayal" label="El Chayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607954" start="6170" end="6192" title="San Martín Jilotepeque" label="San Martín Jilotepeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748863" start="6298" end="6307" title="Tajumulco" label="Tajumulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131268" start="6309" end="6318" title="Ixtepeque" label="Ixtepeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q160750" start="6323" end="6330" title="Pachuca" label="Pachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215249" start="6478" end="6490" title="bloodletting in Mesoamerica" label="bloodletters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625100" start="6502" end="6515" title="sacrifice in Maya culture" label="autosacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245691" start="6517" end="6532" title="prismatic blade" label="prismatic blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="7498" end="7504" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445821" start="7547" end="7557" title="Coatepeque, Quetzaltenango" label="Coatepeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490975" start="7577" end="7590" title="Ocosito River" label="Ocosito River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408531" start="7612" end="7624" title="Samalá River" label="Samalá River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137419" start="7686" end="7693" title="Kʼicheʼ people" label="Kʼicheʼ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="8239" end="8254" title="Pollen analysis" label="Pollen analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="8392" end="8397" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q954016" start="8694" end="8706" title="Mixe–Zoque languages" label="Mixe–Zoquean"/>
<link wikidata="Q795587" start="9194" end="9203" title="Escuintla (department)" label="Escuintla"/>
<link wikidata="Q913166" start="9415" end="9423" title="La Venta" label="La Venta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964" start="9956" end="9971" title="Mesoamerican chronology" label="Late Preclassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150786" start="10138" end="10153" title="Olmec influences on Mesoamerican cultures" label="Olmec influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101423" start="10409" end="10415" title="Maya stelae" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q767358" start="10777" end="10809" title="Mesoamerican Long Count calendar" label="Mesoamerican Long Count calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234778" start="10980" end="10988" title="Potbelly sculpture" label="potbelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081581" start="11750" end="11761" title="Kaminaljuyu" label="Kaminaljuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346148" start="11863" end="11876" title="Motagua River" label="Motagua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852201" start="12751" end="12770" title="Valley of Guatemala" label="Valley of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="12783" end="12794" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164403" start="13230" end="13241" title="Petén Basin" label="Petén Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="13602" end="13606" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971493" start="13612" end="13616" title="slip (ceramics)" label="slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="14116" end="14127" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="14143" end="14159" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948509" start="14276" end="14284" title="Suchiate River" label="Suchiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134594" start="14289" end="14298" title="Nahualate River" label="Nahualate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469362" start="14470" end="14474" title="wash (visual arts)" label="wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q27036" start="15074" end="15086" title="Sierra Madre de Chiapas" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q96066" start="16468" end="16479" title="Karl Sapper" label="Karl Sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204657" start="16718" end="16729" title="Santa María (volcano)" label="Santiaguito"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="16769" end="16781" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q705504" start="16905" end="16924" title="J. Eric S. Thompson" label="J. Eric S. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="16995" end="17015" title="Carnegie Institution" label="Carnegie Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346633" start="17170" end="17184" title="Edwin M. Shook" label="Edwin M. Shook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426806" start="17547" end="17554" title="Colomba, Quetzaltenango" label="Colomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q844502" start="17600" end="17614" title="Quetzaltenango department" label="Quetzaltenango"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="17676" end="17710" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041624" start="18098" end="18134" title="Instituto de Antropología e Historia" label="Instituto de Antropología e Historia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18331" end="18368" title="World Heritage Site#Nominating process" label="UNESCO World Heritage Tentative Lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="18470" end="18489" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q124130227" start="18632" end="18665" title="National Museum of Guatemalan Art" label="National Museum of Guatemalan Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654704" start="18842" end="18852" title="Mesoamerican ballcourts" label="ballcourts"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="18967" end="18972" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451168" start="19131" end="19139" title="temazcal" label="temazcal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19351" end="19383" title="Ministerio de Cultura y Deportes" label="Ministerio de Cultura y Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319926" start="19945" end="19949" title="fill (archaeology)" label="fill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109175" start="21470" end="21480" title="assemblage (archaeology)" label="assemblage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21632" end="21644" title="Kʼicheʼ Maya" label="Kʼicheʼ Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654704" start="23082" end="23091" title="Mesoamerican ballcourts" label="ballcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33467" start="23543" end="23551" title="Mam language" label="Mam Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="24500" end="24506" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654704" start="26412" end="26421" title="Mesoamerican ballcourt" label="ballcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="28166" end="28176" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q8675" start="28224" end="28229" title="Draco (constellation)" label="Draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q621642" start="28467" end="28475" title="appliqué" label="appliqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q913166" start="29008" end="29016" title="La Venta" label="La Venta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321023" start="29024" end="29039" title="Olmec heartland" label="Olmec heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="29043" end="29051" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="30878" end="30888" title="crocodilia" label="crocodilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="34725" end="34733" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101423" start="35583" end="35589" title="Maya stelae" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q767358" start="35657" end="35667" title="Mesoamerican Long Count calendar" label="Long Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="35995" end="36006" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q212080" start="38222" end="38232" title="Monte Alto culture" label="Monte Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="40295" end="40302" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q218626" start="40449" end="40455" title="volute" label="volute"/>
<link wikidata="Q300981" start="40504" end="40522" title="Common Vampire Bat" label="Common Vampire Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20219676" start="41783" end="41795" title="Tuxtla Chico" label="Tuxtla Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="41799" end="41806" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="42804" end="42814" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="43143" end="43150" title="Molding (decorative)" label="molding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744013" start="47432" end="47446" title="Maya maize god" label="Maya maize god"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="47662" end="47672" title="Relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q610098" start="47688" end="47698" title="Mesoamerican ballgame" label="ballplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940495" start="48994" end="49035" title="Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología" label="Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081581" start="50172" end="50183" title="Kaminaljuyu" label="Kaminaljuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455863" start="51353" end="51361" title="earspool" label="earspool"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997560" start="51389" end="51395" title="Jaguars in Mesoamerican cultures" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51985" end="52002" title="Mesoamerican chronology#Preclassic Era" label="Middle Preclassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="52254" end="52262" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="56254" end="56260" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="58456" end="58462" title="Stele" label="Stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323914" start="58981" end="58988" title="El Baúl" label="El Baúl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479866" start="60375" end="60389" title="vision serpent" label="vision serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334607" start="61229" end="61234" title="Izapa" label="Izapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q335109" start="61665" end="61676" title="Maya numerals" label="bar-and-dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245691" start="62112" end="62137" title="prismatic blade" label="prismatic obsidian blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="62406" end="62414" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="62882" end="62898" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q368205" start="64639" end="64648" title="cartouche (design)" label="cartouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="65774" end="65782" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121406" start="65821" end="65825" title="Jade use in Mesoamerica" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455863" start="65840" end="65848" title="earspool" label="earspool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874692" start="65885" end="65892" title="Mirrors in Mesoamerican culture" label="mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="65903" end="65914" title="iron pyrite" label="iron pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604583" start="66023" end="66033" title="Greenstone (archaeology)" label="greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66300" end="66316" title="K&amp;#x27;utz Chman" label="K&amp;#x27;utz Chman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539747" start="66379" end="66390" title="sacred king" label="sacred king"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66518" end="66531" title="Miguel Orrego" label="Miguel Orrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769512" start="66637" end="66645" title="Balberta" label="Balberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q723433" start="66647" end="66673" title="Bilbao (Mesoamerican site)" label="Bilbao (Mesoamerican site)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121220" start="66675" end="66703" title="Kʼicheʼ Kingdom of Qʼumarkaj" label="Kʼicheʼ Kingdom of Qʼumarkaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002996" start="66705" end="66711" title="Ujuxte" label="Ujuxte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758324" wikidata="Q621029" url="?curid=758324" title="Louis Charles Delescluze">
<text>Louis Charles Delescluze (; 2 October 1809 – 25 May 1871) was a French revolutionary leader, journalist, and military commander of the Paris Commune.

==Biography==
===Early life===

Delecluze was born at Dreux, Eure-et-Loir. He studied law in Paris, and became a member of several secret republican societies. He also took part in the July revolution of 1830 which overthrew the Bourbon monarchy and placed King Louis-Philippe into power. In 1836, he was forced to take refuge in Belgium, where he devoted himself to republican journalism.

He returned to France in 1840 and settled in Valenciennes. After the revolution of 1848, which toppled Louis-Philippe and created the Second French Republic, he moved to Paris, where he started a newspaper called &quot;La Révolution démocratique et sociale&quot; (&quot;The Democratic and Social Revolution&quot;), and founded the revolutionary organization named &quot;Solidarité républicaine.&quot; In June 1848 he and other revolutionaries made a failed attempt to overthrow the government of the new Republic, which was swiftly and violently repressed by the army under General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac. In March 1849 he was arrested and sentenced to one year in prison for criticizing Cavaignac. He was arrested again in April 1850, and sentenced to three years in prison; after which he fled from France to England. He returned secretly to France in 1853, but was arrested and condemned to ten years of prison and exile. He served his sentence at the prisons of Saint-Pelagie, Belle-Île, Carte and finally at Devil&#x27;s Island in French Guiana. Throughout his six-year imprisonment, he composed a memoir that, in 1869, was published in Paris as &quot;De Paris à Cayenne, Journal d&#x27;un transporté (From Paris to Cayenne, diary of a transport)&quot;.

In 1859, he and other political prisoners were granted amnesty by Emperor Napoleon III and in November 1860 he returned to France, weakened by illness. His next venture was the publication of the &quot;Réveil&quot;, a radical newspaper supporting the new socialist International Workingmen&#x27;s Association, which was founded in 1864. This journal brought him three condemnations, a fine and imprisonment in a single year, was finally suppressed; and he again fled to Belgium.

===Paris Commune===

The rapid defeat of the French Army in the 1870 Franco-German War and capture of the Emperor at the Battle of Sedan brought a sudden end to the Second Empire and the proclamation of the French Republic. The new government, headquartered in Bordeaux, tried to continue the war. On September 8, Delescluze returned to Paris and plunged back into revolutionary politics, agitating against the new national government. In November 1870, he was mayor of the working-class 19th arrondissement. The Germans surrounded Paris and began a long siege and began a bombardment of the city. On 28 January 1871, after the city had suffered thousands of deaths from starvation and disease, the Government of National Defense signed an armistice with the Germans. Delescluze&#x27;s denounced the armistice and called for an armed struggle against the Government of National Defense. The revolutionaries tried unsuccessfully to seize the Hotel de Ville, and Delescluze&#x27;s newspaper was briefly closed down. 

On 18 March, the French army attempted to remove a large number of cannons stored in a depot on the heights of Montmartre but they were blocked by soldiers of the Paris National Guard. The soldiers seized and killed two French Army generals, Claude Lecomte and Jacques Léon Clément-Thomas. The revolutionary leaders of Paris, including Delescluze, swiftly organized elections for a new revolutionary government, called the Paris Commune. Half of Parisians, mostly those in the more wealthy neighborhoods in the west of the city, abstained, but those in the working-class east voted in large numbers. On 26 March Delescluze was elected a member of the Commune from the 11th and 19th arrondissements, and resigned his seat in the National Assembly. On 27 March the Commune was formally proclaimed. 

====Revolutionary leader====
Delescluze, because of his prestige and long revolutionary career, soon became a member of the major committees of the Commune; the foreign relations commission, the executive commission (4 April); the Committee of Public Safety (9 May) and, although he had no military experience, the civilian delegate of the War Committee (11 May), which made him effectively the military leader of the Commune. French explorer Théodore Ber, who had come back from Peru to support the Commune, became Delescluze’s personal secretary. 

Delescluze and the other Commune members had little time to organize their new administration; after the killing of Generals Lecomte and Clément-Thomas, the French national government, led by chief executive Adolphe Thiers, moved its headquarters to Versailles and began mobilizing the French army to recapture the city. The Commune organized its own military force, the National Guard, and established a Committee of Public Safety, modeled after the Committee of the same name in the French Revolution, to suppress opposition. Opposition newspapers were closed down and, beginning on 5 April, the Commune arrested the Archbishop of Paris and two hundred priests and other religious figures, proposing to trade them for Auguste Blanqui, a radical revolutionary leader held by the French government. Thiers refused.

A new siege of Paris, by the French army, began, under the eyes of the German army, which still occupied the heights to the north and east of the city. As the army approached, Delescluze and the Commune voted to destroy symbols of the old government; the Vendôme Column was pulled down on 16 May; the home of Adolphe Thiers was emptied of his art collection and demolished on 16 May.

On 21 May Delescluze and the Commune members were debating whether to punish the Commune military leader, Gustave Cluseret for incompetence or treason when news came that the French Army had entered Paris, through a section of the city defenses that had inadvertently been left unmanned. The next day, Delescluze issued a proclamation, calling upon all Parisians to join in the fight against the army. Delescluze did not have any experience as a soldier, but he knew how to write stirring prose. This was his proclamation, which was printed and posted all over the city on the 22nd:
&quot;TO THE PEOPLE OF PARIS:
TO THE NATIONAL GUARD:

Citizens!

Enough of militarism, no more general staff with braid and gilding on their uniforms! Make way for the People, for fighters with bare arms! The hour of revolutionary war has sounded. The People don&#x27;t know anything about clever maneuvers, but when they have a rifle in their hand, and pavement under their feet, they have nothing to fear from all the strategists of the royal military school.

To arms, citizens! To arms! It is a question, as you know, of conquering or falling into the merciless hands of the reactionaries and clerics of Versailles, of those miserable ones who have, by their actions, delivered France to the Prussians, and who want to make us pay the ransom for their treason!

If you desire that the generous amount of blood which has flowed like water for the last six weeks, shall not have been in vain; if you want to live in a France that is free and where all are equal; if you want to spare your children from your pain and misery; you will rise up like one man- and because of your formidable resistance, the enemy, who proudly imagines he will put you back into your yoke, will find himself shamed for his useless crimes by which he has been stained for the last two months.

Citizens, your representatives will fight and die with you if needed; but, in the name of this glorious France, the mother of all popular revolutions, permanent home of the ideas of justice and solidarity which must be and will be the laws of the world, march at the enemy, and let your revolutionary energy show him that traitors can try to sell Paris, but that no one can surrender it or conquer it.

The Commune is counting on you- count on the Commune!&quot; 
Despite his bold words, the Commune was at a great disadvantage; the Commune forces were outnumbered by the army four or five to one; they had very few trained officers; and, most importantly, they had no plan for the defense of the city; Delescluze called upon each neighborhood to defend itself, which made it impossible for them to move or fight as a unified force.

The battle for Paris took place between 21 and 28 May 1871, which became known later as the &quot;Bloody Week&quot;. By 22 May, the army had captured Montmartre and the western part of the city. On 23 May, Delescluze and the leaders of the Commune were located inside the Hôtel de Ville. They gave orders for the burning of the Tuileries Palace, the symbol of government authority, as well as the Palais de Justice, the Cour des Comptes, the Palais de la Légion d&#x27;Honneur, part of the Palais-Royal, and other government buildings and institutions.

On 24 May, as the army approached, Delescluze and the Commune leaders had to abandon the Hôtel de Ville. As soon as they left, the City Hall was set on fire, destroying the building and the city archives. The same day, on orders from the Committee of Public Safety, Archbishop Darboy and a dozen other hostages were executed. A group of Dominican priests was executed the following day. The fighting was bitter on both sides; Commune soldiers captured by the army were often shot without further formality. 

====Death and legacy====

Delescluze and the remaining Communard leaders moved their headquarters to the city hall of the 13th arrondissement on rue Voltaire, but this neighborhood also was soon under attack by the army. At about 7:30 in the evening on the 25th, Delescluze put on his ceremonial sash as the chief executive of the Commune, and walked to the nearest defended Commune barricade, on Place Château-d&#x27;Eau. Unarmed, he climbed up to the top of the barricade, in clear view of the army soldiers, and was promptly shot dead.

After the death of Delescluze, the fighting continued on the 26th and 27th, when a bloody battle was fought at Père Lachaise cemetery. On 28 May, the last soldiers of the Commune surrendered and the fighting ended.

Army casualties numbered 873 dead and 6,424 wounded. Commune casualties were never officially counted, but six to seven thousand Commune soldiers were buried in temporary graves and then reburied in city cemeteries, and another three thousand may have been buried in unmarked graves. 45,522 Commune prisoners were taken, most of whom were released. 3,417 were sentenced to deportation, 1,247 to life in prison, 3,359 to shorter terms, and 93 were condemned to death, of whom 23 were executed. There is no marked grave for Delescluze. Despite his absence and the reports that he had been killed, he was formally tried in his absence by a military tribunal and sentenced to death.

In 1930, the city council of Paris voted to name a street in 11th arrondissement rue Charles-Delescluze.

==References==

===Notes and citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
*
*
*
===Other sources===
*Karl Marx, &#x27;Le 13 juin&#x27;, &quot;La Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane&quot;, no. 26, 29 juin 1849. 
*Charles Delescluze: &quot;Affaire de la souscription Baudin : seul compte rendu complet, recueilli par la sténographie et revu par les défenseurs&quot;. Paris: A. Le Chevalier 1868.
*Charles Delescluze: &quot;De Paris à Cayenne: Journal d&#x27;un transporté / par Ch. Delescluze&quot;. Paris: A. Le Chevalier 1869.
*Festschrift for Charles Delescluze:
:Jules Guesde: &quot;Le livre Rouge de la justice rurale: documents pour servir à l&#x27;histoire d&#x27;une république sans républicains; a la mémoire de Charles Delescluze&quot;. Paris: Editions d&#x27;Histoire Sociale 1871.
:Reprint 1968: ([Ed. par] J[ules Bazille, dit Jules], G[uesde]). Genève: Imprimerie Blanchard; [Réimpr.:] Paris: Editions d&#x27;Histoire Sociale, 1868.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621029" start="0" end="24" title="Louis Charles Delescluze" label="Louis Charles Delescluze"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="135" end="148" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q142410" start="205" end="224" title="Dreux" label="Dreux, Eure-et-Loir"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="336" end="359" title="July Revolution" label="July revolution of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="413" end="427" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="481" end="488" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163795" start="587" end="599" title="Valenciennes" label="Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="611" end="629" title="revolution of 1848" label="revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="676" end="698" title="Second French Republic" label="Second French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379702" start="1124" end="1146" title="Louis-Eugène Cavaignac" label="Louis-Eugène Cavaignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q220385" start="1555" end="1574" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="1578" end="1591" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1876" end="1888" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q183725" start="2067" end="2110" title="International Workingmen&amp;#x27;s Association" label="International Workingmen&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2351" end="2368" title="Franco-German War" label="Franco-German War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156681" start="2403" end="2418" title="Battle of Sedan" label="Battle of Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="3409" end="3419" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977691" start="3540" end="3554" title="Claude Lecomte" label="Claude Lecomte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159435" start="3559" end="3586" title="Jacques Léon Clément-Thomas" label="Jacques Léon Clément-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="3721" end="3734" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q22911814" start="4539" end="4551" title="Théodore Ber" label="Théodore Ber"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4576" end="4580" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="4855" end="4869" title="Adolphe Thiers" label="Adolphe Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q309722" start="5367" end="5382" title="Auguste Blanqui" label="Auguste Blanqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q643520" start="5718" end="5732" title="Vendôme Column" label="Vendôme Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="5772" end="5786" title="Adolphe Thiers" label="Adolphe Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q684449" start="5954" end="5970" title="Gustave Cluseret" label="Gustave Cluseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478362" start="8636" end="8647" title="Semaine sanglante" label="Bloody Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="8866" end="8882" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q143080" start="8935" end="8952" title="Palais de Justice, Paris" label="Palais de Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137614" start="8958" end="8974" title="Cour des Comptes" label="Cour des Comptes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229917" start="8980" end="9014" title="Palais de la Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Palais de la Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q329948" start="9028" end="9040" title="Palais-Royal" label="Palais-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="10252" end="10265" title="Père Lachaise" label="Père Lachaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q933348" start="11650" end="11661" title="Festschrift" label="Festschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q379699" start="11687" end="11699" title="Jules Guesde" label="Jules Guesde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758328" wikidata="Q175669" url="?curid=758328" title="Stijn Streuvels">
<text>Franciscus &quot;Frank&quot; Petrus Maria Lateur (3 October 1871 – 15 August 1969), known as Stijn Streuvels (), was a Flemish Belgian writer.

==Biography==
He started writing at a very young age. He was inspired by his uncle, the poet Guido Gezelle. Until 1905 he worked as a baker at Avelghem, a village near Kortrijk. Initially his work was published in an insignificant magazine, &quot;De jonge Vlaming&quot; (The young Fleming). Soon he was discovered by the editors of a new magazine, &quot;Van Nu en Straks&quot; (From Now and Soon). After their first encounter, Emmanuel de Bom became his mentor and advised him to publish his work in book form.

In 1905 he married Alida Staelens. They had 4 children: Paula (1906), Paul (1909), Dina (1916) and Isa (1922). In 1980 their house became a museum dedicated to Streuvels.

Streuvels work usually deals with the rural life of poor farmers in Flanders. &quot;De Teleurgang van de Waterhoek&quot; was made into a film titled &quot;Mira&quot;. Also &quot;De vlaschaard&quot; (twice) and &quot;De blijde dag&quot; were filmed.

In 1937 and 1938 Streuvels garnered the majority of the Nobel Committee votes for his receiving the literature Nobel Prize, but each time the academy awarded the prize to someone else: in 1937 he had to give way to Roger Martin du Gard and in 1938 to a new discovery, Pearl Buck. He became doctor honoris causa at the University of Leuven, the University of Münster and the University of Pretoria.

== Published work ==

* &quot;Lenteleven&quot; (1899) - containing and &quot;Het einde&quot;
* &quot;Zomerland&quot; (1900) - containing &quot;Groeikracht&quot;, &quot;Zomerland&quot;, &quot;Meimorgen&quot; and &quot;Het woud&quot;
* &quot;Zonnetij&quot; (1900) - containing &quot;De oogst&quot;, &quot;In &#x27;t water&quot;, &quot;Zomerzondag&quot; and &quot;Avondrust&quot;
* &quot;Doodendans&quot; (1901) - containing &quot;Doodendans&quot;, &quot;Jongenstijd&quot; (in later editions : &quot;Kindertijd&quot;), &quot;In de wijde wereld&quot;, &quot;Een speeldag&quot;, &quot;In de weide&quot;, &quot;Noorsche liederen&quot;, &quot;Honden&quot; and &quot;Doodendans 2&quot;
* &quot;De oogst&quot; (1901) - from &quot;Zonnetij&quot;
* &quot;Langs de wegen&quot; (1902) - The book Streuvels himself loved the most
* &quot;Dagen&quot; (1902) - containing &quot;De kalfkoe&quot;, &quot;Naar buiten&quot;, &quot;Sint-Jan&quot;, &quot;Sint-Josef&quot;, &quot;Vrede&quot; and &quot;Verovering&quot;
* &quot;Vertellingen van Tolstoï&quot; (1902) - 13 narrations of Tolstoy, translated from German
* &quot;Minnehandel&quot; (1903) - containing &quot;Joel&quot;, &quot;Maagdekensminne&quot;, and 
* &quot;Geluk in &#x27;t huishouden&quot; (1903) - Book of Tolstoy, translated from German
* &quot;Soldatenbloed&quot; (1904) - Dramatic play
* &quot;Dorpsgeheimen I&quot; (1904) - containing &quot;De lawine&quot;, &quot;Bertken en de moordenaars alle twaalf&quot; (in later editions : &quot;Een beroerde maandag&quot;) and &quot;Jantje Verdure&quot;
* &quot;Dorpsgeheimen II&quot; (1904) - containing &quot;Kinderzieltje&quot;, and &quot;Op het kasteel&quot;
* &quot;Openlucht&quot; (1905) - containing &quot;Zonder dak&quot;, &quot;Grootmoederken&quot;, &quot;Een nieuw hoedje&quot;, &quot;Het duivelstuig&quot; and &quot;Jeugd&quot;
* &quot;Stille avonden&quot; (1905) - containing &quot;Een lustige begraving&quot;, &quot;Horieneke&quot;, &quot;Zomerdagen op het vlakke land&quot;, &quot;Zonneblommen&quot; and &quot;Ingoyghem&quot;
* &quot;Grootmoederken&quot; (1905) - from &quot;Openlucht&quot;
* &quot;Het uitzicht der dingen&quot; (1906) - containing &quot;De kwade dagen&quot;, &quot;De veeprijskamp&quot; and &quot;De ommegang&quot;
* &quot;Reinaert de Vos&quot; (1907)
* &quot;De vlaschaard&quot; (1907)
* &quot;Twee vertellingen van Tolstoï&quot; (1908)
* &quot;Tieghem : Het Vlaamse lustoord&quot; (1908) - containing &quot;De Streek&quot;, &quot;Sint Aernout&quot;, &quot;Het oude Tieghem&quot;, &quot;Het Lustoord&quot; and &quot;Eene wandeling&quot;
* &quot;Najaar I&quot; (1909) - containing &quot;Najaar&quot;, &quot;De blijde dag&quot; (&quot;Najaar&quot; was later included in &quot;Najaar II&quot;; from then on &quot;Najaar I&quot; became &quot;De blijde dag&quot;)
* &quot;Najaar II&quot; (1909) - containing &quot;De boomen&quot;, &quot;Jacht&quot;, &quot;De aanslag&quot; (After inclusion of &quot;Najaar I&quot;, &quot;Najaar II&quot; Became &quot;Najaar&quot;)
* &quot;Reinaert de Vos voor de Vierschaar van Koning Nobel de leeuw&quot; (1909)
*&quot;Reinaert de Vos&quot; (1910) - Short version of the 1907 edition
* &quot;Björnson, Kleine verhalen&quot; (1910) - 8 stories of Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson translated from Norwegian
* &quot;Vertelsel van Gokkel en Hinkel&quot; (1910) - A story of Clemens Brentano translated from German
* &quot;De Mourlons&quot; (1910) - A book of F. Bouché translated from French
* &quot;Het kerstekind&quot; (1911)
* &quot;Björnstjerne Björnson, Het Bruidslied&quot; (1911) - Translated from Norwegian
* &quot;Over vrouwe Courtmans&quot; (1911) - Text of a lecture
* &quot;Het glorierijke licht&quot; (1912)
* &quot;Morgenstond&quot; (1912)
* &quot;De werkman&quot; (1913) - Later included in &quot;Werkmenschen&quot;
* (1913)
* &quot;Een beroerde maandag&quot; (1913) - containing &quot;Een beroerde maandag&quot; and &quot;De lawine&quot; (from &quot;Dorpsgeheimen I&quot;)
* &quot;Dorpslucht in 2 delen&quot; (1914)
* &quot;Mijn rijwiel&quot; (1915) - containing &quot;Mijn rijwiel &quot;, &quot;Hoe men schrijver wordt&quot;
* &quot;In oorlogstijd&quot; (1915–1916) - containing &quot;Augustus 1914&quot;, &quot;September 1914&quot;, &quot;October 1914&quot;, &quot;November 1914&quot;, &quot;December 1914-I&quot; and &quot;December 1914-Slot&quot;
* &quot;De aanslag&quot; (1917) from &quot;Najaar II&quot;
* &quot;Charles de Coster&#x27;s Vlaamsche vertelsels&quot; (1918) - translated from French - containing &quot;De mannen van Smeerop&quot;, &quot;Blanca, Clara en Candida&quot;, &quot;Heere Halewijn&quot; and &quot;Smedje Smee&quot;
* &quot;Sint-Jan&quot; (1919) - from &quot;Dagen&quot;
* &quot;De boomen&quot; (1919) - from &quot;Najaar II&quot;
* &quot;Björnson, Een vrolijke knaap&quot; (1919) - from &quot;Kleine verhalen&quot;
* &quot;Genoveva van Brabant Deel I&quot; (1919)
* &quot;Genoveva van Brabant Deel II&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Reinaert de Vos&quot; (1921)
* &quot;De blijde dag&quot; (1921) see &quot;Najaar I&quot;
* (1921) - short version of the work from 1919
* &quot;Prutske&quot; (1922)
* &quot;Grootmoedertje&quot; (1922) - Play version of &quot;Grootmoederken&quot; from &quot;Openlucht&quot;
* &quot;Vertelsels van &#x27;t jaar nul&quot; (1922) - containing 29 short stories
* &quot;Land en leven in Vlaanderen&quot; (1923) - containing &quot;Het uitzicht&quot;, , , 
* &quot;Herinneringen uit het verleden&quot; (1924) - containing &quot;Onze streek&quot;, &quot;Damme&quot;, &quot;Veurn-Ambacht&quot;, &quot;Volkslectuur&quot; (= edited and enhanced version of &quot;Over vrouwe Courtmans&quot;), &quot;Schoonheid&quot;, &quot;De schoonste deugd&quot;, &quot;Kinderlectuur&quot;, &quot;Mijn schooltijd&quot;, &quot;Het lied van den weemoed&quot;, &quot;Mijn loopbaan op de planken&quot;, &quot;Voor den oorlog&quot;, &quot;Mijn fiets in oorlogstijd&quot;, &quot;Na den oorlog&quot;, &quot;Na vijf en twintig jaren&quot;
* &quot;Tristan en Isolde&quot; (1924) - Based on the old folk book
* &quot;Op de Vlaamsche binnenwateren&quot; (1925) - containing &quot; &#x27;t Haantje&quot;, &quot;Dinsdag&quot;, &quot;Woensdag&quot;, &quot;Donderdag&quot;, &quot;Vrijdag&quot;, &quot;Zaterdag&quot;, &quot;Zondag&quot;
* &quot;Waarom ik Vlaanderen liefheb&quot; (1926) - original by G. Blachon translated from French
* &quot;Werkmenschen&quot; (1926) - containing &quot;De werkman&quot; (separately published in 1913), &quot;Kerstmis in niemandsland&quot;, &quot;Het leven en de dood in den ast&quot;
* &quot;De teleurgang van den Waterhoek&quot; (1927)
* &quot;De drie Koningen aan de kust&quot; (1927)
* &quot;De tijd der kollebloemen&quot; (1927) - original by D.-J. D&#x27;Orbaix translated from French
* &quot;Levenswijsheid uit China&quot; (1928) - translated from German
* &quot;Vader en dochter&quot; (1928) - Correspondence of Tolstoy with his daughter Marie translated from German
* &quot;Reinaert de Vos fragment&quot; (1928)
* &quot;Kerstwake&quot; (1928)
* &quot;Kerstvertelsel&quot; (1929) - In 1938 published as &quot;De vreemde verteller&quot;
* &quot;Over Genoveva van Brabant&quot; (1929) - Text of a lecture
* &quot;Alma met de vlassen haren&quot; (1931)
* &quot;De oude wiking&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Dr. Lauwers schriften&quot; (1931) - Text of a lecture
* &quot;Drie Russische novellen&quot; (1932)
* &quot;De rampzalige kaproen&quot; (1933) - Rewriting of a medieval rural novel of Wernher de Tuinder
* (1933) - containing 18 stories
* &quot;Sagen uit het hooge noorden&quot; (1934) - containing 38 tales from Denmark, Sweden and Iceland
* &quot;Zeelieden en zeevisscherij&quot; (1934) - Edited from French book of René de Pauw: &quot;Gens de mer et pêche maritime&quot;
* &quot;Vijf kerstvertellingen&quot; (1934) - Translated from French work of Camille Melloy
* &quot;Prutske&#x27;s vertelselboek&quot; (1935) - containing 9 stories
* &quot;Levensbloesem&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Paradijssprookjes&quot; (1938) - From original of Max Mell.
* &quot;De terechtstelling van een onschuldige&quot; (1940)
* &quot;De maanden&quot; (1941) - Title in The Netherlands: &quot;Een gang door het jaar&quot;
* &quot;De grauwe ruiter&quot; (1942) - original by Herbert von Hoerner translated from German
* &quot;Smedje Smee&quot; (1942) - From &quot;Vlaamsche vertelsels&quot; of Ch. de Coster
* &quot;Heule&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Jantje Verdure&quot; (1943) - from &quot;Dorpsgeheimen I&quot;
* &quot;Het leven en de dood in den ast&quot; (1944) - from &quot;Werkmenschen&quot;
* &quot;Jeugd&quot; (1946) - from &quot;Openlucht&quot;
* &quot;Avelghem&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Beroering over het dorp&quot; (1948) - Short reworked version of &quot;Dorpslucht&quot;
* &quot;Ingoyghem&quot; (1951) - Period 1904–1914
* &quot;Ingoyghem II&quot; (1957) - Periode 1914–1940
* &quot;Ingooigem&quot; (1980) - containing &quot;Ingoyghem&quot; and &quot;Ingoyghem II&quot;
* &quot;Kroniek van de familie Gezelle&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Hugo Verriest&quot; (1964) - Monography
* &quot;In levenden lijve&quot; (1966) - Reworkings of some texts from &quot;Heule&quot;, &quot;Avelghem&quot;, &quot;Ingoyghem&quot; and &quot;Ingoyghem II&quot;, &quot;Kroniek van de familie Gezelle&quot; and &quot;Herinneringen uit het verleden&quot;
* (1970) - from &quot;Lenteleven&quot;
* &quot;Het zinnespel van droom en dood&quot; (1971) - play version of &quot;Het leven en de dood in den ast&quot;
* &quot;Hoe ik Brugge gezien en beleefd heb&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Onze streek&quot; (1972) - part of &quot;Herinneringen uit het verleden&quot;

== Awarded prizes ==
* Prize of Dutch Literature 1906 for his work over the period 1900–1904
* Prize of Dutch Literature 1911 for his work over the period 1905–1909
* State Prize for Literature 1935
* Prize Scriptores Catholici 1950
* Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren 1962 for his entire life work

==See also==
* Flemish literature

== Sources ==
* Stijn Streuvels

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175669" start="0" end="10" title="Stijn Streuvels" label="Franciscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q175669" start="17" end="22" title="Stijn Streuvels" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q175669" start="29" end="48" title="Stijn Streuvels" label="Petrus Maria Lateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q175669" start="93" end="108" title="Stijn Streuvels" label="Stijn Streuvels"/>
<link wikidata="Q336977" start="237" end="250" title="Guido Gezelle" label="Guido Gezelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q590299" start="498" end="514" title="Van Nu en Straks" label="Van Nu en Straks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="571" end="586" title="Emmanuel de Bom" label="Emmanuel de Bom"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="598" end="604" title="mentor" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="644" end="648" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="796" end="802" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="896" end="904" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="965" end="969" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565999" start="983" end="987" title="Mira (1971 film)" label="Mira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046261" start="1006" end="1019" title="De vlaschaard" label="De vlaschaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46446" start="1134" end="1149" title="Nobel Committee" label="Nobel Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="1189" end="1200" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q129155" start="1293" end="1313" title="Roger Martin du Gard" label="Roger Martin du Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80900" start="1346" end="1356" title="Pearl Buck" label="Pearl Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618975" start="1368" end="1374" title="Doctor (title)" label="doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="1375" end="1388" title="honoris causa" label="honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q644789" start="1396" end="1416" title="Catholic University of Leuven (1834–1968)" label="University of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q168426" start="1422" end="1443" title="University of Münster" label="University of Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q604444" start="1452" end="1474" title="University of Pretoria" label="University of Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="2538" end="2545" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046261" start="3757" end="3770" title="De vlaschaard" label="De vlaschaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="4673" end="4694" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="4711" end="4720" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="5017" end="5026" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698050" start="6022" end="6036" title="Heer Halewijn" label="Heere Halewijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="8288" end="8295" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8830" end="8838" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="8839" end="8844" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="8845" end="8850" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="9002" end="9009" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9618" end="9637" title=":de:Herbert von Hoerner" label="Herbert von Hoerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063896" start="11202" end="11232" title="Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren" label="Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren"/>
<link wikidata="Q834293" start="11279" end="11297" title="Flemish literature" label="Flemish literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758331" wikidata="Q741198" url="?curid=758331" title="Marshall H. Stone">
<text>Marshall Harvey Stone (April 8, 1903 – January 9, 1989) was an American mathematician who contributed to real analysis, functional analysis, topology and the study of Boolean algebras.

==Biography==

Stone was the son of Harlan Fiske Stone, who was the Chief Justice of the United States in 1941–1946. Marshall Stone&#x27;s family expected him to become a lawyer like his father, but he became enamored of mathematics while he was an undergraduate at Harvard University, where he was a classmate of future judge Henry Friendly. He completed a PhD there in 1926, with a thesis on differential equations that was supervised by George David Birkhoff. Between 1925 and 1937, he taught at Harvard, Yale University, and Columbia University. Stone was promoted to a full professor at Harvard in 1937.

During World War II, Stone did classified research as part of the &quot;Office of Naval Operations&quot; and the &quot;Office of the Chief of Staff&quot; of the United States Department of War. In 1946, he became the chairman of the Mathematics Department at the University of Chicago, a position that he held until 1952. While chairman, Stone hired several notable mathematicians including Paul Halmos, André Weil, Saunders Mac Lane, Antoni Zygmund, and Shiing-Shen Chern. He remained on the faculty at this university until 1968, after which he taught at the University of Massachusetts Amherst until 1980.

In 1989, Stone died in Madras, India (now referred to as Chennai), due to a stroke. Following his death, many mathematicians praised Stone for his contributions to various mathematical fields. For instance, University of Massachusetts Amherst mathematician Larry Mann claimed that &quot;Professor Stone was one of the greatest American mathematicians of this century,&quot; while Mac Lane described how Stone made the University of Chicago mathematics department the &quot;best department in mathematics in the country in that period.&quot; 

==Accomplishments==
Stone made several advances in the 1930s:
*In 1930, he proved the Stone–von Neumann uniqueness theorem.
*In 1932, he published a 662 page long monograph titled &quot;Linear transformations in Hilbert space and their applications to analysis&quot;, which was a presentation about self-adjoint operators. Much of its content is now deemed to be part of functional analysis.
*In 1932, he proved conjectures by Hermann Weyl on spectral theory, arising from the application of group theory to quantum mechanics.
*In 1934, he published two papers setting out what is now called Stone–Čech compactification theory. This theory grew out of his attempts to understand more deeply his results on spectral theory.
*In 1936, he published a long paper that included Stone&#x27;s representation theorem for Boolean algebras, an important result in mathematical logic, topology, universal algebra and category theory. The theorem has been the starting point for what is now called Stone duality.
*In 1937, he published the Stone–Weierstrass theorem which generalized Weierstrass&#x27;s theorem on the uniform approximation of continuous functions by polynomials.

Stone was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1933 and the National Academy of Sciences (United States) in 1938. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1943. He presided over the American Mathematical Society, 1943–44, and the International Mathematical Union, 1952–54. In 1982, he was awarded the National Medal of Science.

==Selected publications==
*
* 
* (50 pages)

==See also==
* Convex space
* Ideals
* Unbounded operator
* Stone algebra

==References==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q741198" start="0" end="21" title="Marshall H. Stone" label="Marshall Harvey Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="105" end="118" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="120" end="139" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="141" end="149" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="167" end="182" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="222" end="240" title="Harlan Fiske Stone" label="Harlan Fiske Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="254" end="288" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="452" end="470" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721635" start="513" end="527" title="Henry Friendly" label="Henry Friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="544" end="547" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="580" end="602" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q327301" start="626" end="647" title="George David Birkhoff" label="George David Birkhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="694" end="709" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="715" end="734" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="803" end="815" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="957" end="988" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1059" end="1080" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q370085" start="1187" end="1198" title="Paul Halmos" label="Paul Halmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q323232" start="1200" end="1210" title="André Weil" label="André Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q441223" start="1212" end="1229" title="Saunders Mac Lane" label="Saunders Mac Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q598132" start="1231" end="1245" title="Antoni Zygmund" label="Antoni Zygmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q328131" start="1251" end="1268" title="Shiing-Shen Chern" label="Shiing-Shen Chern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="1357" end="1392" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="1429" end="1442" title="Madras, India" label="Madras, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="2035" end="2052" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="2161" end="2174" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="2248" end="2269" title="self-adjoint operator" label="self-adjoint operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="2320" end="2339" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="2376" end="2388" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409122" start="2392" end="2407" title="spectral theory" label="spectral theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="2441" end="2453" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2457" end="2474" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033899" start="2541" end="2568" title="Stone–Čech compactification" label="Stone–Čech compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166774" start="2722" end="2778" title="Stone&amp;#x27;s representation theorem for Boolean algebras" label="Stone&amp;#x27;s representation theorem for Boolean algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="2803" end="2821" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="2823" end="2831" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="2833" end="2850" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="2855" end="2870" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619060" start="2935" end="2948" title="Stone duality" label="Stone duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q939927" start="2977" end="3002" title="Stone–Weierstrass theorem" label="Stone–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="3021" end="3032" title="Weierstrass" label="Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="3143" end="3180" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="3197" end="3225" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3273" end="3303" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="3334" end="3363" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="3382" end="3414" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="3453" end="3478" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q117443049" start="3541" end="3553" title="Convex space" label="Convex space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656686" start="3556" end="3562" title="Ideal (order theory)" label="Ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108738" start="3565" end="3583" title="Unbounded operator" label="Unbounded operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619048" start="3586" end="3599" title="Stone algebra" label="Stone algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758332" wikidata="Q6233517" url="?curid=758332" title="John Flynn">
<text>John or Johnny Flynn may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
*John Flynn (director) (1932–2007), American film director
*Johnny Flynn (born 1983), British actor and musician
*John Flynn (Marvel Cinematic Universe), fictional character

==Law and politics==
*John Flynn Jr. (born 1820), American politician in Wisconsin
*John E. Flynn (1912–2003), American politician from New York
*John Gerrard Flynn (born 1937), British ambassador to Venezuela, the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and Angola
*John Flynn (Australian politician) (born 1953), Australian politician
*John Flynn (New Brunswick politician) (born 1954)
*John Flynn (Irish politician) (died 1968), Fianna Fáil politician from Kerry
*John J. Flynn, former district attorney of Erie County, New York, chairman of the National District Attorneys Association

==Sports==
*John Flynn (baseball) (1883–1935), American baseball player
*John Flynn (rugby league) (1884–1918), English rugby league footballer
*John Flynn (cricketer) (1890–1952), Australian cricketer
*John Flynn (footballer, born 1948), English footballer
*John Flynn (Gaelic footballer) (born 1984), Irish Gaelic footballer

==Others==
*John Flynn (minister) (1880–1951), Australian presbyterian minister and medical missionary
*John T. Flynn (1882–1964), American journalist
*John P. Flynn (1922–1997), United States Air Force general
*John J. Flynn, American labor union leader

==See also==
*John Flinn (born 1954), American baseball player
*John Flinn (politician) (died c. 1900), Canadian politician and prison warden
*Jonny Flynn (born 1989), American basketball player
*John Flynt (1914–2007), American politician; U.S. Representative from Georgia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6233517" start="0" end="4" title="John Flynn" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233517" start="8" end="20" title="John Flynn" label="Johnny Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q726095" start="64" end="85" title="John Flynn (director)" label="John Flynn (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893931" start="123" end="135" title="Johnny Flynn" label="Johnny Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="177" end="215" title="John Flynn (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="John Flynn (Marvel Cinematic Universe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107353819" start="260" end="274" title="John Flynn Jr." label="John Flynn Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6230735" start="322" end="335" title="John E. Flynn" label="John E. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235197" start="384" end="402" title="John Gerrard Flynn" label="John Gerrard Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185344" start="495" end="529" title="John Flynn (Australian politician)" label="John Flynn (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186234" start="566" end="603" title="John Flynn (New Brunswick politician)" label="John Flynn (New Brunswick politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233519" start="617" end="646" title="John Flynn (Irish politician)" label="John Flynn (Irish politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114843" start="738" end="759" title="Erie County, New York" label="Erie County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233522" start="830" end="851" title="John Flynn (baseball)" label="John Flynn (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233524" start="891" end="916" title="John Flynn (rugby league)" label="John Flynn (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065978" start="963" end="985" title="John Flynn (cricketer)" label="John Flynn (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16120925" start="1021" end="1055" title="John Flynn (footballer, born 1948)" label="John Flynn (footballer, born 1948)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233515" start="1077" end="1107" title="John Flynn (Gaelic footballer)" label="John Flynn (Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q323080" start="1158" end="1179" title="John Flynn (minister)" label="John Flynn (minister)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182589" start="1250" end="1263" title="John T. Flynn" label="John T. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q94376087" start="1298" end="1311" title="John P. Flynn" label="John P. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q122878406" start="1358" end="1371" title="John J. Flynn" label="John J. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233460" start="1416" end="1426" title="John Flinn" label="John Flinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233458" start="1466" end="1489" title="John Flinn (politician)" label="John Flinn (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q921771" start="1545" end="1556" title="Jonny Flynn" label="Jonny Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700604" start="1598" end="1608" title="John Flynt" label="John Flynt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758337" wikidata="Q5044439" url="?curid=758337" title="Carol Lin">
<text>Carol Lin is an American former journalist, best known as the first national television news anchor to report on the September 11 attacks, reporting for CNN, at 8:49 a.m. on the day of the attacks. Lin previously worked as a reporter for ABC News and reported for NPR. She subsequently worked for the Los Angeles County Chief Executive Office as a communications director and senior advisor.

==Early life==
Lin was born to parents Hsi Chuan Chen and Po Chen Lin.

Lin, after graduating from Los Angeles John Marshall High School in 1986, earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in history from the University of California, Los Angeles.

==Career==
Early in her career, Lin served as a weekend news anchor for KTTV in Los Angeles where she worked in the Special Undercover Investigations Unit. She started her reporting career at the Washington, D.C., bureau of CONUS Communications, where she covered the presidency of Ronald Reagan.

===ABC News===
In the 1990s, Lin reported for ABC News, where she served as a national correspondent and substitute anchor for &quot;Good Morning America&quot; and also reported for &quot;World News Tonight with Peter Jennings&quot;. While with ABC News, Lin&#x27;s major stories included national reports on the Montana Freeman standoff, the Unabomber arrest, the North Dakota floods, and the JonBenet Ramsey murder case.

===CNN===
From 1998 to December 30, 2006, Lin served as a news anchor and correspondent for CNN and was based in the network&#x27;s worldwide headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. During her time at CNN, Lin anchored several news programs, including &quot;CNN Early Edition&quot;, &quot;CNN Live at Daybreak&quot;, the weekend editions of &quot;CNN Newsroom&quot;, and the former news-magazine program &quot;CNN NewsStand&quot;. She covered several major news stories during this time, including the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton, the 1999 shootings at Columbine High School, the fall of the Taliban in Afghanistan in 2001, and the 2002 rescue of nine miners in Somerset, Pennsylvania, who were trapped for 77 hours.

Lin reported live from New York City&#x27;s Times Square as part of CNN&#x27;s worldwide Millennium night coverage on New Year&#x27;s Eve, December 31, 1999.

She played an integral role in CNN&#x27;s Election 2000 coverage, anchoring live from the New Hampshire Primary, and from the Democratic Convention from the Staples Center in Los Angeles. Lin also interviewed many of the key players during the Florida vote recount, including Florida Governor Jeb Bush.

Lin traveled the world to report on numerous breaking news stories for CNN, including the rebuilding of Kosovo. She also traveled to Jerusalem during the siege of Bethlehem to cover tensions between Israel and the Palestinian territories.

====September 11 attacks====
Lin was the first television anchor to break the news of the September 11 attacks to a worldwide audience. It was three minutes after the attacks began in New York City that CNN interrupted a Ditech TV commercial at 8:49 a.m. EST with a live picture of the World Trade Center&#x27;s north tower on fire and Lin reporting from CNN Center in Atlanta:

Yeah. This just in. You are looking at obviously a very disturbing live shot there. That is the World Trade Center, and we have unconfirmed reports this morning that a plane has crashed into one of the towers of the World Trade Center. CNN Center right now is just beginning to work on this story, obviously calling our sources and trying to figure out exactly what happened, but clearly something relatively devastating happening this morning there on the south end of the island of Manhattan. That is once again, a picture of one of the towers of the World Trade Center.

Less than two months after Lin reported the news of the September 11 attacks, she traveled to Pakistan to report on numerous topics for CNN, including Afghan refugees in the country.

===Later career===
In 2007, Lin became a visiting lecturer at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism.

In 2012, Lin joined the Los Angeles County Probation Department as a spokesperson. In 2015, she moved to the Los Angeles County Sheriff&#x27;s Department to direct their strategic communications unit. In 2018, due to a change in administration, she took a position as senior advisor to the chief executive officer of Los Angeles County. Lin retired from the county in 2021.

==Awards and honors==
Lin&#x27;s journalism had been praised by numerous media critics, including Jon Friedman of MarketWatch, who cited how she handled the news of the death of her former ABC News colleague Peter Jennings. Friedman first noted &quot;CNN distinguished itself by sticking to the story and giving a balanced picture of Jennings&#x27; career -- thanks in large part to Lin&#x27;s composure,&quot; and went on to write that Lin &quot;was steady, thoughtful and, most of all, reliable -- the essential quality for any journalist working under pressure.&quot;

Lin has been honored with numerous awards for her work, including three Los Angeles Press Club Awards. Lin was also the first recipient of the National IMAGE Award by the Organization of Chinese Americans.

==Personal life==
Lin&#x27;s husband, William Robinson, an eight-time Emmy Award-winning news producer, died of cancer in 2003. They had one child, who attended the University of California, Berkeley and studied Art Practice and Media Studies, with a minor in Journalism. In February 2009, Lin married Mike Dowling, then UCLA assistant athletic director of operations.

==References==
==External links==
*CarolLinReports.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5044439" start="0" end="9" title="Carol Lin" label="Carol Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="117" end="137" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="153" end="156" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="238" end="246" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="264" end="267" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683176" start="301" end="342" title="Los Angeles County Chief Executive Office" label="Los Angeles County Chief Executive Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="591" end="628" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="703" end="707" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="711" end="722" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="899" end="926" title="presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="presidency of Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="1062" end="1082" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q700417" start="1117" end="1155" title="ABC World News Tonight" label="World News Tonight with Peter Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738776" start="1242" end="1257" title="Montana Freemen" label="Montana Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="1272" end="1281" title="Ted Kaczynski" label="Unabomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q51716967" start="1323" end="1338" title="Death of JonBenét Ramsey" label="JonBenet Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1511" end="1527" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1880" end="1892" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="1903" end="1937" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="shootings at Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="1955" end="1962" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1966" end="1977" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2104" end="2117" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="2125" end="2137" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="2282" end="2295" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="Election 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="2533" end="2541" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="2648" end="2654" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q508006" start="2698" end="2716" title="siege of Bethlehem" label="siege of Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2874" end="2894" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2968" end="2981" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283644" start="3005" end="3011" title="Ditech" label="Ditech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="3070" end="3088" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798738" start="3139" end="3149" title="CNN Center" label="CNN Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3153" end="3160" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="3259" end="3277" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798738" start="3399" end="3409" title="CNN Center" label="CNN Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3831" end="3839" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="3888" end="3903" title="Afghan refugees" label="Afghan refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866332" start="3987" end="4040" title="USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism" label="USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682096" start="4067" end="4106" title="Los Angeles County Probation Department" label="Los Angeles County Probation Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259709" start="4152" end="4196" title="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068426" start="4532" end="4543" title="MarketWatch" label="MarketWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q354540" start="4626" end="4640" title="Peter Jennings" label="Peter Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101965" start="5161" end="5194" title="Organization of Chinese Americans" label="Organization of Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5362" end="5396" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758338" wikidata="Q337983" url="?curid=758338" title="Charles Yorke, 5th Earl of Hardwicke">
<text>Charles Philip Yorke, 5th Earl of Hardwicke, (23 April 1836 – 18 May 1897), styled Viscount Royston until 1873, was a British aristocrat, Conservative politician and dandy.

==Background==
Hardwicke was the eldest son of Admiral Charles Yorke, 4th Earl of Hardwicke, and the Hon. Susan, daughter of Thomas Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth. Elliot Yorke was his younger brother.

==Cambridge==
While studying at Trinity College, Cambridge, Hardwicke played first-class cricket on four occasions for Cambridge University Cricket Club in 1856 and 1857. He was also a Freemason, initiated into Lodge of Himalayan Brotherhood No. 459 and was appointed Provincial Grand Master of Cambridgeshire in 1872.

==Political career==
Hardwicke was returned to Parliament for Cambridgeshire in 1865 (succeeding his uncle Eliot Yorke) and served under the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli as Comptroller of the Household between 1866 and 1868. He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1866.
In 1873 he succeeded his father in the earldom and to his estates, including Wimpole Hall in Cambridgeshire, and entered the House of Lords. The following year he was appointed Master of the Buckhounds under Disraeli, and continued in this post until the government fell in 1880.

In 1879 Lord Hardwicke had a horse race, the Hardwicke Stakes, named after him.

An inveterate gambler, the 5th Earl racked up huge debts with the Agar-Robartes Bank and was obliged to put the Wimpole Hall Estate up for sale by auction in 1891. When it failed to raise the reserve price Lord Robartes, as Chairman of Agar-Robartes Bank, accepted the estate in settlement.

==Family==
Lord Hardwicke married Lady Sophia Georgiana Robertina, daughter of Henry Wellesley, 1st Earl Cowley, in 1863. They had one son and two daughters.

*Lady Feodorowna (1864 - 27 June 1934) married Humphrey Sturt, 2nd Baron Alington on 27 June 1934. They had two sons, and three daughters.
*Lady Magdalen (1865 - 27 Jan 1940) married Sir Richard Henry Williams-Bulkeley, 12th Baronet on 10 December 1885. They had two sons, and two daughters.
*Albert Edward Philip Henry Yorke, 6th Earl of Hardwicke (14 Mar 1867 - 29 Nov 1904)

He died in May 1897, aged 61, and was succeeded in the earldom by his only son, Albert. The Countess of Hardwicke died in June 1923.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337983" start="0" end="43" title="Charles Yorke, 5th Earl of Hardwicke" label="Charles Philip Yorke, 5th Earl of Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q337983" start="83" end="99" title="Charles Yorke, 5th Earl of Hardwicke" label="Viscount Royston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="138" end="150" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q876391" start="166" end="171" title="dandy" label="dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083776" start="229" end="265" title="Charles Yorke, 4th Earl of Hardwicke" label="Charles Yorke, 4th Earl of Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791851" start="299" end="336" title="Thomas Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth" label="Thomas Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365591" start="338" end="350" title="Elliot Yorke" label="Elliot Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="409" end="435" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="454" end="473" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q949035" start="496" end="529" title="Cambridge University Cricket Club" label="Cambridge University Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="562" end="571" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025647" start="759" end="773" title="Cambridgeshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361267" start="804" end="815" title="Eliot Yorke" label="Eliot Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="838" end="851" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="856" end="873" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577691" start="877" end="905" title="Comptroller of the Household" label="Comptroller of the Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="949" end="962" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q68990657" start="1049" end="1061" title="Wimpole Hall" label="Wimpole Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1097" end="1111" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851591" start="1149" end="1173" title="Master of the Buckhounds" label="Master of the Buckhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1282" end="1292" title="horse-racing" label="horse race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656494" start="1298" end="1314" title="Hardwicke Stakes" label="Hardwicke Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q320817" start="1705" end="1737" title="Henry Wellesley, 1st Earl Cowley" label="Henry Wellesley, 1st Earl Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941640" start="1832" end="1866" title="Humphrey Sturt, 2nd Baron Alington" label="Humphrey Sturt, 2nd Baron Alington"/>
<link wikidata="Q27577444" start="1968" end="2017" title="Sir Richard Henry Williams-Bulkeley, 12th Baronet" label="Sir Richard Henry Williams-Bulkeley, 12th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711514" start="2078" end="2133" title="Albert Yorke, 6th Earl of Hardwicke" label="Albert Edward Philip Henry Yorke, 6th Earl of Hardwicke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758346" wikidata="Q342176" url="?curid=758346" title="Villanova">
<text>Villanova is a name of Latin origin, meaning &quot;new town&quot;. It is equivalent to Italian Villanuova, French Villeneuve, Spanish Villanueva, and Catalan, Galician, Occitan and Portuguese Vilanova. It may refer to:
==Botany==
*&quot;Villanova&quot;, a genus of plants in the family Phyllanthaceae, an illegitimate name replaced by &quot;Flueggea&quot; (bushweed)
*&quot;Villanova&quot; (plant), a genus of plants in the family Asteraceae

==Education==
*Villanova University, an American university established in 1842 in Pennsylvania, by the Augustinian Order (formerly known as Villanova College)
**Villanova Wildcats, the athletic program of Villanova University
*St. Thomas of Villanova College, an Augustinian university preparatory school in King City, Ontario, Canada
*Villanova College (Australia), a current school run by the Augustinian priests, located in Coorparoo, in Brisbane, Queensland
*Villanova Preparatory School, a college preparatory school in Ojai, California

==Geography and history==
*Villanova, Pennsylvania, a neighborhood in the suburbs of Philadelphia
**Villanova (SEPTA Regional Rail station), the station on Philadelphia&#x27;s SEPTA Regional Rail Paoli/Thorndale Line
*Villanova d&#x27;Asti, a town in the Province of Asti, Piedmont, Italy
*Villanova Monferrato, a town in the Province of Alessandria, Piedmont, Italy
* Villanova Monteleone, a &quot;comune&quot; (municipality) in the Province of Sassari in the Italian region Sardinia
* Villanova Tulo, a &quot;comune&quot; (municipality) in the Province of Cagliari in the Italian region Sardinia
*Villanova Canavese, a town in the Metropolitan city of Turin, Piedmont, Italy
*Villanova, a frazione in the municipality of Bagnacavallo, province of Ravenna, Emilia-Romagna, Italy
*Villanova, a frazione in the municipality of Castenaso, province of Bologna, Emilia-Romagna, Italy
**Villanovan Culture, the predecessor to the Etruscan civilization culture, named after the frazione of Castenaso
*Villanova, a frazione in the municipality of Ostuni, Puglia, in Italy
*Villanova, Corse-du-Sud, a commune of the Arrondissement of Ajaccio in Corsica
*Vilanova de Arousa, a town in the Province of Pontevedra, Galicia, Spain
*Villanova, Huesca, a municipality in Huesca (province), Spain
*Villanova, Ribagorza (AKA Vilanova d&#x27;Éssera), a village in the autonomous community of Aragon, Spain

==Literature==
* &quot;Villanova&quot; (short story), a 2002 short story by John Hodgman

==Names==
*Arnaldus de Villa Nova (c. 1235–1313), alchemist, astrologer, and physician
*Saint Thomas of Villanova (born Tomás García Martínez, 1488–1555), Spanish Augustinian friar and archbishop

==See also==
*Vila Nova (disambiguation)
*Villa Nova (disambiguation)
*Vilanova (disambiguation)
*Villanova College (disambiguation)
*Villanueva (disambiguation)
*Villeneuve (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342176" start="0" end="9" title="Villanova" label="Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q342176" start="95" end="105" title="Villanova" label="Villanuova"/>
<link wikidata="Q232726" start="114" end="124" title="Villeneuve (disambiguation)" label="Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q296369" start="134" end="144" title="Villanueva (disambiguation)" label="Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q405615" start="192" end="200" title="Vilanova (disambiguation)" label="Vilanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q41427" start="341" end="349" title="Flueggea" label="Flueggea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162737" start="368" end="397" title="Villanova (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Villanova&amp;quot; (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="458" end="478" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930884" start="605" end="623" title="Villanova Wildcats" label="Villanova Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592009" start="671" end="702" title="St. Thomas of Villanova College" label="St. Thomas of Villanova College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930877" start="780" end="809" title="Villanova College (Australia)" label="Villanova College (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930878" start="907" end="935" title="Villanova Preparatory School" label="Villanova Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930873" start="1014" end="1037" title="Villanova, Pennsylvania" label="Villanova, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930874" start="1087" end="1126" title="Villanova (SEPTA Regional Rail station)" label="Villanova (SEPTA Regional Rail station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17885" start="1205" end="1226" title="Villanova d&amp;#x27;Asti" label="Villanova d&amp;#x27;Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17698" start="1277" end="1297" title="Villanova Monferrato" label="Villanova Monferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q391750" start="1356" end="1376" title="Villanova Monteleone" label="Villanova Monteleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285505" start="1474" end="1488" title="Villanova Tulo" label="Villanova Tulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10352" start="1586" end="1604" title="Villanova Canavese" label="Villanova Canavese"/>
<link wikidata="Q52957" start="1710" end="1722" title="Bagnacavallo" label="Bagnacavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q94788" start="1813" end="1822" title="Castenaso" label="Castenaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q587309" start="1869" end="1887" title="Villanovan Culture" label="Villanovan Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51872" start="2027" end="2033" title="Ostuni" label="Ostuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q748203" start="2053" end="2076" title="Villanova, Corse-du-Sud" label="Villanova, Corse-du-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q739495" start="2133" end="2151" title="Vilanova de Arousa" label="Vilanova de Arousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55182" start="2244" end="2261" title="Province of Huesca" label="Huesca (province)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206166" start="2270" end="2290" title="Villanova, Ribagorza" label="Villanova, Ribagorza"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161666" start="2394" end="2429" title="Villanova (short story)" label="&amp;quot;Villanova&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356568" start="2478" end="2500" title="Arnaldus de Villa Nova" label="Arnaldus de Villa Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166628" start="2561" end="2580" title="Thomas of Villanova" label="Thomas of Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q413468" start="2678" end="2704" title="Vila Nova (disambiguation)" label="Vila Nova (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34301667" start="2706" end="2733" title="Villa Nova (disambiguation)" label="Villa Nova (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q405615" start="2735" end="2760" title="Vilanova (disambiguation)" label="Vilanova (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41574445" start="2762" end="2796" title="Villanova College (disambiguation)" label="Villanova College (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296369" start="2798" end="2825" title="Villanueva (disambiguation)" label="Villanueva (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q232726" start="2827" end="2854" title="Villeneuve (disambiguation)" label="Villeneuve (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758348" wikidata="Q640452" url="?curid=758348" title="Area committee">
<text>Many large local government councils in the United Kingdom have a system of area committees or area boards, which involve local people and organisations in decisions affecting council spending within their area. They cover a geographical area such as a group of parishes, one or more electoral wards, or a local authority district.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="11" end="27" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="28" end="36" title="local government in the United Kingdom" label="councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="44" end="58" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q640452" start="76" end="91" title="Area committee" label="area committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991722" start="114" end="121" title="public consultation" label="involve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="262" end="270" title="Civil parish" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="284" end="299" title="Electoral ward" label="electoral wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="306" end="330" title="Districts of England" label="local authority district"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758351" wikidata="Q753853" url="?curid=758351" title="Lama (genus)">
<text>Lama is a genus containing the South American camelids: the wild guanaco and vicuña and the domesticated llama, alpaca, and the extinct chilihueque. Before the Spanish conquest of the Americas, llamas, alpacas, and chilihueques were the only domesticated ungulates of the continent. They were kept not only for their value as beasts of burden, but also for their flesh, hides, and wool.

==Classification==
Although they were often compared to sheep by early writers, their affinity to the camel was soon perceived. They were included in the genus &quot;Camelus&quot; in the &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; of Linnaeus. In 1800, Cuvier moved the llama, alpaca, and guanaco to the genus &quot;Lama&quot;, and the vicuña to the genus &quot;Vicugna&quot;. After genetic testing revealed that the alpaca descends from the vicuña it was also moved to genus &quot;Vicugna.&quot; The American Society of Mammalogists later moved the species of genus &quot;Vicugna&quot; back into genus &quot;Lama&quot; due to low genetic distance between the two. The Royal Society, however, maintains the separation of the two genera.

These New World camelids alongside camels, are the sole extant representatives of a distinct section of Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) called Tylopoda, or &quot;hump-footed&quot;, from the peculiar bumps on the soles of their feet. This section consists of a single family, the Camelidae, the other sections of the same great division being the Suina or pigs, the Tragulina or chevrotains, and the Pecora or true ruminants, to each of which the Tylopoda have some affinity, standing in some respects in a central position between them, sharing some characters from each, but showing special modifications not found in any of the others.

Discovery of the extinct fauna of the American continent of the Paleogene and Neogene periods, starting with the 19th-century paleontologists Leidy, Cope, and Marsh, has revealed the early history of this family. Llamas were not always confined to South America; their remains are abundant in the Pleistocene deposits of the Rocky Mountains region, and in Central America; some of these extinct forms were much larger than any now living.

None of these transitional forms has been found in Old World strata; North America was the original home of the Camelidae family. The ancestor of modern camels crossed Beringia into Eurasia and Africa about 7 million years ago. The ancestor of the modern llamas entered South America via the Isthmus of Panama about 3 million years ago, as part of the Great American Interchange. The Old World camels were gradually driven southward into regions of Asia and Africa, perhaps by changes of climate, and having become isolated, they have undergone further special modifications. Meanwhile, the New World llamas became restricted to South America following the peopling of the Americas by Paleo-Indians and the accompanying extinction of the megafauna.

A possible variety is the hueque or chilihueque that existed in central and south-central Chile in pre-Hispanic and early colonial times. Two main hypotheses on their status among South American camelids are given: the first one suggests they are locally domesticated guanacos and the second suggests they are a variety of llamas brought from the north into south-central Chile. Chilihueques became extinct in the 16th or 17th century, being replaced by European livestock. The causes of its extinction are unknown. According to Juan Ignacio Molina, the Dutch captain Joris van Spilbergen observed the use of chilihueques by native Mapuches of Mocha Island as plough animals in 1614.

===Species===





==Characteristics==
These characters apply especially to llamas. Dentition of adults:-incisors 1/3 canines 1/1, premolars 2/2, molars 3/2; total 32. In the upper jaw is a compressed, sharp, pointed laniariform incisor near the hinder edge of the premaxilla, followed in the male at least by a moderate-sized, pointed, curved true canine tooth canine in the anterior part of the maxilla. The isolated canine-like premolar which follows in the camels is not present. The teeth of the molar series which are in contact with each other consist of two very small premolars (the first almost rudimentary) and three broad molars, constructed generally like those of &quot;Camelus&quot;. In the lower jaw, the three incisors are long, spatulate, and procumbent; the outer ones are the smallest. Next to these is a curved, suberect canine, followed after an interval by an isolated minute and often deciduous simple conical premolar; then a contiguous series of one premolar and three molars, which differ from those of &quot;Camelus&quot; in having a small accessory column at the anterior outer edge.

The skull generally resembles that of &quot;Camelus&quot;, the relatively larger brain cavity and orbits and less developed cranial ridges being due to its smaller size. The nasal bones are shorter and broader, and are joined by the premaxilla.

Ears are rather long and pointed. No dorsal hump is present. Feet are narrow, the toes being more separated than in the camels, each having a distinct plantar pad. The tail is short, and the fur is long and ruffled looking like that of a sheep.

The llama and alpaca are only known in the domestic state, and are variable in size and color, being often white, black, or piebald. The wild guanaco and vicuña are of a nearly uniform light-brown color, passing into white below. The vicuña and guanaco share an obvious family resemblance and may be difficult to tell apart at a distance. The vicuña is smaller and slenderer in its proportions, and has a shorter head than the guanaco.

The guanaco has an extensive geographical range, from the high lands of the Andean region of Ecuador and Peru to the open plains of Patagonia, and even the wooded islands of Tierra del Fuego. It constituted the principal food of the Patagonian Indians, and they use its skin for the material from which their long robes are made. It is about the size of a European red deer, and is an elegant animal with a long, slender, gracefully curved neck and slim legs. The vicuña ranges throughout the Western Andes.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="10" end="15" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="31" end="44" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="46" end="53" title="camelid" label="camelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172886" start="65" end="72" title="guanaco" label="guanaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125422609" start="77" end="83" title="vicuña" label="vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="105" end="110" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="112" end="118" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249332" start="136" end="147" title="chilihueque" label="chilihueque"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="160" end="167" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="184" end="192" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="255" end="263" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="272" end="281" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="381" end="385" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="554" end="561" title="Camelus" label="Camelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="606" end="614" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="625" end="631" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843017" start="873" end="905" title="American Society of Mammalogists" label="American Society of Mammalogists"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1041" end="1054" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1116" end="1125" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="1126" end="1133" title="camelid" label="camelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="1145" end="1150" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="1166" end="1172" title="extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="1214" end="1226" title="Artiodactyla" label="Artiodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="1256" end="1264" title="Tylopoda" label="Tylopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="1392" end="1401" title="Camelidae" label="Camelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="1459" end="1464" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="1468" end="1471" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="1491" end="1501" title="chevrotain" label="chevrotain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="1527" end="1536" title="ruminants" label="ruminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="1769" end="1776" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q461250" start="1894" end="1899" title="Joseph Leidy" label="Leidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="1901" end="1905" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="1911" end="1916" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2049" end="2060" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="2077" end="2092" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2108" end="2123" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2261" end="2274" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="2360" end="2368" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="2484" end="2501" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="2544" end="2570" title="Great American Interchange" label="Great American Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="2680" end="2687" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2821" end="2834" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="2849" end="2873" title="peopling of the Americas" label="peopling of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="2877" end="2890" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="2930" end="2939" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249332" start="2978" end="2989" title="chilihueque" label="chilihueque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171004" start="3006" end="3013" title="Zona Central, Chile" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746706" start="3018" end="3031" title="Zona Sur" label="south-central"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="3041" end="3053" title="pre-Hispanic" label="pre-Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172886" start="3210" end="3218" title="guanacos" label="guanacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="3265" end="3270" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q55068526" start="3471" end="3490" title="Juan Ignacio Molina" label="Juan Ignacio Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370433" start="3510" end="3530" title="Joris van Spilbergen" label="Joris van Spilbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="3574" end="3581" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635008" start="3586" end="3598" title="Mocha Island" label="Mocha Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="3602" end="3616" title="plough" label="plough animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="3711" end="3720" title="Dentition" label="Dentition"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="3856" end="3863" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q244969" start="3892" end="3902" title="premaxilla" label="premaxilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3976" end="3995" title="canine tooth canine" label="canine tooth canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="4058" end="4066" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="4261" end="4267" title="molars" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="4865" end="4879" title="cranial ridges" label="cranial ridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q244969" start="4974" end="4984" title="premaxilla" label="premaxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="5802" end="5811" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="5844" end="5860" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="6026" end="6043" title="European red deer" label="European red deer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758357" wikidata="Q387614" url="?curid=758357" title="Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust">
<text>Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust (; 13 January 1809 – 24 October 1886) was a German and Austrian statesman. As an opponent of Otto von Bismarck, he attempted to conclude a common policy of the German middle states between Austria and Prussia.

== Birth and education ==
Beust was born in Dresden, where his father held office in the Saxon court. He was descended from a noble family which had originally sprung from the Margraviate of Brandenburg, and descended from Joachim von Beust (1522–1597). After studying at Leipzig and Göttingen he entered the Saxon public service. 

== Political career ==
His initial political career was as a diplomat and politician in Saxony. In 1836 he was made secretary of legation at Berlin, and afterwards held appointments at Paris, Munich, and London.

In March 1848 he was summoned to Dresden to take the office of foreign minister, but in consequence of the outbreak of the revolution was not appointed. In May he was appointed Saxon envoy at Berlin, and in February 1849 was again summoned to Dresden, and this time appointed minister of state and of foreign affairs. He held that office till 1866, when he was summoned by Franz Josef I to the Imperial Court of Austria.

In addition to this he held the ministry of education and public worship from 1849 to 1853, and that of internal affairs in 1853, and in the same year was appointed minister-president. From the time that he entered the ministry he was, however, the leading member of it, and he was chiefly responsible for the events of 1849. By his advice the king rejected the German constitution proclaimed by the Frankfurt Parliament. This led to revolutionary outbreaks in Dresden. The riots were suppressed after four days of fighting by Prussian troops, whose assistance Beust had requested.

== Affairs of state ==

=== Saxony 1849–1866 ===
On Beust fell also the chief responsibility for governing the country after order was restored, and he was the author of the so-called &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; of June 1850 by which the new constitution was overthrown. The vigor he showed in repressing all resistance to the government, especially that of the university, and in reorganizing the police, made him one of the most unpopular men among the Liberals, and his name became synonymous with the worst form of reaction, but it is not clear that the attacks on him were justified.

After this he was chiefly occupied with foreign affairs, and he soon became one of the most conspicuous figures in German politics. He was the leader of that party which hoped to maintain the independence of the smaller states, and was the opponent of all attempts on the part of Prussia to attract them into a separate union. In 1849-1850 he was compelled to bring Saxony into the &quot;three kings&#x27; union&quot; of Prussia, Hanover and Saxony, but he was careful to keep open a loophole for withdrawal, of which he speedily availed himself. In the crisis of the Erfurt Union, Saxony was on the side of Austria, and he supported the restoration of the diet of the German Confederation.

In 1854 he took part in the Bamberg conferences, in which the smaller German states claimed the right to direct their own policy independently of Austria or of Prussia, and he was the leading supporter of the idea of the Trias, i.e., that the smaller states should form a closer union among themselves against the preponderance of the great monarchies. In 1863 he came forward as a warm supporter of the claims of the prince of Augustenburg to Schleswig-Holstein. He was the leader of the party in the German diet which refused to recognize the settlement of the Danish question effected in 1852 by the Treaty of London, and in 1864 he was appointed representative of the diet at the peace conference in London.

He was thus thrown into opposition to the policy of Bismarck, and he was exposed to violent attacks in the Prussian press as a particularist, i.e., a supporter of the independence of the smaller states. Already in the aftermath of the Second Schleswig War, the expulsion of the Saxon troops from Rendsburg nearly led to a conflict with Berlin. On the outbreak of the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, Beust accompanied King John of Saxony on his escape to Prague, and thence to Vienna, where they were received by allied Emperor Franz Joseph with the news of Königgrätz. Beust undertook a mission to Paris to procure the help of Napoleon III. When the terms of peace were discussed he resigned, for Bismarck refused to negotiate with him.

=== Austria 1866–1871 ===
After the victory of Prussia there was no office for Beust in an emerging Lesser Germany, and his public career seemed to be closed, but he quite unexpectedly received an invitation from Franz Joseph to become his foreign minister. It was a bold decision, for Beust was not only a stranger to Austria, but also a Protestant. He threw himself into his new position with great energy. Despite the opposition of the Slavs who foresaw that &quot;dualism would lead Austria to downfall, negotiations with Hungary were resumed and rapidly concluded by Beust.
Impatient to take his revenge on Bismarck for Sadowa, he persuaded Francis Joseph to accept the Magyar demands which he had till then rejected. [...] Beust deluded himself that he could rebuild both the [Germanic Federation] and the Holy Roman Empire and negotiated the &quot;Ausgleich&quot; as a necessary preliminary for the &quot;revanche&quot; on Prussia. [...] As a compromise with Hungary for the purposes of &quot;revanche&quot; on Prussia, the &quot;Ausgleich&quot; could not be otherwise than a surrender to the Magyar oligarchy.&quot;
When difficulties came he went himself to Budapest, and acted directly with the Hungarian leaders. Beusts&#x27;s desired revanche against Prussia did not materialize because, in 1870, the Hungarian Prime Minister Gyula Andrássy was &quot;vigorously opposed.&quot;

In 1867 he also held the position of Austrian minister-president, and he carried through the measures by which parliamentary government was restored. He also carried on the negotiations with the Pope concerning the repeal of the concordat, and in this matter also did much by a liberal policy to relieve Austria from the pressure of institutions which had checked the development of the country. In 1868, after giving up his post as minister-president, he was appointed Chancellor of the empire (&quot;Reichskanzler&quot;),

and received the title of count. This was unusual, and he was the only statesman given the title of Chancellor between Metternich (1848) and Karl Renner (1918) (see &quot;Österreich-Lexikon&quot;). His conduct of foreign affairs, especially in the matter of the Balkan States and Crete, successfully maintained the position of the Empire. In 1869, he accompanied the Emperor on his expedition to the East. He was still to some extent influenced by the anti-Prussian feeling he had brought from Saxony.

He maintained a close understanding with France, and there can be little doubt that he would have welcomed an opportunity in his new position of another struggle with his old rival Bismarck. In 1867, however, he helped to bring the Luxembourg Crisis to a peaceful termination. In 1870 he did not disguise his sympathy for France. The failure of all attempts to bring about an intervention of the powers, joined to the action of Russia in denouncing the Treaty of Frankfurt, was the occasion of his celebrated saying that he was nowhere able to find Europe. After the war was over he completely accepted the new organization of Germany.

As early as December 1870 he had opened a correspondence with Bismarck with a view to establishing a good understanding with Germany. Bismarck accepted his advances with alacrity, and the new &quot;&quot;, which Beust announced to the Austro-Hungarian delegations in July 1871, was sealed in August by a friendly meeting of the two old rivals and enemies at Gastein.

In 1871 Beust interfered at the last moment, together with Andrassy, to prevent the emperor accepting the pro-Czech federalist plans of Hohenwart. He was successful, but at the same time he was dismissed from office. The precise cause for this is not known, and no reason was given him.

== Later diplomatic career 1871–1882 ==
At his own request he was appointed Austrian ambassador at London; in 1878 he was transferred to Paris; in 1882 he retired from public life.

== Death ==
He died at his villa at Altenberg, near Vienna, on 24 October 1886, leaving two sons, both of whom entered the Austrian diplomatic service. His wife survived him only a few weeks. His elder brother, Friedrich Konstantin von Beust (1806–1891), who was at the head of the Saxon department for mines, was the author of several works on mining and geology, a subject in which other members of the family had distinguished themselves.

== Posthumous assessment ==
Beust had great social gifts and personal graces; he was proud of his proficiency in the lighter arts of composing waltzes and &quot;vers de société&quot;. It was more vanity than rancor which made him glad to appear even in later years as the great opponent of Bismarck. If he cared too much for popularity, and was very sensitive to neglect, the saying attributed to Bismarck, that if his vanity were taken away there would be nothing left, is very unjust. He was apt to look more to the form than the substance, and attached too much importance to the verbal victory of a well-written dispatch; but when the opportunity was given him he showed higher qualities.

In the crisis of 1849 he displayed considerable courage, and never lost his judgment even in personal danger. If he was defeated in his German policy, it must be remembered that Bismarck held all the good cards, and in 1866 Saxony was the only one of the smaller states which entered on the war with an army properly equipped and ready at the moment. That he was no mere reactionary, the whole course of his government in Saxony, and still more in Austria, shows. His Austrian policy has been much criticized, on the ground that in establishing the system of dualism he gave too much to Hungary, and did not really understand multinational Austrian affairs; and the Austro-Hungarian crisis during the early years of the 20th century has given point to this view. Yet it remains the fact that in a struggle of extraordinary difficulty he carried to a successful conclusion, a policy which, even if it were not the best imaginable, was possibly the best attainable in the circumstances seen from a contemporary perspective during that fatal pre-war crisis.

== Writings ==
Beust was the author of reminiscences:
*&quot;Aus drei Viertel-Jahrhunderten&quot; (2 vols, Stuttgart, 1887; English trans. edited by Baron H de Worms)
*He also wrote a shorter work, &quot;Erinnerungen zu Erinnerungen&quot; (Leipzig, 1881), in answer to attacks made on him by his former colleague, Herr v. Frieseri, in his reminiscences.
See also Ebeling, &quot;F. F. Graf v. Beust&quot; (Leipzig 1876), a full and careful account of his political career, especially up to 1866; &quot;Diplomatic Sketches: No. 1, Count Beust&quot;, by Outsider (Baron Carl v. Malortie); Flathe, &quot;Geschichte von Sachsen&quot;, vol. iii. (Gotha, 1877); Friesen, &quot;Erinnerungen aus meinem Leben&quot; (Dresden, 1880).

== Famous descendants ==
His most famous descendant is Ole von Beust (born 13 April 1955, in Hamburg, Germany), who was First Mayor of the city-state of Hamburg from 2001 to 2010, also serving as President of the Bundesrat between 2007 and 2008.

== Honours ==
He received the following orders and decorations:
== See also ==
* List of minister-presidents of Austria
* List of foreign ministers of Austria-Hungary

== Notes ==
== References ==

;Attribution
== Sources ==
* Schmitt, Hans A. &quot;Count Beust and Germany, 1866–1870: Reconquest, Realignment, or Resignation?&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; (1968) 1#1 pp. 20–34 in JSTOR
* Sondhaus, Lawrence. &quot;Austria-Hungary&#x27;s Italian policy under Count Beust, 1866–1871,&quot; &quot;Historian&quot; (1993) 56#1 pp 41–64, online
* Österreich-Lexikon: Bundeskanzler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q387614" start="0" end="35" title="Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust" label="Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="80" end="86" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="91" end="99" title="Austrians" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="100" end="109" title="politician" label="statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="129" end="146" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="225" end="232" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="237" end="244" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="291" end="298" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="423" end="449" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690621" start="470" end="487" title="Joachim von Beust" label="Joachim von Beust"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="519" end="526" title="University of Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="531" end="540" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="721" end="727" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="765" end="770" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="772" end="778" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="784" end="790" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="826" end="833" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="1166" end="1179" title="Franz Josef I" label="Franz Josef I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157638" start="1615" end="1635" title="Frankfurt Parliament" label="Frankfurt Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1742" end="1749" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1988" end="2004" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2254" end="2262" title="Liberalism" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="2819" end="2826" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q327179" start="2957" end="2969" title="Erfurt Union" label="Erfurt Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2997" end="3004" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q547751" start="3046" end="3050" title="Bundesversammlung (German Confederation)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="3058" end="3078" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="3109" end="3116" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q545482" start="3525" end="3543" title="Schleswig-Holstein Question" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q685683" start="3644" end="3659" title="Danish question" label="Danish question"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136035" start="3684" end="3700" title="London Protocol (1852)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q13177385" start="3765" end="3791" title="London Conference of 1864" label="peace conference in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="3846" end="3854" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="4029" end="4049" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q490457" start="4090" end="4099" title="Rendsburg" label="Rendsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="4161" end="4180" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57538" start="4213" end="4227" title="John, King of Saxony" label="John of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="4245" end="4251" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q154942" start="4348" end="4358" title="Battle of Königgrätz" label="Königgrätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="4418" end="4430" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q696590" start="4629" end="4643" title="Lesser Germany" label="Lesser Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q696873" start="4769" end="4785" title="Foreign Minister of Austria-Hungary" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4868" end="4878" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="5055" end="5062" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154942" start="5154" end="5160" title="Battle of Königgrätz" label="Sadowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="5378" end="5399" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="&amp;quot;Ausgleich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="5695" end="5703" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="5866" end="5880" title="Gyula Andrássy" label="Gyula Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="6029" end="6039" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q213541" start="6147" end="6156" title="concordat" label="concordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006398" start="6388" end="6398" title="Chancellor of Austria" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="6469" end="6474" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="6562" end="6572" title="Metternich" label="Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11726" start="6584" end="6595" title="Karl Renner" label="Karl Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="6705" end="6718" title="Balkans" label="Balkan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="6723" end="6728" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q699765" start="7178" end="7195" title="Luxembourg Crisis" label="Luxembourg Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158021" start="7399" end="7418" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1871)" label="Treaty of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q254835" start="7941" end="7948" title="Gastein" label="Gastein"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="8010" end="8018" title="Gyula Andrássy" label="Andrassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508938" start="8067" end="8083" title="Fundamental Articles of 1871" label="federalist plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q695744" start="8087" end="8096" title="Count Karl Sigmund von Hohenwart" label="Hohenwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q672587" start="8457" end="8466" title="Sankt Andrä-Wördern" label="Altenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="8777" end="8784" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="9007" end="9012" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556118" start="9025" end="9040" title="vers de société" label="vers de société"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="9154" end="9162" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="10184" end="10197" title="multinational state" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q60426" start="11393" end="11406" title="Ole von Beust" label="Ole von Beust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="11431" end="11438" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="11551" end="11560" title="Bundesrat of Germany" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q697077" start="11666" end="11704" title="List of minister-presidents of Austria" label="List of minister-presidents of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q696873" start="11707" end="11751" title="List of foreign ministers of Austria-Hungary" label="List of foreign ministers of Austria-Hungary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758360" wikidata="Q1004664" url="?curid=758360" title="Gorey">
<text>Gorey () is a market town in north County Wexford, Ireland. It is bypassed by the main M11 Dublin to Wexford road. The town is also connected to the railway network along the same route. Local newspapers include the &quot;Gorey Guardian&quot;.

As a growing commuter town to Dublin for some residents, there has been an increase in population in the early 21st century. Between 1996 and 2002, the population of the surrounding district grew by 23%, and the town itself almost trebled in population (from 3,939 to 11,517 inhabitants) in the period between the 1996 and 2022 census.

==Name==
While the town and parish were sometimes historically known as Kilmichaelogue (), the town&#x27;s modern English name may derive from the Irish &quot;Gabhraighe&quot;, meaning a &quot;a place abounding in goats&quot;.

The town was granted a charter as a borough in 1619, under the name Newborough. However, as noted in &quot;A Topographical Dictionary of Ireland&quot; (published in 1837 by Samuel Lewis) and in &quot;Wexford Guide and Directory&quot; (published by George Henry Bassett in 1885), this name &quot;never [grew] into general use&quot; as the &quot;inhabitants did not take kindly to the name chosen for the town&quot;.

==History==

Evidence of ancient settlement in the area includes a number of standing stone, fulacht fiadh, burnt mound, holy well and ringfort sites in the townlands of Gorey Hill, Gorey Corporation Lands and Ramstown Lower.

Among the earliest written recordings relating to Gorey are Norman records from 1296 which refer to an existing town on the site. Several centuries later, in 1619, the town was granted a charter as a borough, under the name Newborough. The borough charter had been obtained by the then Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin, Thomas Ram (1564–1634).

As the principal local landlords, the Ram family laid-out the town as a &quot;planned town&quot; in the early 17th century. Together with several other developments in the area, the Ram family also built a large estate to the north of the town. The manor house of this estate, Ramsfort, was burned following the Irish Rebellion of 1641, and again during the Irish Rebellion of 1798. Ramsfort house was rebuilt in the 19th century to designs attributed to architect Daniel Robertson.

In addition to Gorey&#x27;s 18th century market house, many of the larger buildings within the town itself date to the mid-19th century. These include Gorey railway station which dates to 1863, the Church of Ireland church (Kilmakilloge) dating to 1861, and the Roman Catholic church (dedicated to Saint Michael) completed in 1843. Gorey was the centre of several conflicts during the 1798 Rebellion, and a memorial to these events was erected in the town in the rebellion&#x27;s centenary year (1898).

The parents of Jim Bolger, the former Prime Minister of New Zealand, emigrated from Gorey in the 1930s.

==Amenities==

Courtown Harbour or Courtown, a small holiday resort used by weekend visitors from Dublin, is situated east of Gorey.

The town marked the 150th anniversary of the consecration of Christ Church (Kilmakilloge) in 2011. The church, which was completed in 1861, was designed by James Welland, one of the provincial architects of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners of the Church of Ireland. Its stained glass windows were designed by Harry Clarke and Catherine O&#x27;Brien.

== Sport ==
Naomh Éanna GAA was founded in 1970 by a group of Christian Brothers. Naomh Éanna&#x27;s club ground is called Pairc uí Síochain located at the top of Clonattin Gorey, County Wexford. Naomh Éanna won their first senior hurling county title in 2018.

There are also two soccer clubs located in the town: Gorey Rangers and Gorey Celtic. Gorey Rangers are located at The Showgrounds and Ramstown, while Gorey Celtic are located in Mullaunfin Creagh on the outskirts of the town.

Gorey Rugby Club is located at Clonattin. Former players include Nick Popplewell and Robin Copeland.

==Education==
Gorey&#x27;s largest secondary school, Gorey Community School has over 1,500 students. In 2011 another post-primary school, Creagh College, opened to accommodate Gorey&#x27;s increased population of secondary school students. Then, in 2021 an Educate Together Secondary School opened to accommodate more second-level students. Five local primary schools, Gorey Educate Together National School, Gorey Loreto Primary, Saint Joseph&#x27;s Primary, Gorey Central School and Gaelscoil Moshíológ Guaire feed the secondary schools in Gorey, as do a number of schools in the surrounding area. Gorey School of Art is Post Leaving Certificate school for the arts.

The library in Gorey opened its doors in 2011 - after a decade of plans to build it.

==Transport==
Gorey railway station opened on 16 November 1863. It is located on the Dublin to Rosslare Europort line, and is served by a total of 12 trains per weekday.

The town lies on the N11 road route (Dublin-to-Rosslare) and, until a by-pass was opened in June 2007, local traffic congestion was an issue. The by-pass is a 23-kilometre-long high standard dual carriageway and was upgraded to motorway status in August 2009.

Several bus services serve Gorey, with most serving the Main Street&#x27;s two opposing bus stops. Bus Éireann&#x27;s Expressway route 2 links the town with Dublin Airport, Dublin and Wexford. Bus Éireann also operates route 379 between Gorey, Ballycanew and Wexford on Mondays and Saturdays only.

Wexford Bus&#x27;s route 740 links Gorey with Wexford, Dublin and Dublin Airport. The company&#x27;s route 740A also provides a service to Dublin Airport via Arklow and Wicklow. Route UM11 is operated by Wexford Bus between Gorey and Maynooth University during term time for students. It also operates route 389 under the TFI Local Link brand.

Gorey Bus Links operates route 879 from Gorey Shopping Centre, linking Gorey with Ballycanew, Ballygarrett and Courtown. Dunnes Coaches operates route IW07 between Gorey&#x27;s Main Street and Carlow College via Camolin.

==Media and entertainment==
The Gorey Guardian is the local newspaper.

Gorey has had a local theatre group since the 1950s, which hosts a number of performances annually from its 300-seat auditorium.

Gorey Musical Society has one production a year, and its 2007 staging of &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; received the &#x27;Best Overall Show&#x27; award at the Association of Irish Musical Societies awards in Killarney.

Gorey Choral Group, a mixed-voice choir founded in the 1970s, has participated in a number of contests and won the first plan in the jazz and popular music section of the 2016 Cork International Choral Festival.

For 15 years during the 1970s and early 1980s, the Gorey Arts Festival, organised by local artist Paul Funge, was held in the town during the summer. Performers at the festival included U2, Horslips, Chris de Burgh, Christy Moore, Planxty, Makem and Clancy,
Niall Tóibín and Eamon Morrissey.

Every year, varying from late July to early August, Gorey&#x27;s main street closes over several days for the Market House Festival.

There are a number of pubs, bars, and nightclub in the town. A seven-screen cinema is located on the Courtown road.

== People ==

* Jim Bolger, 35th Prime Minister of New Zealand; parents were born in Gorey
* Paul Boyle, Connacht and Ireland rugby union player
* Billy Byrne, former hurler and All-Ireland winner
* Robin Copeland, Munster, Connacht and Ireland rugby union player
* Ger Cushe, former hurler and All-Ireland winner
* Michael W. D&#x27;Arcy, politician
* James Godkin, author and journalist
* Herbert F. Hore, historian, author and archaeologist
* Conor McDonald, hurler
* Darragh McDonald, former paralympic gold medalist in swimming
* Colm O&#x27;Gorman, director of Amnesty International Ireland
*Alanna O&#x27;Kelly, artist, born in Gorey
* Aisling O&#x27;Neill, actress, lives in Gorey

== Town twinning ==
Gorey is twinned with Oban in Scotland.

==See also==
* List of towns and villages in Ireland
* Market Houses in Ireland

==References==
==External links==

* Gorey Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1004664" start="0" end="5" title="Gorey" label="Gorey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="35" end="49" title="County Wexford" label="County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771638" start="87" end="90" title="N11 road (Ireland)" label="M11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="91" end="97" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="101" end="108" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969740" start="149" end="164" title="Gorey railway station" label="railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="729" end="734" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="796" end="800" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="846" end="853" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412007" start="917" end="954" title="A Topographical Dictionary of Ireland" label="A Topographical Dictionary of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412007" start="983" end="995" title="Samuel Lewis (publisher)" label="Samuel Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="1303" end="1317" title="standing stone" label="standing stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778145" start="1319" end="1332" title="fulacht fiadh" label="fulacht fiadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016853" start="1334" end="1345" title="burnt mound" label="burnt mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371047" start="1347" end="1356" title="holy well" label="holy well"/>
<link wikidata="Q92383" start="1361" end="1369" title="ringfort" label="ringfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151232" start="1383" end="1391" title="townland" label="townland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="1653" end="1660" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917843" start="1739" end="1767" title="Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin" label="Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18735415" start="1769" end="1779" title="Thomas Ram" label="Thomas Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="2106" end="2129" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="Irish Rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="2152" end="2175" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="Irish Rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218594" start="2259" end="2275" title="Daniel Robertson (architect)" label="Daniel Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46002125" start="2319" end="2331" title="market house" label="market house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969740" start="2429" end="2450" title="Gorey railway station" label="Gorey railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="2797" end="2807" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084249" start="2922" end="2930" title="Courtown" label="Courtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="3268" end="3285" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q981851" start="3330" end="3342" title="Harry Clarke" label="Harry Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750325" start="3384" end="3399" title="Naomh Éanna GAA" label="Naomh Éanna GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="3434" end="3452" title="Congregation of Christian Brothers" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586198" start="3861" end="3877" title="Gorey RFC" label="Gorey Rugby Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339789" start="3926" end="3941" title="Nick Popplewell" label="Nick Popplewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352334" start="3946" end="3960" title="Robin Copeland" label="Robin Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586197" start="4016" end="4038" title="Gorey Community School" label="Gorey Community School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233648" start="4586" end="4610" title="Post Leaving Certificate" label="Post Leaving Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969740" start="4733" end="4754" title="Gorey railway station" label="Gorey railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366092" start="4804" end="4836" title="Dublin–Rosslare railway line" label="Dublin to Rosslare Europort line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771638" start="4911" end="4925" title="N11 road (Ireland)" label="N11 road route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="4937" end="4945" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="5250" end="5261" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="5308" end="5322" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="5324" end="5330" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="5335" end="5342" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076752" start="5395" end="5405" title="Ballycanew" label="Ballycanew"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="5410" end="5417" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q673662" start="5608" end="5614" title="Arklow" label="Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q652101" start="5619" end="5626" title="Wicklow" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q119805248" start="5772" end="5786" title="TFI Local Link" label="TFI Local Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076752" start="5877" end="5887" title="Ballycanew" label="Ballycanew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076742" start="5889" end="5901" title="Ballygarrett" label="Ballygarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211679" start="6007" end="6014" title="Camolin, County Wexford" label="Camolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586199" start="6049" end="6063" title="Gorey Guardian" label="Gorey Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="6298" end="6307" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170795" start="6607" end="6641" title="Cork International Choral Festival" label="Cork International Choral Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="6830" end="6832" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629031" start="6834" end="6842" title="Horslips" label="Horslips"/>
<link wikidata="Q178237" start="6844" end="6858" title="Chris de Burgh" label="Chris de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q257267" start="6860" end="6873" title="Christy Moore" label="Christy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q763092" start="6875" end="6882" title="Planxty" label="Planxty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961377" start="6884" end="6900" title="Makem and Clancy" label="Makem and Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984549" start="6902" end="6914" title="Niall Tóibín" label="Niall Tóibín"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325532" start="6919" end="6934" title="Eamon Morrissey (actor)" label="Eamon Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="7204" end="7214" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="7221" end="7250" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q62686089" start="7281" end="7291" title="Paul Boyle (rugby union)" label="Paul Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126167" start="7293" end="7301" title="Connacht Rugby" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="7306" end="7313" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912310" start="7335" end="7346" title="Billy Byrne (hurler)" label="Billy Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352334" start="7387" end="7401" title="Robin Copeland" label="Robin Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140373" start="7403" end="7410" title="Munster Rugby" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126167" start="7412" end="7420" title="Connacht Rugby" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="7425" end="7432" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548722" start="7454" end="7463" title="Ger Cushe" label="Ger Cushe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835128" start="7504" end="7526" title="Michael W. D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="Michael W. D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134699" start="7541" end="7553" title="James Godkin" label="James Godkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485479" start="7579" end="7594" title="Herbert F. Hore" label="Herbert F. Hore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713918" start="7634" end="7648" title="Conor McDonald" label="Conor McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224232" start="7659" end="7675" title="Darragh McDonald" label="Darragh McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110087" start="7723" end="7741" title="Colm O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Colm O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407131" start="7755" end="7784" title="Amnesty International Ireland" label="Amnesty International Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114458363" start="7786" end="7805" title="Alanna O&amp;#x27;Kelly" label="Alanna O&amp;#x27;Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q65631625" start="7831" end="7851" title="Aisling O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Aisling O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7907" end="7914" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="7920" end="7924" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7928" end="7936" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113044" start="7954" end="7991" title="List of towns and villages in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of towns and villages in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257857" start="7994" end="8018" title="Market Houses in the Republic of Ireland" label="Market Houses in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758364" wikidata="Q130381" url="?curid=758364" title="Commonwealth Stadium">
<text>Commonwealth Stadium is an open-air, multi-purpose stadium located in the McCauley neighbourhood of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. It has a seating capacity of 56,302, making it the largest open-air stadium in Canada. Primarily used for Canadian football, it also hosts athletics, soccer, rugby union and concerts.

Construction commenced in 1975 and the venue opened ahead of the 1978 Commonwealth Games, hence its name. The stadium replaced the adjacent Clarke Stadium as the home of the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League that same year. It received a major expansion ahead of the 1983 Summer Universiade, when it reached a capacity of 60,081. Commonwealth Stadium has hosted five Grey Cups, the CFL&#x27;s championship game.

Soccer tournaments include nine FIFA World Cup qualification matches with the Canadian men&#x27;s national soccer team, two versions of the invitational Canada Cup, the 1996 CONCACAF Men&#x27;s Pre-Olympic Tournament, the 2002 FIFA U-19 Women&#x27;s World Championship and the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup, the 2014 FIFA U-20 Women&#x27;s World Cup and the 2015 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup. FC Edmonton played its Canadian Championship matches at Commonwealth Stadium from 2011 to 2013.

Other events at the stadium include the 2001 World Championships in Athletics, the 2006 Women&#x27;s Rugby World Cup and three editions of the Churchill Cup.

==History==
Prior to Commonwealth Stadium, the main stadium in Edmonton was Clarke Stadium, which opened in 1939 and was built on a plot of land. Work on applying to host the 1978 Commonwealth Games started in the early 1970s. With both federal, provincial and city funding backing the bid, it called for a massive renovation of the city&#x27;s various sporting venues. The original plans called for Clarke Stadium to be rebuilt and expanded to host the athletics events. By 1974 there was consensus that Clarke Stadium would not be sufficient and that an all-new stadium should be built. Several locations and sizes were discussed, with Edmonton City Council in January 1975 landing on building a 40,000-seat venue next to Clarke Stadium. The venue was designed by Ragan, Bell, McManus Consultants. The city also decided to build additional new venues: Kinsmen Aquatic Centre and Argyll Velodrome. They based their design on Jack Trice Stadium in the US city of Ames, Iowa.

Part of the public support for the stadium came from it being built to also support being used by the Eskimos (the Elks&#x27; name until 2020). The plans were met with opposition from local residents. There were also discussions regarding the necessity of a $50,000 royal retirement room and the allocation of training and office space to the Eskimos. The largest discussion was related to whether the stadium needed a roof or dome. As the roof would cost $18.2 million, there was limited public support, and the stadium was built without one. In an attempt to further the roof process, the Eskimos offered to pay $1.6 million towards the roof. The Commonwealth Games did not permit an enclosed stadium, so the design would have to call for the roof to be added afterwards. Among the opponents of the roof was Commonwealth Games Foundation President Maury Van Vliet, who said experience from construction of the Olympic Stadium in Montreal showed the necessity of building a simple structure. An alternative design, which would have cost an additional $7.3 million, was launched by the Eskimos in August 1975, but rejected by the city council. A major concern for the city council was the large cost overruns being experienced in Montreal at the time.
Excavation started in December 1974 and saw the removal of of earthwork. A local action committee, Action Edmonton, demanded in early 1975 that construction be halted and the venue relocated. The city estimated that this would cost an additional $2.5 million and delay the process with eight months. The decision to not enclose the stadium was taken on December 10, 1975. The venue was thus not designed to allow a roof, air-filled or stiff, to be retrofitted. The venue was built on the former site of the Rat Creek Dump and the Williamson Slaughter House. During excavation, remains from the dump were struck, resulting in archaeological surveys being carried out. Construction of the Edmonton LRT&#x27;s inaugural line (later named the Capital Line) commenced in 1974 and was opened in time for the Commonwealth Games, which allowed spectators to take the LRT from Stadium station to downtown Edmonton.

Construction of the stadium was completed within budget and time. When the venue opened it had a capacity for 42,500 and a natural grass turf. Unlike most other major stadiums in Canada, Commonwealth Stadium elected for a natural grass turf. The original configuration included 39,384 bucket seats and 3,200 bench seating on the north end. The venue was officially opened on July 15, 1978, in an event which attracted 15,000 spectators. The venue went through a slight expansion in 1980, when the seating capacity was increased to 43,346. Additional proposals for a roof, ranging from $10 to $32 million in cost, were presented in 1979, but since then the discussion of covering the stadium died out.

Edmonton was selected to host the 1983 Summer Universiade, and in 1981 the city council approved an $11 million upgrade to the venue, which added a further 18,000 seats to the upper tiers and the north end zone; this gave a capacity of 59,912 in 1982 and 60,081 from 1983. For special events, such as the Grey Cup, additional seating could be added. This made it the second-largest stadium in Canada, after Montreal&#x27;s Olympic Stadium, and the largest without a dome. After Winnipeg Stadium, home of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, installed AstroTurf on their field for the 1988 CFL season, the stadium was the last in the CFL to have a natural grass surface (a few teams from the CFL&#x27;s American expansion in the 1990s notwithstanding); it would have this distinction for the next 21 years.
Ahead of the 2001 World Championships in Athletics, the stadium received a $24-million facelift. Major investments included a new façade, an enlargement of the concourse, improved lighting, a new scoreboard and an all-new all-weather running track. Ahead of the 2008 season the stadium underwent a reconfiguration, reducing its capacity to 59,537. For the nine seasons prior to 2010, the natural turf was replaced eight times, costing $50,000 each time. The natural grass turf was replaced with FieldTurf Duraspine Pro in May 2010, making the Eskimos the last CFL team to switch to artificial turf (and made all fields in the CFL having artificial turf; this would last for six seasons), and the last team to play on grass until the Toronto Argonauts began playing at BMO Field for the 2016 season. The investment cost $2.6 million and was split evenly between the city and the Eskimos. The work included the removal of of soil, and the turf has a life expectancy of 8 to 10 years. It will cost $500,000 to replace. The reasons for the replacement were to reduce injuries, reduce the need for watering and fertilizer, allow a green turf for the entire season, including at Grey Cups (when the weather is especially cold in Edmonton), allow the venue to host more events, as concerts and the like will not damage the field, and that turf is recycled and recyclable.

Commonwealth Stadium underwent a $112-million facelift starting in 2009. The main investment was a field house, new locker rooms, a hosting area and two floors of office space. The complex, named the Commonwealth Community Recreation Centre and designed by MacLennan Jaunkalns Miller Architects and HIP Architects, also has an aquatic centre and a fitness centre. The complex was completed in February 2012.

Following the 2010 Grey Cup, the program to replace the seating at the stadium commenced. All seating (which had been in place since the stadium&#x27;s opening) was replaced with new and wider seats, and the color changed from red and orange to green and yellow—the Eskimos&#x27; colors. Approval of the $12 million upgrade was made by the city council on May 18, 2011, and it took 11 months to select a supplier, with installation starting in June 2012. The upgrade removed all bench seating, which had been in place in the corners and end zones, resulting in an all-seater stadium. Because of wider seats, wide instead of , capacity for the venue as reduced to 56,302. The process reduced the number of seats in each row by one. With the seating installed, the total investment in the venue exceeded $200 million. Before the start of the 2014 CFL season, the track surface was stripped off, thus giving the football end zones a squared-off look; they were rounded off prior to this.

On June 15, 2016, the Edmonton Eskimos announced a five-year field naming rights partnership with The Brick to name the field &quot;The Brick Field at Commonwealth Stadium&quot; during CFL events.

The Edmonton Elks will not sell upper bowl tickets at Commonwealth Stadium for the 2024 CFL season, reducing the stadium&#x27;s capacity to 31,000 seats.

==Facilities==

Commonwealth Stadium has a seating capacity of 56,302, in an all-seater configuration. The stadium has two twin-tier grandstands along each side, and single-tier stands on the corners and ends. The sides feature 44,032 seats, with the remaining 12,386 in the corners and ends. The side seats are wide and have a cup holder, a feature lacking on the narrower end zone seats. The seating is laid out in a colorized mosaic pattern, with dark green at the bottom, yellow in the middle and lighter green at the top. In the sides there are 14,203 dark green seats, 19,019 yellow seats and 10,810 light green seats. In the corner and end zones there are 8,672 dark green and 3,713 yellow seats. There are 15 executive suites on the east stand, 7 on the west stand and 8 on the south end zone. There is a limited amount of covered seating on the upper sections of the lower tier on the sides; half of this section on the east stand is a media centre.

The stadium has a Shaw Sports Turf Powerblade Elite 2.5S artificial turf system, installed in 2016 by GTR turf, which covers an area of . It contains additional cushioning through the installation of an extra shock pad. The turf lacks permanent line markings; this allows the markings to alternate between football and soccer. Because of the running track, the corners of the end zones were partially cut. In 2014, the end zones were squared off. The track and field segment consists of a Sportflex Super X all-weather running track manufactured by Mondo of Italy. The International Association of Athletics Federations has certified the stadium as a Class 1 venue, a certification only two other stadiums have in Canada: Moncton Stadium and Université de Sherbrooke Stadium.
At Commonwealth Stadium complex is the Field House, an three-storey training facility which includes a running track, a artificial turf training field, a fitness and weight room, locker rooms and a running track. It is part of the Commonwealth Community Recreation Centre, which also includes a aquatics centre with a four-lane lap pool, water slides and a recreational pool; of administrative offices; and a fitness centre. The building features a central lobby with each of the facilities in an annex. The centre has Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver certification. Adjacent to Commonwealth Stadium lies Clarke Stadium; it seats 5,000 and is used as a training field and as the home ground of the Canadian Premier League side FC Edmonton until it was dissolved in 2022.

The stadium is served by Stadium station of the Edmonton Light Rail Transit Capital Line. During Elks games, the service frequency is increased. The City of Edmonton and the Elks cooperate on the Green &amp; Go program, which provides free transit rides to the venue from six park and ride lots throughout Edmonton. Any holder of a pre-purchased game ticket can travel free on the buses from these lots to Commonwealth Stadium. The program was initiated by the city to minimize parking and congestion in the stadium&#x27;s neighbourhood. Game tickets are also valid fare on the LRT service from two hours prior to games to two hours after games. The city bans on-street parking in the vicinity of the stadium during games, excepting cars with residential permits.


==Events==
===Athletics===
Commonwealth Stadium was the centrepiece of the 1978 Commonwealth Games, which were hosted from August 3 to 12. The games saw 1,474 athletes from 46 nations competed in 128 events. Canada conducted its all-time best performance, capturing 45 gold medals and 109 medals in total. Commonwealth Stadium hosted the athletics events, which consisted of 38 events: 23 for male and 15 for female competitors, as well as the opening and closing ceremonies.

The success and popularity of the Commonwealth Games resulted in Edmonton bidding for and being selected to host the 1983 Summer Universiade. Commonwealth Stadium was again selected to host the athletics events, in addition to the opening and closing ceremonies. 24 male and 17 female athletics events were hosted. The games saw 2,400 participants from 73 countries, but did not attract the same public attention as the Commonwealth Games had.

The 2001 World Championships in Athletics were held at Commonwealth Stadium between August 3 and 12, featuring 1677 participants from 189 nations.

===Canadian football===
Commonwealth Stadium has been the home of the Canadian Football League&#x27;s Edmonton Eskimos/Elks since the 1978 season. In the 1977 season, the last whole season at Clarke, the Eskimos drew an average 25,324 spectators, filling up the venue to its capacity for seven of eight games. For the 1979 season, they drew an average 42,540 spectators, selling out seven of eight games. The all-time regular-season attendance record is 62,517, set against the Saskatchewan Roughriders on September 26, 2009. 28 regular-season Edmonton Elks games have sold out at Commonwealth. With the laying of artificial turf in 2010, the team stopped training on Clarke Stadium and have since used Commonwealth Stadium as their training ground.


The stadium has been host to the Grey Cup, the CFL&#x27;s championship game, five times, in 1984, 1997, 2002, 2010, and 2018. Tickets to the 2010 Grey Cup were sold out prior to the start of the season. The game was spectated by a crowd of 63,317, the largest to attend the stadium.

===Soccer===
;Edmonton Drillers
The Edmonton Drillers of the North American Soccer League, then the premier soccer league in Canada and the United States, was established in 1979 with the relocation of the Oakland Stompers. Bought by Peter Pocklington, the team chose to play its first three seasons at Commonwealth Stadium. The team played to home play-off matches during the 1980 season. The Drillers averaged between 9,923 and 10,920 in their first three seasons. After having lost $10.5 million in three years, Pocklington chose to relocate to Clarke Stadium for the 1982 season. This caused average attendance to plummet to 4,922 and the team was disbanded at the end of the year.

;Canadian Soccer Association
In the past, because of its natural turf, Commonwealth Stadium has been a favored stadium for the Canadian Soccer Association to host national games. It has hosted 18 games of the Men&#x27;s National Soccer Team and two of the Men&#x27;s Under-20 National Team. The most intense period was between 1995 and 2000, when 13 A-team games were played. The A-team has played nine FIFA World Cup qualification and five friendly matches at Commonwealth. The record attendance of 51,936 was set when Canada tied Brazil 1–1 on June 5, 1994.

The Canadian Soccer Association twice invited to the Canada Cup, a three- or four-way invitational international friendly tournament, with all matches hosted at Commonwealth Stadium. The 1995 Canada Cup featured Canada, Northern Ireland and Chile, while the 1999 Canada Cup featured Canada U-23, Iran, Ecuador and Guatemala U-23.

On November 16, 2021, the stadium hosted a third-round match in the CONCACAF 2022 FIFA World Cup qualifiers between Canada and Mexico; with a 2–1 victory, Canada defeated Mexico for the first time in 21 years, taking the lead in the pool. Due to the frigid Prairie temperatures of November, Canada Soccer tweeted that the stadium was &quot;Canada&#x27;s frozen fortress&quot;, while fans also nicknamed the field &quot;Estadio Iceteca&quot; or &quot;The Iceteca&quot;, in reference to Mexico&#x27;s home field Estadio Azteca. With a temperature of −9 °C at kickoff, it was the coldest game in Mexico national team history.

Edmonton has hosted five international friendly matches and two FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup matches featuring the Canada women&#x27;s national soccer team. Before the 2015 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup, the record attendance was 29,953 for a game on August 31, 2003, when Canada beat Mexico 8–0. The attendance record was broken in 2015, when a record crowd of 53,058 saw Canada beat China 1–0 in the first match of the Women&#x27;s World Cup.

Canada and Commonwealth Stadium were host to the 1996 edition of the CONCACAF Men&#x27;s Olympic Qualifying Tournament, which featured the Men&#x27;s Under-23 National Team between 10 and 19 May. The tournament drew crowds up to 19,401, and saw Canada finish second to Mexico. Canada played Australia, playing 2–2 at Commonwealth Stadium on 26 May. Canada lost 5–0 in Australia and fail to qualify.

Edmonton co-hosted the inaugural 2002 FIFA U-19 Women&#x27;s World Championship between August 17 and September 1 along with Vancouver and Victoria. Edmonton was the base of operations and featured 12 of the 26 matches. FIFA was originally skeptical to using such a large venue, especially for those matches which did not involve Canada. The 12 games drew a total 238,090 and an average 19,841 spectators. The final, which saw the United States defeat Canada 1–0 in extra time, was spectated by 47,784; this remains a world-record attendance for youth-level women&#x27;s soccer.

Commonwealth Stadium was one of six Canadian venues selected to host the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup between June 30 and July 22. Nine of 52 matches were played in Edmonton, including a quarterfinal and a semifinal, and two of Canada. The games drew a total attendance of 243,517 and an average attendance of 27,057, second only to the Olympic Stadium in Montreal. The highest attendance was 32,058, which watched Canada play Congo.

Two club friendly matches were played at Commonwealth in 2009 and 2010, under the Edmonton Cup umbrella. In the first, 15,800 spectators watched Argentinian side River Plate defeat England&#x27;s Everton 1–0. In the second, 8,792 spectators watched FC Edmonton play English side Portsmouth to a 1–1 draw. A third club friendly was played in 2019 at Commonwealth Stadium between Cardiff City FC (English Football League) and Real Valladolid (La Liga Spain). Cardiff City fought out a 1–1 draw against the Spanish La Liga club, owned by Brazilian ace Ronaldo, before winning the penalty shoot-out 4–2. FC Edmonton started competing in the Canadian Championship in 2011 season and played these games at Commonwealth Stadium until 2014 when they returned to Clarke Stadium which is their regular home ground. Commonwealth Stadium also hosted matches during the 2014 FIFA U-20 Women&#x27;s World Cup between August 5 and 24, and the 2015 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup between June 5 and July 6.


===Concerts===

Concerts held at Commonwealth Stadium include Pink Floyd, Beyoncé, David Bowie, Tim McGraw, Genesis, the Rolling Stones, the Police, Fiction Plane, AC/DC, Metallica, U2, Kenny Chesney, Bob Dylan, Willie Nelson, Taylor Swift, Bon Jovi, Guns N&#x27; Roses, Lilith Fair, Mötley Crüe, Edgefest and One Direction.

===Ice hockey===
The 2003 Heritage Classic was an outdoor ice hockey game played on November 22 between the National Hockey League (NHL) sides Edmonton Oilers and the Montreal Canadiens. The first regular-season NHL game to be played outdoors, it saw the Canadiens win 4–3 in front of a crowd of 57,167, despite temperatures of close to −18 °C, −30 °C (−22 °F) with wind chill. It was held to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Oilers joining the NHL in 1979 and the 20th anniversary of their first Stanley Cup win in 1984. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation television broadcast drew 2.747 million viewers in Canada, the second-highest audience for a regular-season NHL game. The 2023 Heritage Classic was played at Commonwealth Stadium, where the Edmonton Oilers hosted the Calgary Flames in the first outdoor NHL “Battle of Alberta” where the Oilers won 5–2.

===Rugby union===
Commonwealth Stadium has been used to host Churchill Cup matches. The 2004 edition had the first round played in Calgary and the second round played at Commonwealth Stadium. The 2005 edition saw all matches being played in Edmonton, with the final drawing a crowd of 17,000. In the 2006 edition the three finals were played at Commonwealth Stadium. The 2006 Women&#x27;s Rugby World Cup was hosted in Edmonton and its suburb, St. Albert. Most of the Edmonton games were played at Ellerslie Rugby Park, but the final, third-place match and fifth-place match were all played at Commonwealth Stadium. On June 9, 2018, the Canadian Men&#x27;s National team played host to Scotland, world number 6 at the time, in a test match at Commonwealth Stadium. Scotland came away with a 48–10 victory over Canada in front of a crowd of 12,824 at Commonwealth Stadium.

===Other events===
In 1980, the venue hosted a Billy Graham event during his Northern Canada Crusade.

In 1983, the Edmonton Trappers Triple-A baseball team defeated the California Angels of Major League Baseball in an exhibition baseball game witnessed by a crowd of 24,830.

On 26 July 2022, Pope Francis led an open-air Mass in front of an attendance of nearly 50,000 people as part of his first visit to Canada.

On 30 July 2022, Monster Jam made its only appearance at the stadium.

In 2024, it hosted the IFAF U20 World Junior Championship, marking the first time American football was played at the stadium.

==See also==
*List of Commonwealth Games venues

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130381" start="0" end="20" title="Commonwealth Stadium" label="Commonwealth Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049757" start="37" end="58" title="multi-purpose stadium" label="multi-purpose stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800241" start="74" end="82" title="McCauley, Edmonton" label="McCauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="100" end="108" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="136" end="152" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="233" end="250" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="266" end="275" title="athletics (sport)" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="277" end="283" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="285" end="296" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060575" start="377" end="400" title="1978 Commonwealth Games" label="1978 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127504" start="452" end="466" title="Clarke Stadium" label="Clarke Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285835" start="486" end="502" title="Edmonton Eskimos" label="Edmonton Eskimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="510" end="534" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155227" start="594" end="617" title="1983 Summer Universiade" label="1983 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="694" end="702" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q852061" start="720" end="737" title="championship game" label="championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q565657" start="772" end="800" title="FIFA World Cup qualification" label="FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q208635" start="818" end="858" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Canadian men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029339" start="893" end="903" title="Canada Cup (soccer)" label="Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926745" start="909" end="956" title="1996 CONCACAF Men&amp;#x27;s Pre-Olympic Tournament" label="1996 CONCACAF Men&amp;#x27;s Pre-Olympic Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q303117" start="962" end="1008" title="2002 FIFA U-19 Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2002 FIFA U-19 Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q831688" start="1017" end="1041" title="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q217991" start="1047" end="1084" title="2014 FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2014 FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q911847" start="1093" end="1125" title="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207755" start="1127" end="1138" title="FC Edmonton" label="FC Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032086" start="1150" end="1171" title="Canadian Championship" label="Canadian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q503240" start="1264" end="1301" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics" label="2001 World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051173" start="1307" end="1340" title="2006 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup" label="2006 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089881" start="1367" end="1380" title="Churchill Cup" label="Churchill Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339025" start="2021" end="2042" title="Edmonton City Council" label="Edmonton City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414302" start="2237" end="2259" title="Kinsmen Field House" label="Kinsmen Aquatic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564097" start="2264" end="2280" title="Argyll Velodrome" label="Argyll Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157332" start="2309" end="2327" title="Jack Trice Stadium" label="Jack Trice Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q470273" start="2346" end="2356" title="Ames, Iowa" label="Ames, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793989" start="3209" end="3224" title="Maury Van Vliet" label="Maury Van Vliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="3271" end="3298" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium in Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="3554" end="3567" title="cost overruns" label="cost overruns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285861" start="4298" end="4310" title="Edmonton LRT" label="Edmonton LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054219" start="4350" end="4362" title="Capital Line" label="Capital Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596463" start="4479" end="4494" title="Stadium station (Edmonton)" label="Stadium station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303426" start="4498" end="4515" title="downtown Edmonton" label="downtown Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="5627" end="5635" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378622" start="5698" end="5714" title="Winnipeg Stadium" label="Winnipeg Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465351" start="5794" end="5809" title="1988 CFL season" label="1988 CFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q614379" start="6212" end="6222" title="scoreboard" label="scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004435" start="6238" end="6263" title="all-weather running track" label="all-weather running track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610930" start="6278" end="6289" title="2008 Edmonton Eskimos season" label="2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="6511" end="6520" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="6598" end="6613" title="artificial turf" label="artificial turf"/>
<link wikidata="Q142349" start="6749" end="6766" title="Toronto Argonauts" label="Toronto Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q796351" start="6784" end="6793" title="BMO Field" label="BMO Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021955" start="6802" end="6813" title="2016 CFL season" label="2016 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447073" start="7481" end="7492" title="field house" label="field house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818734" start="7805" end="7818" title="98th Grey Cup" label="2010 Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956268" start="8631" end="8646" title="2014 CFL season" label="2014 CFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720000" start="8875" end="8884" title="The Brick" label="The Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q123179634" start="9058" end="9073" title="2024 CFL season" label="2024 CFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728370" start="9207" end="9217" title="all-seater stadium" label="all-seater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398862" start="9458" end="9468" title="cup holder" label="cup holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768419" start="9847" end="9862" title="executive suite" label="executive suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234374" start="10466" end="10474" title="end zone" label="end zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="10541" end="10556" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="10659" end="10709" title="International Association of Athletics Federations" label="International Association of Athletics Federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944117" start="10812" end="10827" title="Moncton Stadium" label="Moncton Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496011" start="10832" end="10864" title="Université de Sherbrooke Stadium" label="Université de Sherbrooke Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="11385" end="11430" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127504" start="11498" end="11512" title="Clarke Stadium" label="Clarke Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000566" start="11591" end="11614" title="Canadian Premier League" label="Canadian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207755" start="11620" end="11631" title="FC Edmonton" label="FC Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="11941" end="11954" title="park and ride" label="park and ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869162" start="12758" end="12785" title="Athletics at the 1978 Commonwealth Games" label="hosted the athletics events"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155227" start="13025" end="13048" title="1983 Summer Universiade" label="1983 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q930226" start="13093" end="13118" title="Athletics at the 1983 Summer Universiade" label="host the athletics events"/>
<link wikidata="Q503240" start="13357" end="13394" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics" label="2001 World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285835" start="13603" end="13624" title="Edmonton Elks" label="Edmonton Eskimos/Elks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578130" start="13635" end="13646" title="1978 Edmonton Eskimos season" label="1978 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339048" start="13655" end="13666" title="1977 Edmonton Eskimos season" label="1977 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578682" start="13819" end="13830" title="1979 Edmonton Eskimos season" label="1979 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q596796" start="13979" end="14003" title="Saskatchewan Roughriders" label="Saskatchewan Roughriders"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="14286" end="14294" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643211" start="14345" end="14349" title="72nd Grey Cup" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644863" start="14351" end="14355" title="85th Grey Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645657" start="14357" end="14361" title="90th Grey Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818734" start="14363" end="14367" title="98th Grey Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561324" start="14373" end="14377" title="106th Grey Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q16765359" start="14573" end="14590" title="Edmonton Drillers (1979–1982)" label="Edmonton Drillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="14598" end="14626" title="North American Soccer League (1968–1984)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14711" end="14715" title="1979 Edmonton Drillers season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842584" start="14743" end="14759" title="Oakland Stompers" label="Oakland Stompers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381653" start="14771" end="14788" title="Peter Pocklington" label="Peter Pocklington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14914" end="14925" title="1980 Edmonton Drillers season" label="1980 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15108" end="15119" title="1982 Edmonton Drillers season" label="1982 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032414" start="15351" end="15378" title="Canadian Soccer Association" label="Canadian Soccer Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q208635" start="15433" end="15464" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Men&amp;#x27;s National Soccer Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029522" start="15480" end="15513" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national under-20 soccer team" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Under-20 National Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q565657" start="15627" end="15655" title="FIFA World Cup qualification" label="FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="15665" end="15673" title="exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="15756" end="15762" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029339" start="15838" end="15848" title="Canada Cup (soccer)" label="Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590249" start="15972" end="15987" title="1995 Canada Cup" label="1995 Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="16005" end="16021" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="16026" end="16031" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5786620" start="16043" end="16058" title="1999 Canada Cup" label="1999 Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873967" start="16068" end="16079" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national under-23 soccer team" label="Canada U-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q184602" start="16081" end="16085" title="Iran national football team" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q987584" start="16087" end="16094" title="Ecuador national football team" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16099" end="16113" title="Guatemala national under-23 football team" label="Guatemala U-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q97829074" start="16159" end="16170" title="2022 FIFA World Cup qualification – CONCACAF third round" label="third-round"/>
<link wikidata="Q61745925" start="16184" end="16223" title="2022 FIFA World Cup qualification (CONCACAF)" label="CONCACAF 2022 FIFA World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="16243" end="16249" title="Mexico men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="16373" end="16380" title="Canadian Prairies" label="Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032414" start="16407" end="16420" title="Canada Soccer" label="Canada Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320454" start="16626" end="16640" title="Estadio Azteca" label="Estadio Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323" start="16804" end="16831" title="FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q499946" start="16854" end="16894" title="Canada women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Canada women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q911847" start="16907" end="16939" title="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2015 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q599923" start="17022" end="17028" title="Mexico women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q756037" start="17122" end="17127" title="China women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926745" start="17232" end="17244" title="1996 CONCACAF Men&amp;#x27;s Pre-Olympic Tournament" label="1996 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013393" start="17252" end="17301" title="CONCACAF Men&amp;#x27;s Olympic Qualifying Tournament" label="CONCACAF Men&amp;#x27;s Olympic Qualifying Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926260" start="17452" end="17458" title="Mexico national under-23 football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589775" start="17474" end="17483" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national under-23 soccer team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q303117" start="17616" end="17662" title="2002 FIFA U-19 Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2002 FIFA U-19 Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="17708" end="17717" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="17722" end="17730" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="17803" end="17807" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029537" start="17913" end="17919" title="Canada women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 soccer team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893547" start="18014" end="18027" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="18049" end="18059" title="extra time" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q831688" start="18236" end="18260" title="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160525" start="18586" end="18591" title="Congo national under-20 football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339034" start="18676" end="18688" title="Edmonton Cup" label="Edmonton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15799" start="18756" end="18767" title="Club Atlético River Plate" label="River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="18790" end="18797" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="18873" end="18883" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032086" start="19231" end="19252" title="Canadian Championship" label="Canadian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621051" start="19256" end="19267" title="2011 FC Edmonton season" label="2011 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q217991" start="19451" end="19488" title="2014 FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2014 FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="19646" end="19656" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="19658" end="19665" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="19667" end="19678" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q356487" start="19680" end="19690" title="Tim McGraw" label="Tim McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="19692" end="19699" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="19701" end="19719" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="19721" end="19731" title="the Police" label="the Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q669033" start="19733" end="19746" title="Fiction Plane" label="Fiction Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="19748" end="19753" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="19755" end="19764" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="19766" end="19768" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q467526" start="19770" end="19783" title="Kenny Chesney" label="Kenny Chesney"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="19785" end="19794" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="19796" end="19809" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="19811" end="19823" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="19825" end="19833" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="19835" end="19853" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770211" start="19855" end="19866" title="Lilith Fair" label="Lilith Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="19868" end="19879" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337749" start="19881" end="19889" title="Edgefest" label="Edgefest"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="19894" end="19907" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q627719" start="19931" end="19952" title="2003 Heritage Classic" label="2003 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631838" start="19960" end="19983" title="list of outdoor ice hockey games" label="outdoor ice hockey game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="20018" end="20040" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="20053" end="20068" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="20077" end="20095" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="20343" end="20365" title="1979 NHL expansion" label="Oilers joining the NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="20414" end="20425" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581880" start="20433" end="20437" title="1984 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="20443" end="20476" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115866771" start="20599" end="20620" title="2023 Heritage Classic" label="2023 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="20694" end="20708" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20735" end="20752" title="Battle of Alberta#Hockey" label="Battle of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089881" start="20842" end="20855" title="Churchill Cup" label="Churchill Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676098" start="20869" end="20881" title="2004 Churchill Cup" label="2004 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="20912" end="20919" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676100" start="20977" end="20989" title="2005 Churchill Cup" label="2005 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676102" start="21081" end="21093" title="2006 Churchill Cup" label="2006 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051173" start="21152" end="21185" title="2006 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup" label="2006 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q939127" start="21225" end="21235" title="St. Albert, Alberta" label="St. Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365195" start="21279" end="21299" title="Ellerslie Rugby Park" label="Ellerslie Rugby Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="21701" end="21713" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538059" start="21770" end="21787" title="Edmonton Trappers" label="Edmonton Trappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="21788" end="21796" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="21824" end="21841" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="21845" end="21866" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="21948" end="21960" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="21977" end="21981" title="Mass in the Catholic Church" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q113297348" start="22047" end="22068" title="Visit by Pope Francis to Canada" label="first visit to Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q866784" start="22088" end="22099" title="Monster Jam" label="Monster Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851686" start="22165" end="22199" title="2024 IFAF World Junior Championship" label="IFAF U20 World Junior Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="22224" end="22241" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883023" start="22284" end="22317" title="List of Commonwealth Games venues" label="List of Commonwealth Games venues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758366" wikidata="Q906007" url="?curid=758366" title="USS Barbel (SS-580)">
<text>USS &quot;Barbel&quot; (SS-580) was the lead ship of her class of submarines in the United States Navy. She was the second Navy ship named for the barbel, a cyprinoid fish, commonly called a minnow or carp.

The contract to build &quot;Barbel&quot; was awarded to Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, Maine on 24 August 1955 and her keel was laid down on 18 May 1956. She was launched on 19 July 1958 sponsored by Mrs. Bernard L. Austin, and commissioned on 17 January 1959, with Lieutenant Commander Ord Kimzey, Jr., in command.

==1950s and 1960s==

&quot;Barbel&quot;-class submarines were originally designed and built with bow planes. On 30 November 1960, the &quot;Barbel&quot; had been operating off the coast of the Eastern U.S. while participating in training exercise SLAMEX. Following her first dive of the day to test depth (700 feet), she ruptured a 5&quot; line used for cooling equipment which circulated sea water throughout the boat at sea pressure. An emergency blow was performed and on reaching the surface it was found that she had taken on of water in the engine room. She entered Portsmouth Naval Shipyard and underwent major repairs of all her piping over 2&quot;. At that time, her bow planes were also converted to fairwater planes.

In 1966 &quot;Barbel&quot; accidentally rammed and sank North Vietnam&#x27;s largest freighter while trying to determine what type of war-related cargo it was carrying. Although damaged, &quot;Barbel&quot; was able to remain submerged and return to port for repairs.

During the 1950s and 1960s, the early classes of nuclear submarines suffered propulsion plant reliability problems, and occasionally were unable to complete their assigned missions. In 1969, while deployed in WESPAC, &quot;Barbel&quot; was assigned to fill in on a &quot;special mission&quot; for such a nuclear submarine. It was noted by the control room watch standers at that time that there should be some sort of recognition badge, similar to the recently authorized &quot;Polaris Patrol Pin&quot;, for diesel boats required to fill in for a broken down nuclear submarine. A contest was held to design the badge. ETR3(SS) Leon Figurido&#x27;s winning design was a broadside view of a guppy submarine with SS superimposed on the North Atlantic sail. There were two bare-breasted mermaids facing towards the sail with arms outstretched. Completing the design was a wreath under the boat, with holes for stars, and centered on the wreath were the letters &quot;DBF&quot; standing for &quot;Diesel Boats Forever&quot;. And so was born the DBF pin.

==1970s and 1980s==

In 1973 &quot;Barbel&quot;″s weapons division set a SUBPAC record for successfully shooting 118 torpedoes that year. This included successful salvo firing two Mark 16-8 exercise torpedoes, and a successful MK 16-8 warshot operational test. In addition the boat performed a zero error Mark 45 torpedo Technical Standardization Inspection conducted by DoD, a Navy Technical Proficiency Inspection, and the torpedomen identified the source of the MK 45 torpedo &quot;flex hose eater problem.&quot; For this record, &quot;Barbel&quot; was awarded the 1973 Battle Efficiency &quot;E&quot;. &quot;Barbel&quot; record for firing torpedoes was around 1978. She also succeeded in a simulated &quot;sinking&quot; of the aircraft carrier during Exercise RIMPAC during that same period.

From 19 January 1981 to 22 January, &quot;Barbel&quot; and fellow submarine participated in ASWEX 81-3U off the coast of the Philippines, an exercise in shallow water ASW. The submarines opposed the transit of the oiler , which was escorted by the destroyers (CTF 75 embarked) and , and frigates , , , and through the narrow straits.

From 1988 until her decommissioning in 1989, &quot;Barbel&quot; was commanded by Commander William F. Bundy who was the first African-American Navy enlisted man to rise to become a submarine commander. After retiring from the Navy, Bundy served as Director of the Rhode Island Department of Transportation and later as a professor at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island.

On 1 May 1989, while operating off Kyūshū, Japan, three submariners were washed overboard by heavy waves. One sailor was rescued; two drowned. Due to extensive damage from flooding during the incident, the decision was made to decommission &quot;Barbel&quot;. Supposedly, the May &#x27;89 event was caused soon after having surfaced due to improperly ensuring the vessel had a proper positive buoyancy, and when a large wave went over the bow, the boat was driven below periscope depth before ships force was able to recover depth control and resurface.

==Fate==

&quot;Barbel&quot; was decommissioned on 4 December 1989, and stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 17 January 1990. The Navy sold &quot;Barbel&quot; to a scrapper who began the process of scrapping her. After the sail, superstructure and induction piping were removed, the scrapper discovered the boat&#x27;s interior was filled with painted-over asbestos insulation. Scrapping ceased at that time while the scrapper decided what to do with &quot;Barbel&quot;. &quot;Barbel&quot; had her sail and superstructure reconstructed out of plywood for a brief role in the movie &quot;Crimson Tide&quot; (1995). She is seen as the submarine when it is tied up and they are making preparations for departure on patrol. After eight years &quot;Barbel&quot; returned to Navy ownership. She was towed from the berth in San Pedro, Los Angeles and on 30 January 2001 she was sunk as a target off the California coast in 1,972 fathoms (3,606 m)

== References ==

== External links ==

*navsource:org: USS &quot;Barbel&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906007" start="0" end="31" title="USS Barbel (SS-580)" label="USS &amp;quot;Barbel&amp;quot; (SS-580)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095057" start="40" end="49" title="lead ship" label="lead ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q611047" start="53" end="62" title="Barbel-class submarine" label="her class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="66" end="75" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="84" end="102" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326219" start="147" end="153" title="Barbus barbus" label="barbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48694" start="191" end="197" title="Leuciscinae" label="minnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="201" end="205" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="264" end="289" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q973112" start="293" end="307" title="Kittery, Maine" label="Kittery, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="377" end="385" title="ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893339" start="420" end="437" title="Bernard L. Austin" label="Bernard L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="443" end="455" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="502" end="517" title="Ord Kimzey, Jr." label="Ord Kimzey, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="1104" end="1129" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670160" start="1208" end="1217" title="bow plane" label="bow plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670160" start="1242" end="1257" title="fairwater plane" label="fairwater plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="1317" end="1330" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840873" start="2569" end="2576" title="Diesel Boats Forever insignia" label="DBF pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121367" start="2759" end="2768" title="Mark 16 torpedo" label="Mark 16-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899853" start="2884" end="2899" title="Mark 45 torpedo" label="Mark 45 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="3310" end="3326" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q633954" start="3334" end="3349" title="Exercise RIMPAC" label="Exercise RIMPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3501" end="3512" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="3624" end="3633" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="3663" end="3670" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="4049" end="4066" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="4070" end="4091" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="4129" end="4135" title="Kyūshū" label="Kyūshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="4739" end="4760" title="Naval Vessel Register" label="Naval Vessel Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140085" start="5242" end="5254" title="Crimson Tide (film)" label="Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="5472" end="5481" title="San Pedro, Los Angeles" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5551" end="5561" title="California" label="California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758368" wikidata="Q517268" url="?curid=758368" title="Kroger Field">
<text>Kroger Field, also known as Commonwealth Stadium, is a stadium in Lexington, Kentucky, United States, located on the campus of the University of Kentucky that primarily serves as the home field for the Kentucky Wildcats football team. The stadium is located at the corner of Alumni Drive and University Drive in Lexington. The playing surface is named C. M. Newton Grounds in honor of the late UK athletic director and former baseball and basketball player C. M. Newton. Built in 1973, it is the newest football stadium in the Southeastern Conference, as measured by date of original construction. The original capacity for the stadium was 57,800. In the stadium&#x27;s first game, played on September 15, 1973, the Wildcats defeated the Virginia Tech Hokies 31–26.

==History==
===Renovations===
Both ends of the stadium were enclosed in 1999 and 40 suites were added, 10 in each corner of the stadium, resulting in a symmetrical oval bowl seating 67,530. The total cost of the expansion was $27.6 million. Seating adjustments over the next decade brought capacity to 67,942. During the 1999 season, Kentucky&#x27;s average home attendance for football games was 67,756. Attendance for the game against Tennessee that year was 71,022, which remained the record attendance until the Wildcats&#x27; 2007 game against Florida drew 71,024. For much of the next decade, Wildcat football games frequently attracted crowds in excess of 70,000.
The University of Kentucky announced an audio and video upgrade to the stadium in July 2011. These upgrades included two LED video boards each measuring approximately high by wide (2,960 square feet), making each display the 20th-largest scoreboard in the country. Combined, the make the new video boards one of the largest scoreboard systems in the country. Additionally, a new custom audio system and over 1,800 linear sq/ft of video ribbon board were implemented by September 10, 2011. The approximate cost of the upgrades totaled close to $6 million.

The stadium underwent a $110 million renovation in 2015. The renovation included a new press box, loge box seats, club seats, recruiting room, suites, concourses, bathrooms, lights, and exterior facade while reducing capacity to around 61,000. The project was completed before the start of the 2015 season. It was referred to as &quot;The New Commonwealth Stadium&quot;. On May 1, 2017, the university, along with marketing partner JMI Sports, announced the stadium&#x27;s name change to Kroger Field, part of a 12-year, $1.85 million per year naming rights deal with Cincinnati-based retailer Kroger. This agreement makes the University of Kentucky the first school in the Southeastern Conference to enter into a corporate partnership for the naming rights to their football stadium.

In 2022, as part of a $30 million athletics facilities project, new video boards were installed measuring 37 feet (11m) high by 100 feet (30m) wide, along with significant upgrades to the adjacent Nutter Field House, the team&#x27;s indoor practice facility. In 2023, a new turf playing surface was installed, replacing the existing one installed in 2015. In 2024, as part of another $7 million upgrade, new video ribbon boards and LED stadium lights were installed, the latter of which allows for light shows to be performed during breaks and after scores, enhancing the fan experience.

=== KHSAA Football Championship ===
Since 2017, Kroger Field has been the site for Kentucky&#x27;s high school football championship games. The event was moved from Western Kentucky University&#x27;s Houchens Industries–L. T. Smith Stadium due to conflicts with WKU&#x27;s hosting of two recent Conference USA championship games (2015 and 2016), which led to rescheduling of high school title games on short notice. The 2017 championships were the first held in Lexington since 1976.

Since 1999, fireworks have been shot from atop the suites whenever the Wildcats take the field, as well as after every Wildcat score and win.

==Concerts==
The stadium hosted no concerts in its first 47 years of use. The first concert was scheduled for 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the concert was rescheduled and took place on April 24, 2022. The concert featured Chris Stapleton, Willie Nelson, and Sheryl Crow.

==See also==
*Bluegrass Miracle
*2003 Arkansas vs. Kentucky football game, a game at Commonwealth that took seven overtime periods to decide
*Stoll Field/McLean Stadium
*List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums
*List of American football stadiums by capacity
*Lists of stadiums

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q517268" start="0" end="12" title="Kroger Field" label="Kroger Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q517268" start="28" end="48" title="Kroger Field" label="Commonwealth Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="66" end="85" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="131" end="153" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392427" start="202" end="228" title="Kentucky Wildcats football" label="Kentucky Wildcats football"/>
<link wikidata="Q517268" start="352" end="372" title="Kroger Field" label="C. M. Newton Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666448" start="457" end="469" title="C. M. Newton" label="C. M. Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="527" end="550" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934612" start="738" end="758" title="Virginia Tech Hokies football" label="Virginia Tech Hokies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070759" start="1204" end="1213" title="Tennessee Volunteers football" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608733" start="1298" end="1302" title="2007 Kentucky Wildcats football team" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608491" start="1316" end="1323" title="2007 Florida Gators football team" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="2538" end="2551" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="2562" end="2572" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="2588" end="2594" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998320" start="3468" end="3507" title="KHSAA Commonwealth Gridiron Bowl" label="high school football championship games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951979" start="3534" end="3568" title="Western Kentucky Hilltoppers football" label="Western Kentucky University&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912732" start="3569" end="3608" title="Houchens Industries–L. T. Smith Stadium" label="Houchens Industries–L. T. Smith Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="3664" end="3678" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159882" start="3679" end="3697" title="Conference USA Football Championship Game" label="championship games"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095426" start="3699" end="3703" title="2015 Conference USA Football Championship Game" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231605" start="3708" end="3712" title="2016 Conference USA Football Championship Game" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108148" start="4226" end="4241" title="Chris Stapleton" label="Chris Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="4243" end="4256" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="4262" end="4273" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930343" start="4290" end="4307" title="Bluegrass Miracle" label="Bluegrass Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601099" start="4309" end="4349" title="2003 Arkansas vs. Kentucky football game" label="2003 Arkansas vs. Kentucky football game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618650" start="4418" end="4444" title="Stoll Field/McLean Stadium" label="Stoll Field/McLean Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981271" start="4446" end="4491" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums" label="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561591" start="4493" end="4539" title="List of American football stadiums by capacity" label="List of American football stadiums by capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="4541" end="4558" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758371" wikidata="Q7210278" url="?curid=758371" title="Political culture of Germany">
<text>The political culture of Germany as of the early 21st century is known for the popular expectation for governments to ensure a degree of social welfare, business and labour corporatism, and a multiparty system dominated by conservative and social democratic forces, with a strong influence of smaller Green, liberal and socialist parties. Coalition governments are predominant on both the federal and the state levels, exemplifying the German desire for consensus politics over one party majority rule as in democracies that follow the Westminster model. Although this consensus culture is beneficial insofar as it enables minority groups to take part in political discussions and decision making, it often leads to situations in which different interest groups blockade each other resulting in political gridlocks. Political decision-making is further complicated by the powers held by the German states and the presence of a judicial branch with the power to review and dismiss legislation. Therefore, political power in Germany is not concentrated in the hands of one or a small number of individuals but spread thinly. Even the Chancellor can only set general guidelines for federal policies () and has to negotiate with many other politicians and interest groups when there is a need to take concrete measures.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7210278" start="4" end="32" title="Political culture of Germany" label="political culture of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="137" end="151" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="223" end="235" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="240" end="257" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="301" end="306" title="Alliance &amp;#x27;90/The Greens" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="308" end="315" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="320" end="329" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="536" end="553" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758372" wikidata="Q6650479" url="?curid=758372" title="Little Italy, Syracuse">
<text>Little Italy Syracuse is an ethnic enclave in Syracuse, New York that contains several bakeries, cafés, pizzerias, restaurants, beauty salons, shops, bars and nightclubs. The main street in the neighborhood is North Salina Street.

Italian immigrants began to settle in the Northside of Syracuse in the early 1880s, however, the neighborhood was not officially designated as Little Italy until 2003.

==History==

===Immigrants===

Italian immigrants first came to the area around Syracuse, New York in 1883 after providing labor for the construction of the &quot;West Shore Railroad&quot;. At first, they were quite transient and came and went, but eventually settled down on the Northside.

By 1899, the Italian immigrants were living on the Northside of the city in the area centered around Pearl Street. The Italians all but supplanted the Germans in that area of the city and had their own business district along North State and North Salina Streets.

===Local businesses===

Early residents in the neighborhood worked in for &quot;Learbury Suits&quot;, &quot;Nettleton Shoes&quot; and other Northside factories.

===Italian foods===

The &quot;Columbus Baking Company&quot; has been a mainstay on Pearl Street for over a century. The bakery is family-owned and specializes in four types of bread. &quot;Thano&#x27;s Import Market&quot;, located on North Salina Street for over 90 years, sells Italian delicacies such as aged provolone cheese, olives and homemade pasta.

&quot;Lombardi&#x27;s Fruits &amp; Imports&quot;, another fixture on the Northside for several decades, carries hundreds of items imported directory from Italy.

===Produce market===

August 15, 1899 was the last day local farmer&#x27;s were allowed to use the area between West Genesee Street from Salina to Clinton Streets as a public produce market. Commissioner of Public Works Meagher saw to it that those &quot;having produce to sell&quot; were kept away from &quot;Clinton Square&quot;.

The old &quot;Hay Market&quot; on North Salina Street near the &quot;Erie Canal&quot; lift bridge had been approved as a public market after a delegation of local businessmen, members of the &quot;North Side Business Men&#x27;s Association&quot; visited Mayor McGuire and appealed to the &quot;Common Council&quot; asking for a produce market on the Northside.

The &quot;Common Council&quot; passed a resolution in June 1899 directing those having hay to sell &quot;vacate the plot of land enclosed by the fence.&quot; The result was loads of hay were lined up along Pearl Street and Fulton Street, however, the old market was ready for farmers.

By 1900, the Northside &quot;Produce Market&quot; supplied fresh fruit and vegetables from farmers in Cicero and North Syracuse to local residents.

===Hospital===

&quot;St. Joseph&#x27;s Hospital&quot; is a major employer in the neighborhood, which also includes the St. Joseph&#x27;s College of Nursing.

===Recent years===

By September 2009, Syracuse&#x27;s &quot;Little Italy&quot; district received millions of dollars of public and private investment for new sidewalks, streetscapes, landscaping, lighting and to set up a &quot;Green Train&quot; program, which trains men to work in green construction and renovation industries.

In recent years, the neighborhood is a mix of Italian shops, restaurant and businesses that cater to the area&#x27;s South Asian and African population, and vacant storefronts. Although the neighborhood is far less Italian than in past years, banners throughout the district still read &quot;Little Italy&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==

* List of named ethnic enclaves in North American cities
* Northside TNT</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6650479" start="0" end="21" title="Little Italy, Syracuse" label="Little Italy Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149043" start="28" end="42" title="List of named ethnic enclaves in North American cities" label="ethnic enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="46" end="54" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="56" end="64" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q274393" start="87" end="95" title="bakery" label="bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="97" end="101" title="café" label="café"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501212" start="104" end="113" title="pizzerias" label="pizzerias"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="115" end="125" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="143" end="148" title="Retailing#Shops and stores" label="shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="150" end="153" title="bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="159" end="168" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="232" end="239" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="274" end="283" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="287" end="295" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="375" end="387" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="481" end="499" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986481" start="564" end="583" title="West Shore Railroad" label="West Shore Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="681" end="690" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="744" end="753" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191261" start="844" end="851" title="Germans in Syracuse, New York" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900114" start="1432" end="1448" title="provolone cheese" label="provolone cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="1450" end="1456" title="olives" label="olives"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="1470" end="1475" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1632" end="1637" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="2042" end="2052" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="2323" end="2332" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q31219" start="2723" end="2729" title="Cicero, New York" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452997" start="2734" end="2748" title="North Syracuse, New York" label="North Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3305" end="3312" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3382" end="3386" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="3392" end="3399" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149043" start="3611" end="3665" title="List of named ethnic enclaves in North American cities" label="List of named ethnic enclaves in North American cities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758383" wikidata="Q993299" url="?curid=758383" title="Nomonhan">
<text>Nomonhan is a small village in Inner Mongolia, China, south of the city of Manzhouli and near the China–Mongolia border.

In the summer of 1939, it was the location of the Nomonhan Incident, as it is known in Japan, or the Battle of Khalkhin Gol, as it is known in Russia and Mongolia.

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q993299" start="0" end="8" title="Nomonhan" label="Nomonhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="31" end="45" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q890671" start="75" end="84" title="Manzhouli" label="Manzhouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q376744" start="98" end="119" title="China–Mongolia border" label="China–Mongolia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="209" end="214" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="223" end="245" title="Battle of Khalkhin Gol" label="Battle of Khalkhin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="265" end="271" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="276" end="284" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758386" wikidata="Q7917825" url="?curid=758386" title="Vector fields in cylindrical and spherical coordinates">
<text>Note: This page uses common physics notation for spherical coordinates, in which formula_1 is the angle between the &quot;z&quot; axis and the radius vector connecting the origin to the point in question, while formula_2 is the angle between the projection of the radius vector onto the &quot;x-y&quot; plane and the &quot;x&quot; axis. Several other definitions are in use, and so care must be taken in comparing different sources.

== Cylindrical coordinate system ==

=== Vector fields ===

Vectors are defined in cylindrical coordinates by (&quot;ρ&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;, &quot;z&quot;), where
* &quot;ρ&quot; is the length of the vector projected onto the &quot;xy&quot;-plane,
* &quot;φ&quot; is the angle between the projection of the vector onto the &quot;xy&quot;-plane (i.e. &quot;ρ&quot;) and the positive &quot;x&quot;-axis (0 ≤ &quot;φ&quot; &lt; 2&quot;π&quot;),
* &quot;z&quot; is the regular &quot;z&quot;-coordinate.

(&quot;ρ&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;, &quot;z&quot;) is given in Cartesian coordinates by:
formula_3
or inversely by:
formula_4

Any vector field can be written in terms of the unit vectors as:
formula_5
The cylindrical unit vectors are related to the Cartesian unit vectors by:
formula_6

Note: the matrix is an orthogonal matrix, that is, its inverse is simply its transpose.

=== Time derivative of a vector field ===

To find out how the vector field A changes in time, the time derivatives should be calculated.
For this purpose Newton&#x27;s notation will be used for the time derivative (formula_7).
In Cartesian coordinates this is simply:
formula_8

However, in cylindrical coordinates this becomes:
formula_9

The time derivatives of the unit vectors are needed. 
They are given by:
formula_10

So the time derivative simplifies to:
formula_11

=== Second time derivative of a vector field ===

The second time derivative is of interest in physics, as it is found in equations of motion for classical mechanical systems.
The second time derivative of a vector field in cylindrical coordinates is given by:
formula_12

To understand this expression, A is substituted for P, where P is the vector (&quot;ρ&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;, &quot;z&quot;).

This means that formula_13.

After substituting, the result is given:
formula_14

In mechanics, the terms of this expression are called:

== Spherical coordinate system ==

=== Vector fields ===

Vectors are defined in spherical coordinates by (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;θ&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;), where
* &quot;r&quot; is the length of the vector,
* &quot;θ&quot; is the angle between the positive Z-axis and the vector in question (0 ≤ &quot;θ&quot; ≤ &quot;π&quot;), and
* &quot;φ&quot; is the angle between the projection of the vector onto the &quot;xy&quot;-plane and the positive X-axis (0 ≤ &quot;φ&quot; &lt; 2&quot;π&quot;).

(&quot;r&quot;, &quot;θ&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;) is given in Cartesian coordinates by:
formula_15
or inversely by:
formula_16

Any vector field can be written in terms of the unit vectors as:
formula_17

The spherical basis vectors are related to the Cartesian basis vectors by the Jacobian matrix:

formula_18

Normalizing the Jacobian matrix so that the spherical basis vectors have unit length we get:

formula_19

Note: the matrix is an orthogonal matrix, that is, its inverse is simply its transpose.

The Cartesian unit vectors are thus related to the spherical unit vectors by:

formula_20

=== Time derivative of a vector field ===

To find out how the vector field A changes in time, the time derivatives should be calculated.
In Cartesian coordinates this is simply:
formula_21
However, in spherical coordinates this becomes:
formula_22
The time derivatives of the unit vectors are needed. They are given by:
formula_23
Thus the time derivative becomes:
formula_24

== See also ==
* Del in cylindrical and spherical coordinates for the specification of gradient, divergence, curl, and Laplacian in various coordinate systems.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211851" start="517" end="540" title="cylindrical coordinates" label="cylindrical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="992" end="1013" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="1060" end="1072" title="vector field" label="vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="1240" end="1257" title="orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q242188" start="1272" end="1279" title="Invertible matrix" label="inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="1294" end="1303" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269411" start="1461" end="1483" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s notation" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1877" end="1884" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q215007" start="1904" end="1923" title="equations of motion" label="equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="1928" end="1948" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="2399" end="2420" title="spherical coordinates" label="spherical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="2867" end="2888" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="3247" end="3264" title="orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="3301" end="3310" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605462" start="3799" end="3843" title="Del in cylindrical and spherical coordinates" label="Del in cylindrical and spherical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173582" start="3869" end="3877" title="gradient" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q189000" start="3879" end="3889" title="divergence" label="divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q206310" start="3891" end="3895" title="Curl (mathematics)" label="curl"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="3901" end="3910" title="Laplacian" label="Laplacian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758389" wikidata="Q261577" url="?curid=758389" title="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve">
<text>Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve is a national park of the United States located in Southeast Alaska west of Juneau. President Calvin Coolidge proclaimed the area around Glacier Bay a national monument under the Antiquities Act on February 26, 1925. Subsequent to an expansion of the monument by President Jimmy Carter in 1978, the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) enlarged the national monument by on December 2, 1980, and created Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve. The national preserve encompasses of public land to the immediate northwest of the park, protecting a portion of the Alsek River with its fish and wildlife habitats, while allowing sport hunting.

Glacier Bay became part of a binational UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979, and was inscribed as a Biosphere Reserve in 1986. The National Park Service undertook an obligation to work with Hoonah and Yakutat Tlingit Native American organizations in the management of the protected area in 1994. The park and preserve cover a total of , with being designated as a wilderness area.

==Geology==
The west side of the bay consists of a 26,000 feet thick sequence of Paleozoic sedimentary rocks, mainly massive limestones and argillite. The oldest rocks in this sequence are the Late Silurian Willoughby limestone and the youngest being the Middle Devonian Black Cap limestone. An outcrop west of Tidal Inlet includes a sandstone, graywacke and limestone of unknown age. Sedimentary rocks of unknown age on the east side of Muir Inlet include tuff interbedded with limestone. The rocks exposed on the 1,205 foot high hill called &quot;The Nunatak&quot; have been metamorphosed. Early Cretaceous diorite stocks are exposed south of Tidal Inlet, and on Sebree and Sturgress Islands. Quartz diorite outcrops on Lemesurier Island. A granitic stock is exposed in Dundas Bay. Mafic dikes up to 20 feet in width occur throughout the area.

Glacial advances occurred 7,000, 5,000 and 500 years ago, with the last extending to the entrance of the bay, where it left a huge semicircular terminal moraine. The consequent surface glacial deposits include gravels as outwash and moraines. Glacial gravels extend up to 2000 feet up the mountain slopes. Lakes have formed where the glaciers have dammed the heads of valleys. Preglacial forests are found east of Goose Cove and on the east side of Muir Inlet. According to Rossman, &quot;One of the outstanding features of the Glacier Bay area is the rapid advance and retreat of the glaciers during several substages within the last few thousand years.&quot;

A molybdenite deposit occurs on The Nunatak in quartz veins associated with a quartz monzonite porphyry, which includes gold at 0.04 ounces per ton, and silver at 7.07 ounces per ton. A copper deposit occurs on Observation Mountain. Quartz veins containing gold are exposed west of Dundas Bay and on Gilbert Island. Placer gold is also found in the bay. A silver deposit was mined on the western portion of Rendu Inlet.

According to MacKevett et al., &quot;The most extensive and best gold placer deposits...are in the beach sands near Lituya Bay.&quot; Mining of these sands started in 1894, employing up to 200 men by 1896. However, most production had ended by 1917.

The granodiorite and quartz diorite area between Lamplugh Glacier and Reid Glacier contains most of the quartz vein gold lodes, which were produced by six mines. This is known as the Reid Inlet gold area. The Monarch Mines and the Incas Mine was discovered in 1924 by J. Ibach. The Monarch No. 1 and No. 2 veins were drift mined with 200 and 150 foot adits respectively. The LeRoy Mine was the largest though, discovered in 1938 by Gustavus founder and resident A.L. Parker and his son L.F. Parker. They operated a two-stamp mill and an aerial tramway. Most production had ceased by 1945 though.

The region experiences tectonic activity with frequent earthquakes. Earthquake-induced landslides have been significant forces for change, inducing tsunamis. Additionally, parts of the region are undergoing post-glacial rebound (also known as isostatic rebound), the process in which land rises after the weight of the glacier has been removed.

==Geography==

Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve occupies the northernmost section of the southeastern Alaska coastline, between the Gulf of Alaska and Canada. The Canada–US border approaches to within of the ocean in the Saint Elias Mountains at Mount Fairweather, the park&#x27;s tallest peak at , transitioning to the Fairweather Range from there southwards. The Brady Icefield caps the Fairweather Range on a peninsula extending from the ocean to Glacier Bay, which extends from Icy Strait to the Canada–US border at Grand Pacific Glacier, cutting off the western part of the park. To the east of Glacier Bay the Takhinsha Mountains and the Chilkat Range form a peninsula bounded by the Lynn Canal on the east, with the park&#x27;s eastern boundary with Tongass National Forest running along the ridgeline. The park&#x27;s northwestern boundary, which also abuts Tongass National Forest, runs in the valley of the Alsek River to Dry Bay. The preserve lands comprise a small area at Dry Bay — the majority of Glacier Bay lands are national park lands. The park boundary excludes Gustavus at the mouth of Glacier Bay. The lands adjoining the park to the north in Canada are included in Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park.

No roads lead to the park and it is most easily reached by air or sea travel. The Alaska Marine Highway ferry travels between Juneau and Gustavus via the community of Hoonah twice weekly. Despite the lack of roads, the park received an average of about 443,975 recreational visitors annually from 2012 to 2021, with 89,768 visitors in 2021. Most of the visitors arrive via cruise ships. The number of ships that may arrive each day is limited by regulation. Other travelers come on white-water rafting trips, putting in on the Tatshenshini River at Dalton Post in the Yukon Territory and taking out at the Dry Bay Ranger Station in the Glacier Bay National Preserve. Trips generally take six days and pass through Kluane National Park and Reserve in the Yukon and Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park in British Columbia.

==Climate==

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Glacier Bay National Park has six climate zones; Subarctic With Cool Summers and Year Around Rainfall (&quot;Dfc&quot;), Subpolar Oceanic (&quot;Cfc&quot;), Temperate Oceanic (&quot;Cfb&quot;), Humid Continental Mild Summer Wet All Year (&quot;Dfb&quot;), Humid Continental Dry Cool Summer (&quot;Dsb&quot;), and Warm Summer Mediterranean (&quot;Csb&quot;). The plant hardiness zone at Glacier Bay Visitor Center is 7a with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of 4.2 °F (-15.4 °C).

==Environment==

Glacier Bay National Park preserves nearly 600,000 acres (2428.1 km2) of federally protected marine ecosystems in Alaska (including submerged lands) against which other less-protected marine ecosystems can be compared. Within the park and preserve there are two Tlingit ancestral homelands that are of cultural and spiritual significance to living communities today. The Alsek River serves as a route of discovery and migration from the coastal mountain range in the park to the Pacific Ocean in the preserve. Within the preserve, in contrast to the park, the Alsek River provides a setting for subsistence uses, commercial fishing, and hunting as provided for in the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) while simultaneously protecting the glacial ecosystem.

===Glaciers===
The Park is named for its abundant tidewater and terrestrial glaciers, numbering 1,045 in total.

There are seven tidewater glaciers in the park: Margerie Glacier, Grand Pacific Glacier, McBride Glacier, Lamplugh Glacier, Johns Hopkins Glacier, Gilman Glacier, and LaPerouse Glacier. (High tide-water glaciers also include Riggs Glacier, Reid Glacier, Lituya Glacier, and North Crillon Glacier.) Four of these glaciers actively calve icebergs into the bay. In the 1990s, the Muir Glacier receded to the point that it was no longer a tidewater glacier. The advance and recession of the park&#x27;s glaciers has been extensively documented since La Perouse visited the bay in 1786. According to the U.S. National Park Service, &quot;In general, tidewater and terrestrial glaciers in the Park have been thinning and slowly receding over the last several decades.&quot; Some glaciers continue to advance, including Johns Hopkins Glacier and glaciers in Lituya Bay.

====Glacial retreat====
Joseph Whidbey, master of the &quot;Discovery&quot; during the 1791–95 Vancouver expedition, found Icy Strait, at the south end of Glacier Bay, choked with ice in 1794. Glacier Bay itself was almost entirely covered by one large tidewater glacier. In 1879 naturalist John Muir found that the ice had retreated almost all the way up the bay, a distance of around . By 1916 the Grand Pacific Glacier was at the head of Tarr Inlet about 65 miles (105 km) from Glacier Bay&#x27;s mouth. This is the fastest documented glacier retreat. Not all of the park&#x27;s glaciers are in retreat. Two examples are the Johns Hopkins Glacier which, according to observations in 2012, has been advancing at the rate of per day, and the Margerie Glacier which is stable, neither advancing nor retreating. Scientists working in the park and preserve hope to learn how glacial activity relates to climate change.

===Ecosystems===
Wet tundra along with Sitka spruce and Western hemlock forests are mainly found in the Lower bay. In the Upper bay there are tidewater glaciers and from the newly deglaciated land are the post-glacial meadows. In the peaks of Glacier Bay are Alpine tundra, glaciers and ice fields.

Regions of the park closest to the Gulf of Alaska have a relatively mild climate with significant rainfall and comparatively low snowfall. Lower Glacier Bay is a transitional zone, and upper Glacier Bay is cold and snowy. Access to the land can be difficult, since the glacial fjords have steep walls that rise directly from the water. Where there are shoreline flats, they can be densely vegetated with alder and devils club, making hiking difficult.

===Fauna===
Wildlife in Glacier Bay includes both brown and black bear species, timber wolf, coyote, moose, black-tailed deer, red fox species, porcupine, marmot, beaver, Canadian lynx, two species of otter, mink, wolverine, and mountain goat. Birds that nest in this park include the bald eagle, golden eagle, five species of woodpecker, two species of hummingbird, raven, four species of falcon, six species of hawk, osprey, and ten species of owl. Marine mammal species that swim offshore are the sea otter, harbor seal, Steller sea lion, harbor porpoise, orca, minke whale, and humpback whale.

==Activities==

About 80% of visitors to Glacier Bay arrive on cruise ships. The National Park Service operates cooperative programs where rangers provide interpretive services aboard the ships and on the smaller boats that offer excursion trips to more distant park features. In-park accommodations are available at the Glacier Bay Lodge. The park and preserve hosts many outdoor activities such as hiking, camping, mountaineering, kayaking, rafting, fishing, and bird-watching. Unlike many other national parks in Alaska, subsistence hunting is not allowed in the park, only in the preserve.

Sport hunting and trapping are also allowed in the preserve. To hunt and trap, you must have all required licenses and permits and follow all other state regulations. The National Park Service and the State of Alaska cooperatively manage the wildlife resources of the preserve. Campers and hunters should be aware that brown bears are common in the preserve and be prepared to avoid conflicts with them. Typically hunted species in the preserve include black bears, mountain goats, wolves, wolverines, snowshoe hare, ptarmigans, waterfowls and a number of furbearers. There is one big game hunting guide authorized through concession contracts to operate within Glacier Bay National Preserve. Three lodges and one outfitter can provide transportation and services for fishing and hunting small game and waterfowl.

Sport fishing is another activity popular in the park. Halibut are frequently esteemed by deep-sea fishers and in rivers and lakes Dolly Varden and rainbow trout provide sport. An Alaskan sportfishing license is required for all nonresidents 16 and older, and residents 16–59, to fish in Alaska&#x27;s fresh and salt waters.

==Human history==

===Prehistory and exploration===

The earliest traces of human occupation at Glacier Bay date to about 10,000 years before the present, with archaeological sites just outside the park dating to that time. Evidence of human activity is scarce, because so much of the area is or was glaciated for much of the period and because advancing glaciers may have scoured all traces of historical occupation from their valleys. Ongoing uplift of the land may reveal new sites that had been submerged by rising sea levels. Most archaeological evidence is from the last 200 years. The Haida, Eyak and Tlingit all could have occupied the coast until historical times, when the Tlingit came to dominate the area.

Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse was the first European to explore the Alaskan coast on foot in the region of Glacier Bay in 1786, arriving in Lituya Bay and making contact with the Tlingit. Russian fur traders also probably visited the region in the mid-18th century. The region was later visited by George Vancouver in &quot;Discovery&quot; in 1794, during the Vancouver Expedition. The explorers are believed to have seen the Glacier Bay ice at its peak, which coincided with their visits. Russians were chiefly concerned with the area until the 1880s, when Americans were drawn to Alaska and the Klondike by the Klondike Gold Rush of the 1890s.

John Muir visited Glacier Bay in 1879, just prior to the 1880 establishment of Yosemite National Park, Muir&#x27;s first great cause. Muir came to Alaska to learn about glaciers as a means of understanding the formation of the glaciated landscape of the Yosemite Valley. Muir sent dispatches back to San Francisco to be published in the &quot;San Francisco Bulletin&quot; in both 1879 and 1880, eventually collecting these stories, accounts of his third and fourth trips in 1890 and 1899, and later lectures and articles into the 1915 book &quot;Travels in Alaska&quot;, promoting Glacier Bay and the Inside Passage. Muir&#x27;s writings led to the naming of Muir Glacier, then nearly tall at tidewater and the most active glacier in the bay, after Muir.

The Pacific Coast Steamship Company ran tours up the Inside Passage from Tacoma and Portland during the 1890s, highlighting Muir Glacier and Glacier Bay. The accessibility of Glacier Bay brought naturalists and geologists to study, survey and name the glaciers. The Harriman Alaska Expedition of 1899 was organized by railroad executive Edward Harriman who recruited Muir, George Bird Grinnell, photographer Edward S. Curtis and several others to study the Alaska coast on a specially-outfitted ship, spending five days at Glacier Bay. The expedition noted significant glacial retreat. A few months later, the magnitude 8.0 earthquake that shook Yakutat Bay on September 10, 1899, caused Muir Glacier to collapse into the bay, filling it and making it less accessible and attractive to tourists. After 1900, Taku Glacier became a popular destination. A salmon cannery was established in 1900 at Dundas Bay, employing native, white, and Chinese laborers and operating until 1931.

Muir&#x27;s writings attracted the attention of William Skinner Cooper, an ecologist at the University of Minnesota, who saw the bay&#x27;s retreating glaciers as an opportunity to study plant succession on the recently exposed land. He visited Glacier Bay in 1916, surveying the glaciers and inlets and establishing nine test plots to be monitored in future visits. Cooper returned to Glacier Bay in 1922, wrote a paper for the Ecological Society of America in which he proposed that Glacier Bay be protected as a national monument.

The Ecological Society established a committee to promote the designation of Glacier Bay as a national monument at the urging of Cooper, forwarding copies of their resolutions to President Calvin Coolidge, the National Park Service, the Smithsonian and the governor of Alaska. The idea was opposed by the U.S. Geological Survey, which reported that the area had potential for mineral extraction. The Interior Department decided to send an agent to survey the area, assigning George Alexander Parks of the United States General Land Office, and a future governor of Alaska, to examine the area and to canvass local residents. Parks&#x27; 1924 report recommended a very limited boundary designed to include glaciers and little else. In response Cooper and the Ecological Society undertook a letter-writing campaign that supported the park Service and caused Coolidge to add some portions of mature forest to the park&#x27;s boundaries. Coolidge&#x27;s proclamation under the Antiquities Act of Glacier Bay National Monument came on February 26, 1925.

===National monument===
Alaska game managers came under heavy criticism in the 1920s for a perceived lack of interest in protecting Alaskan brown bears. The state approached the Park Service with a proposal to expand the boundaries of the Glacier Bay monument using land from Tongass National Forest as a bear sanctuary. Park Service studies were favorable, and the Forest Service came to view an expansion of Glacier Bay as preferable to the designation of Admiralty Island as a national park, which was first proposed in the 1930s. By the late 1930s Ernest Gruening, the director of the Department of Territories and Island Possessions and future governor of Alaska, suggested that the entire region be protected in a single unit extending up the Saint Elias Range to the Wrangell Range. The substance of Gruening&#x27;s idea would not be realized until 1978, when Wrangell-St. Elias National Monument would be proclaimed. In the meantime, the Wrangell-St. Elias proposal was set aside in favor of expansions to the east for bear habitat and to the west to protect the Gulf of Alaska coastline. President Franklin D. Roosevelt used the Antiquities Act to expand the monument on April 18, 1939, creating the largest unit in the national park system at the time.

During World War II the U.S. Army appropriated an area around Excursion Inlet to be used as a logistics base for transferring materiel from barges transiting the Inside Passage to seagoing vessels, logging the area for pilings to be used in piers. The base was never used. At the same time the Army built an airfield at Gustavus, which offered flat terrain and good weather. The airfield was completed too late to participate in the Aleutian Campaign. However, it was one of four Alaskan airfields suitable for use by B-29s, with and runways and modern navigation equipment. In 1955 the area around Gustavus was removed from the monument and returned to the public domain, together with at Excursion Inlet.

No Park Service personnel were assigned to the monument until 1949, when a seasonal ranger was stationed at Bartlett Cove. The monument was administered locally from 1953 onwards. Starting in 1957 the facilities at Bartlett Cove were expanded as part of the Park Service&#x27;s Mission 66 program with employee housing and maintenance facilities. An administrative site was also developed outside the monument boundaries at the Forest Service ranger station at Indian Point on Auke Bay, closer to Juneau. The Glacier Bay Lodge was built to accommodate guests in 1966. Beginning in 1969 cruise ships became regular visitors to the monument.
In 1958 survey crews found a rich deposit of copper and nickel ore under the Brady Icefield. Investigators looked at a nunatak outcrop in the icefield and found highly mineralized rock. Newmont Exploration Ltd. proposed the construction of a adit to an underground mine under the icefield, with a mill at the portal opening and a road to piers at Dixon Bay. This proposal took advantage of 1936 legislation that permitted mineral exploitation in the monument, which had been confined to small prospectors until this time. In response to this and other proposals, Montana senator Lee Metcalf proposed the Mining in the Parks Act to resolve and eventually prohibit mining at Glacier Bay and five other parks and monuments. However, the final bill contained a number of significant exemptions, and the Newmont claim has never been resolved, although no mining activity has been proposed since the 1970s.

===National park and preserve===
As a result of the 1971 Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA), of Alaskan public lands were eligible for inclusion in the national park system. Studies for expansion of Glacier Bay focused on the area around the Alsek River. Facing an approaching deadline imposed by ANCSA to resolve land allotment and seeing delays in the proposed Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) in Congress that was intended to make a final settlement, President Jimmy Carter used his authority under the Antiquities Act to proclaim fifteen National Park Service units in Alaska on December 1, 1978. The proclamation also expanded Glacier Bay National Monument to include the Alsek lands. The final ANILCA legislation, signed into law by Carter on December 2, 1980, established Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve from the national monument. The Alsek addition comprised the bulk of the preserve lands. The chief distinction between park and preserve lands is that sport hunting by non-residents is permitted in accordance with Alaskan game regulations in the preserve, but prohibited in the park.

==World Heritage Site==
The Kluane-Wrangell-St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek transborder park system comprising Kluane, Wrangell-St Elias, Glacier Bay and Tatshenshini-Alsek parks, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979 for the spectacular glacier and icefield landscapes as well as for the importance of grizzly bears, caribou and Dall sheep habitat. The Glacier Bay National Park was added in 1992 to the Heritage Site.

==See also==
*Glacier Bay Basin
*List of national parks of the United States

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Catton, Theodore (1995) &quot;Land Reborn: A History of Administration and Visitor Use in Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve&quot;, National Park Service

==External links==
*Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve – National Park Service site
*Alaska – National Park Service Alaska Regional Office
*World Heritage Site – UNESCO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="0" end="38" title="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve" label="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="44" end="78" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="90" end="106" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="115" end="121" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="133" end="148" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389292" start="176" end="187" title="Glacier Bay Basin" label="Glacier Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="190" end="207" title="National monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="218" end="233" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="312" end="324" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="338" end="385" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="506" end="523" title="national preserve" label="national preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781851" start="619" end="630" title="Alsek River" label="Alsek River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="739" end="745" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="746" end="765" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="798" end="815" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="829" end="850" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="888" end="894" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="899" end="906" title="Yakutat, Alaska" label="Yakutat"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="907" end="914" title="Tlingit" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="1062" end="1077" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="1161" end="1170" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="1171" end="1187" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1205" end="1214" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q836062" start="1220" end="1229" title="argillite" label="argillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="1273" end="1286" title="Late Silurian" label="Late Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q731313" start="1335" end="1350" title="Middle Devonian" label="Middle Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q531953" start="1375" end="1382" title="outcrop" label="outcrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="1414" end="1423" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="1425" end="1434" title="graywacke" label="graywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33820524" start="1518" end="1528" title="Muir Inlet" label="Muir Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="1537" end="1541" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q194408" start="1633" end="1640" title="Nunatak" label="Nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="1657" end="1670" title="metamorphosed" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="1672" end="1688" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q187408" start="1689" end="1696" title="diorite" label="diorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682848" start="1697" end="1703" title="stock (geology)" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="1775" end="1781" title="Quartz" label="Quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="1823" end="1831" title="granite" label="granitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="1864" end="1869" title="Mafic" label="Mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="1870" end="1875" title="dike (geology)" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585022" start="2071" end="2087" title="terminal moraine" label="terminal moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="2137" end="2143" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q670772" start="2148" end="2155" title="outwash" label="outwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="2160" end="2167" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q382994" start="2591" end="2602" title="molybdenite" label="molybdenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="2603" end="2610" title="deposit (geology)" label="deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130233" start="2674" end="2683" title="monzonite" label="monzonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="2684" end="2692" title="porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2775" end="2781" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="2822" end="2833" title="Quartz vein" label="Quartz vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="2905" end="2916" title="Placer gold" label="Placer gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q215690" start="3265" end="3277" title="granodiorite" label="granodiorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256418" start="3382" end="3386" title="lode" label="lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307459" start="3578" end="3589" title="drift mining" label="drift mined"/>
<link wikidata="Q58917" start="3612" end="3616" title="adit" label="adit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="3693" end="3701" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="3780" end="3790" title="stamp mill" label="stamp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q498002" start="3798" end="3812" title="aerial tramway" label="aerial tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="4006" end="4013" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="4065" end="4085" title="post-glacial rebound" label="post-glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="4342" end="4356" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q48719" start="4431" end="4452" title="Saint Elias Mountains" label="Saint Elias Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544340" start="4456" end="4473" title="Mount Fairweather" label="Mount Fairweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840447" start="4530" end="4547" title="Fairweather Range" label="Fairweather Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389292" start="4660" end="4671" title="Glacier Bay" label="Glacier Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q892287" start="4692" end="4702" title="Icy Strait" label="Icy Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542456" start="4730" end="4751" title="Grand Pacific Glacier" label="Grand Pacific Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680222" start="4826" end="4845" title="Takhinsha Mountains" label="Takhinsha Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072942" start="4854" end="4867" title="Chilkat Range" label="Chilkat Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q422243" start="4900" end="4910" title="Lynn Canal" label="Lynn Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="4967" end="4990" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781851" start="5127" end="5138" title="Alsek River" label="Alsek River"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001145" start="5142" end="5149" title="Dry Bay, Alaska" label="Dry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="5291" end="5299" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q935426" start="5397" end="5431" title="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park" label="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="5516" end="5537" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="5983" end="5994" title="Dalton Post" label="Dalton Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="6002" end="6017" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q738582" start="6148" end="6180" title="Kluane National Park and Reserve" label="Kluane National Park and Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q935426" start="6198" end="6232" title="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park" label="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6236" end="6252" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6285" end="6314" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="6685" end="6705" title="plant hardiness zone" label="plant hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="7095" end="7102" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781851" start="7393" end="7404" title="Alsek River" label="Alsek River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="7501" end="7548" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="7690" end="7697" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895241" start="7775" end="7791" title="Margerie Glacier" label="Margerie Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542456" start="7793" end="7814" title="Grand Pacific Glacier" label="Grand Pacific Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7816" end="7831" title="McBride Glacier" label="McBride Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482463" start="7833" end="7849" title="Lamplugh Glacier" label="Lamplugh Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q941237" start="7851" end="7872" title="Johns Hopkins Glacier" label="Johns Hopkins Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7874" end="7888" title="Glacier Bay Basin#Gilman Glacier" label="Gilman Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7894" end="7911" title="LaPerouse Glacier" label="LaPerouse Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333428" start="7952" end="7965" title="Riggs Glacier" label="Riggs Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309950" start="7967" end="7979" title="Reid Glacier" label="Reid Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158708" start="7981" end="7995" title="Lituya Glacier" label="Lituya Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8001" end="8022" title="North Crillon Glacier" label="North Crillon Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q868757" start="8057" end="8062" title="Ice calving" label="calve"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="8063" end="8070" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529680" start="8104" end="8116" title="Muir Glacier" label="Muir Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800892" start="8162" end="8179" title="Tidewater glacier cycle" label="tidewater glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q941237" start="8540" end="8561" title="Johns Hopkins Glacier" label="Johns Hopkins Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086178" start="8578" end="8588" title="Lituya Bay" label="Lituya Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287896" start="8615" end="8629" title="Joseph Whidbey" label="Joseph Whidbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q892287" start="8714" end="8724" title="Icy Strait" label="Icy Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="8882" end="8891" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542456" start="8991" end="9012" title="Grand Pacific Glacier" label="Grand Pacific Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q903816" start="9129" end="9144" title="Retreat of glaciers since 1850" label="glacier retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="9492" end="9506" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="10312" end="10317" title="Grizzly bear" label="brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="10322" end="10332" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="10342" end="10353" title="Northwestern wolf" label="timber wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="10355" end="10361" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="10363" end="10368" title="Alaska moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474346" start="10370" end="10387" title="Sitka deer" label="black-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="10389" end="10396" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="10406" end="10415" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="10417" end="10423" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="10425" end="10431" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="10433" end="10446" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="10463" end="10468" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="10470" end="10474" title="American mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="10476" end="10485" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="10491" end="10504" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="10547" end="10557" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="10559" end="10571" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="10589" end="10599" title="woodpecker" label="woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="10616" end="10627" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="10629" end="10634" title="common raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="10652" end="10658" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="10675" end="10679" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="10681" end="10687" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="10708" end="10711" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="10762" end="10771" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="10773" end="10784" title="harbor seal" label="harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q431981" start="10786" end="10802" title="Steller sea lion" label="Steller sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="10821" end="10825" title="Killer whale" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="10827" end="10838" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="10844" end="10858" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="11261" end="11267" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="11269" end="11276" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="11278" end="11292" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094083" start="11294" end="11302" title="kayaking" label="kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="11304" end="11311" title="rafting" label="rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="11313" end="11320" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="11326" end="11339" title="bird-watching" label="bird-watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="11938" end="11944" title="Northwestern wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="11946" end="11955" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="11958" end="11971" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q162029" start="11973" end="11982" title="ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="11985" end="11994" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="12012" end="12022" title="furbearers" label="furbearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074737" start="12326" end="12333" title="Halibut" label="Halibut"/>
<link wikidata="Q327067" start="12402" end="12414" title="Dolly Varden trout" label="Dolly Varden"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="12419" end="12432" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="13109" end="13126" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="13189" end="13194" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385649" start="13196" end="13200" title="Eyak people" label="Eyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="13205" end="13212" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q294478" start="13316" end="13359" title="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse" label="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086178" start="13470" end="13480" title="Lituya Bay" label="Lituya Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="13628" end="13644" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564601" start="13654" end="13663" title="HMS Discovery (1789)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="13690" end="13710" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q602965" start="13927" end="13935" title="Klondike, Yukon" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="13943" end="13961" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="13977" end="13986" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="14056" end="14078" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="14231" end="14246" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664546" start="14578" end="14592" title="Inside Passage" label="Inside Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529680" start="14636" end="14648" title="Muir Glacier" label="Muir Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="14806" end="14812" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="14817" end="14825" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586167" start="14999" end="15025" title="Harriman Alaska Expedition" label="Harriman Alaska Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292518" start="15070" end="15085" title="E. H. Harriman" label="Edward Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398792" start="15106" end="15126" title="George Bird Grinnell" label="George Bird Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q433128" start="15141" end="15157" title="Edward S. Curtis" label="Edward S. Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535568" start="15541" end="15553" title="Taku Glacier" label="Taku Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018488" start="15761" end="15783" title="William Skinner Cooper" label="William Skinner Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="16437" end="16452" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q365997" start="16723" end="16745" title="George Alexander Parks" label="George Alexander Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217020" start="16753" end="16786" title="United States General Land Office" label="United States General Land Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="17221" end="17236" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="17430" end="17449" title="Brown bear" label="Alaskan brown bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q878956" start="17850" end="17865" title="Ernest Gruening" label="Ernest Gruening"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="18165" end="18201" title="Wrangell-St. Elias National Monument" label="Wrangell-St. Elias National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837535" start="18624" end="18639" title="Excursion Inlet, Alaska" label="Excursion Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="18882" end="18890" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="18995" end="19012" title="Aleutian Campaign" label="Aleutian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="19080" end="19085" title="Boeing B-29" label="B-29s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744496" start="19548" end="19558" title="Mission 66" label="Mission 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q194408" start="20029" end="20036" title="nunatak" label="nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q58917" start="20152" end="20156" title="adit" label="adit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288076" start="20489" end="20500" title="Lee Metcalf" label="Lee Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="20869" end="20904" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="21184" end="21231" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="21309" end="21321" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q604604" start="21976" end="22032" title="Kluane-Wrangell-St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek" label="Kluane-Wrangell-St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q738582" start="22068" end="22074" title="Kluane National Park and Reserve" label="Kluane"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="22076" end="22093" title="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="Wrangell-St Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q935426" start="22111" end="22129" title="Tatshenshini-Alsek Park" label="Tatshenshini-Alsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="22152" end="22158" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="22159" end="22178" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="22272" end="22284" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="22287" end="22294" title="reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="22299" end="22309" title="Dall sheep" label="Dall sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389292" start="22404" end="22421" title="Glacier Bay Basin" label="Glacier Bay Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="22423" end="22466" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="22722" end="22743" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="22827" end="22833" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758390" wikidata="Q1158664" url="?curid=758390" title="Dąbie Lake">
<text>Dąbie (Polish: &quot;Dąbie&quot; or &quot;Jezioro Dąbskie&quot;, German: &quot;Dammscher See&quot;) is a lake in the delta of the Oder in northwestern Poland at Szczecin. To the South of the lake lies the Szczecin suburban district also called Dąbie.

==See also==
West Oder

==References==
* Opis Odrzańskiej Drogi Wodnej Zawartej w granicach RZGW Szczecin. Regionalny Zarząd Gospodarki Wodnej w Szczecinie.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1158664" start="0" end="5" title="Dąbie Lake" label="Dąbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="7" end="13" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="65" end="71" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="105" end="109" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="130" end="134" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="151" end="157" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="161" end="169" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q878458" start="244" end="249" title="Dąbie (neighborhood of Szczecin)" label="Dąbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810610" start="265" end="274" title="West Oder" label="West Oder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758391" wikidata="Q16106469" url="?curid=758391" title="Gordon C. Strachan">
<text>Gordon Creighton Strachan (born July 24, 1943) is an American attorney and political staffer who served as an aide to H.R. Haldeman, the chief of staff for President Richard Nixon and a figure in the Watergate scandal. He is the last surviving person to be part of the Watergate Seven.

==Early life and education==
Strachan was born in Berkeley, California. At University of Southern California, he was a member of Trojans for Representative Government with future Watergate scandal participants Dwight L. Chapin, Tim Elbourne, Donald Segretti, Herbert Porter, and Ron Ziegler. In 1965, he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in international relations from the University of Southern California. In 1968, received a Juris Doctor from the UC Berkeley School of Law. 

== Career ==
From 1968 until 1970 he worked for the New York City law firm of Mudge, Rose, Guthrie &amp; Alexander, the same firm Nixon worked for before he ran again for the presidency in 1968.
Strachan, who was recruited by Dwight Chapin, joined the White House Office in 1970 and initially worked as a staff assistant to Herbert G. Klein. He was assigned to be H. R. Haldeman&#x27;s liaison to the Committee for the Re-Election of the President (CRP) when it was formed in March 1971. His duties at CRP focused on areas that he had previous experience with; as an advance man during 1970 mid-term election campaigns, he oversaw political operations. He testified as such before the United States Senate Watergate Committee and stated that John Dean oversaw all political intelligence-gathering, including the Watergate break-in, at CRP.

Strachan was indicted along with other White House staffers on March 1, 1974, but all charges against him were dropped on June 10, 1975.

He moved to Utah in 1975, and served as a clerk for Berman &amp; Giauque in Salt Lake City. In 1977 his license to practice law was restored in Utah, and he was elevated to a lawyer at the firm, until he left for a partnership at Prince, Yeates &amp; Geldzahler. He was a principal at the law firm, Strachan Strachan &amp; Simon P.C., in Park City, Utah, but is now retired. His practice mainly focused on antitrust, personal injury and business litigation in the recreational sports industry. He served on the Olympic Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Games, and is also general counsel to the United States Ski and Snowboard Association. He is the author of several articles on law.

==Sources==
* 
* &quot;John Ehrlichman: In the Eye of the Storm, Hosted by Tom Clancy&quot; (1997) Video. 

==References==
==External links==
*Strachan Strachan &amp; Simon P.C. Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16106469" start="0" end="25" title="Gordon C. Strachan" label="Gordon Creighton Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="118" end="131" title="H.R. Haldeman" label="H.R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="166" end="179" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="200" end="217" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974115" start="269" end="284" title="Watergate Seven" label="Watergate Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="337" end="357" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="362" end="395" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="416" end="453" title="List of Trojans for Representative Government members" label="Trojans for Representative Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="466" end="483" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318121" start="497" end="513" title="Dwight L. Chapin" label="Dwight L. Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240340" start="529" end="544" title="Donald Segretti" label="Donald Segretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735285" start="546" end="560" title="Herbert Porter" label="Herbert Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q706406" start="566" end="577" title="Ron Ziegler" label="Ron Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="662" end="695" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="717" end="729" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q846183" start="739" end="764" title="UC Berkeley School of Law" label="UC Berkeley School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="820" end="833" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931729" start="846" end="882" title="Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp;amp; Ferdon" label="Mudge, Rose, Guthrie &amp;amp; Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318121" start="994" end="1007" title="Dwight Chapin" label="Dwight Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287183" start="1020" end="1038" title="White House Office" label="White House Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592098" start="1092" end="1108" title="Herbert G. Klein" label="Herbert G. Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="1132" end="1146" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755212" start="1169" end="1215" title="Committee for the Re-Election of the President" label="Committee for the Re-Election of the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459168" start="1453" end="1493" title="United States Senate Watergate Committee" label="United States Senate Watergate Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630448" start="1510" end="1519" title="John Dean" label="John Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1648" end="1659" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="1759" end="1763" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="1823" end="1837" title="Salt Lake City, Utah" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q482993" start="2085" end="2100" title="Park City, Utah" label="Park City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2153" end="2192" title="antitrust, personal injury and business" label="antitrust, personal injury and business"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2211" end="2230" title="recreational sports" label="recreational sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="2295" end="2312" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429719" start="2349" end="2392" title="United States Ski and Snowboard Association" label="United States Ski and Snowboard Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758394" wikidata="Q6216544" url="?curid=758394" title="Johannes Birringer">
<text>Johannes Birringer is an independent media choreographer and artistic director of AlienNation Co., a multimedia ensemble that has collaborated on various site-specific and cross-cultural performance and installation projects since 1993. He lives and works in Houston and London.

==Biography==

Johannes Birringer&#x27;s artistic training was in theatre and dance; he studied dance-theatre forms that emerged in Germany in the 1970s (Pina Bausch) as well as contemporary dance and movement in the U.S. (with Deborah Hay). After several years of performing, composing his own work in collaboration with dancers, actors, musicians and visual artists, he began to design and direct choreography that included film/video and live acoustic and electronic sound. Increasingly, his performances involve interactive environments and programming of interfaces for real-time performances and installations.

After his first large-scale exhibition-performances in Houston in the late 1980s (&quot;Description of a Landscape&quot;, &quot;Invisible Cities&quot;), he founded an ensemble, AlienNation Co.. which has toured internationally and presented work at festivals, theatres, cultural centers and conferences. He has also created an opera (&quot;Orpheus and Eurydike&quot;, 1992) and a site-specific installation of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Parsifal&quot;, several documentary films and dance videos, and produced public art projects with artists or cultural workers in Houston, Chicago, Havana, Ljubljana, Eisenhüttenstadt, Dresden, and Göttelborn. In the mid 1990s he began directing workshops on performance technologies in many locations of the world. He has received numerous arts grants, awards, and fellowships for his work and the concepts for his intercultural productions, and in the late 1990s was invited to create the new dance and technology Masters Program at The Ohio State University (1999–2003). While teaching at Ohio State University&#x27;s Dance Department, he created a new MFA in dance-technology and conducted the &quot;Environments Laboratory.&quot; In 2003 he founded the Interaktionslabor Göttelborn, Germany, a summer laboratory located in a former coal mine and focused on research in new media performance and interactive systems. He was a Principal Research Fellow in Live Art at the School of Art and Design, Nottingham Trent University, where he directed a telematic performance lab (LATela) from 2003 to 2006. Since 1998 he has been a Research Fellow with the Anthropology Department at Rice University, Houston.

He has created numerous stage works, video and film installations, and interactive and online collaborative performance work since 1986. He has also published widely on the visual and performing arts, new media and technology.

Since 2006 he has been chair and professor of Performance Technologies at Brunel University, West London, where he created a research group (Design and Performance Lab) dedicated to investigations of wearable technology in cross-over fields of performance, music, design, digital art and fashion. The &quot;DAP-Lab&quot;, co-directed by Birringer and Michèle Danjoux, includes artists and researchers, and its production company has produced several new works, Suna no Onna (2007); &quot;Ukiyo&quot; (2009) - &quot;Ukiyo&quot; was created in partnership with Japanese artists and began to tour in 2010 - and &quot;for the time being (Victory over the Sun)&quot;(2012-14). A new series of immersive dance installations, &#x27;metakimospheres,&#x27; began touring in Europe in 2015-18 as part of a Europe-wide project called METABODY.

Birringer has been contributing editor with PAJ Performing Arts Journal and a contributor to numerous theatre/performance and art journals as well as the newsletter for the Baháʼí Association For the Arts from 1994 (Review: Witnesses of existence - Report on a presentation of art out of Sarajevo in New York City Kunsthalle). Sonja van Kerkhoff created a performance which was reviewed in this newsletter and Birringer contributed an interview responding to the sculpture with some autobiographical responses.
He has also been co-editor of the catalogues (&quot;Wechselwirkungen&#x27;, 2004, &quot;Spielsysteme&quot;, 2006, Manifest der Interaktionskunst, 2014) published by Interaktionslabor, and the editor of &quot;Reflexiones sobre Performance, Cultura y Tecnología/ Reflexions on Performance, Culture &amp; Technology&quot;.

==Works==
*[1986]&quot;Hamletmachine&quot;, dance-theatre production, premiered at UTD Theatre, Dallas.
*[1987] &quot;Description of a Landscape&quot;, performance-exhibition, premiered at UTD Theatre, Dallas, and exhibited at Lawndale Art Center, Houston in 1988. 
*[1988] &quot;Translations&quot;, theatre production directed at Satellite Theatre, Houston.
*[1989] &quot;Invisible Cities&quot;, dance theatre performance, premiered at Lawndale Art Center, Houston.
*[1990] &quot;Borderland&quot;, documentary film, premiered at Rice Media Center, Houston, and exhibited widely, including Greenway 3 Plaza Theatre, Houston; Studio 71, New York; Hallwalls Gallery, Buffalo; Houston International Film Festival; Universidad Nacional, Madrid; Chicago Filmmakers, Chicago; Saarländisches Künstlerhaus, Saarbrücken, Grenzland-Festival, Kultur Zentrum, Eisenhüttenstadt.
*[1990] &quot;Ad Mortem&quot;, film-dance-music concert, premiered at Lawndale Art Center and Diverse Works, Houston.
*[1992] Orpheus and Eurydike&quot;, opera, premiered at Josephine Louis Theatre, Evanston-Chicago.
*[1993] &quot;AlienNation&quot;, dance-theatre production, premiered at Josephine Louis Theatre, Evanston-Chicago. This signature work was widely performed and traveled to Germany, France, the Netherlands, Slovenia, and well as to the Cleveland Performance Art Festival, Cleveland and Gran Teatro de Habana, Cuba.
*[1993] &quot;From the Border&quot;, cross-cultural performance festival produced at Northwestern University.
*[1995] &quot;Lovers Fragment&#x27;s&quot;, dance-theatre and film performance, premiered at Barber Theatre, Evanston-Chicago and toured to Cleveland and Dresden.
*[1995] &quot;Parsifal&quot;, collaborative site-specific opera installation, premiered at Festspielhaus Hellerau, Dresden.
*[1995] &quot;La lógica que se cumple&quot;, film project, Alamar, Cuba, with International Premiere at Habana Film Festival 1996; U.S. premiere: Chicago Latino Film Festival 1997, and further showings at Latin American Theatre Conference, Univ. of California-Irvine, and other conferences.
*[1995] &quot;Closed Spaces&quot;, collaborative public art project, staged in Eisenhüttenstadt, Germany.
*[1998] &quot;Parachute&quot;, performance and installation project, International FotoFest Houston.
*[1998 &quot;North by South&quot;, dance-theatre production, premiered at Diverse Works, Houston.
*[1999] &quot;Vespucci&quot;, film installation, premiered at Winter Street Art Center; exhibited at ACA Gallery, Austin, Texas; Performance Studies International Conference, Tempe, Arizona; Performance Platform, Dartington College, England; University of Brasília Art Gallery, Brasília; Media Center, Graduate School of Semiotics and Communication-PUC-University, São Paulo.
*[1999] &quot;Mirak&quot;, sci-fi dance opera, premiered at Diverse Works, Houston, and performed as recital for Houston Composers Forum, Shepherd School of Music.
*[2002] &quot;Embers&quot;, telepresence dance, premiered at American College Dance Festival, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
*[2002] &quot;Here I come again (Flying Birdman)&quot;, a polysite telepresence performance linking five sites in the USA and two sites in Brazil, collaboratively produced by ADaPT and directed by the Environments Lab.
*[2003] &quot;Sueño&quot;, multi-media theatre play (written by Angeles Romero), directed and premiered at Mount Hall, Columbus.
*[2004 &quot;Ensaio sobre a cegueir&quot;a, interactive opera installation premiered at Interaktionslabor Göttelborn.
*[2004] Xu, dance film, Beijing, China.
*[2005] &quot;Canções dos olhos/Augenlieder&quot;, intermedia song cycle premiered at Interaktionslabor Göttelborn.
*[2006] &quot;See you in Walhalla&quot;, a live game performance collaboratively created with Interaktionslabor and amorphy.org, premiered at IME Industrial Performing Arts Complex, Athens, Greece.
*[2007] &quot;Suna no Onna&quot;, interactive dance performance created collaboratively with the DAP-Lab, premiered at Laban Centre, London, and reproduced at Watermans Art Center in 2008.
*[2008] &quot;Corpo, Carne e Espírito&quot;, digital oratorio (with music composed by Paulo Chagas), premiered at FIT-BH Festival, Klauss Vianna Theatre, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
*[2009-10] &quot;Ukiyo (Moveable World)&quot;, choreographic installation created collaboratively with the DAP Lab and InetDance Japan/Maison/Keio University d&#x27;Artaud, Tokyo. First shown at Artaud Performance Center, Brunel University（2009) and Sadler&#x27;s Wells(2010), UK; additionally new versions of the installation were performed in Maribor, Slovenia, and London.
*[2012] &quot;for the time being (Victory over the Sun)&quot;, choreosonic dance work, Watermans, London, International Festival of Digital Art.
*[2014] &quot;for the time being (Victory over the Sun)&quot;, dance opera, Lilian Baylis Studio-Sadler&#x27;s Wells, London.
*[2015] &quot;Metakimosphere no. 2,&quot; immersive installation-performance at METATOPE, International Metabody Platform, MediaLab Prado, Madrid, Spain.
*[2016] &quot;Metakimosphere no. 3,&quot; immersive kinetic installation, METABODY FORUM, Artaud Performance Center, Brunel, London.
*[2017] &quot;Metakimosphere no.4/Horlà,&quot; immersive mixed reality installation, Artaud Performance Center, Brunel, London.
*[2018] &quot;Ephemeral Edgespace (metakimosphre no. 6),&quot; dance performance-installation, with Haein Song and Claudia Robles Angel, ISEA 2018, Durban City Hall, Durban, South Africa.
*[2019] &quot;Mourning for a dead moon,&quot; multimedia dance, Artaud Performance Center, Brunel, London.
*[2022] &quot;The river of no one,&quot; telematic dance/music performance, The Telepresence Stage/Third Space Network

==Publications==
Johannes Birringer&#x27;s books include:
* 1991 &quot;Theatre, Theory, Postmodernism&quot; (Bloomington: Indiana UP).
* 1998 &quot;Media and Performance: along the border&quot; (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP).
* 2000 &quot;Performance on the Edge: Transformations of Culture&quot; (London: Continuum).
* 2008 &quot;Performance, Technology, and Science&quot; (New York: PAJ Publications).
* 2021 &quot;Kinetic Atmospheres: Performance and Immersion.&quot; Abingdon: Routledge.

He has co-edited the anthology &quot;Tanz im Kopf/Dance and Cognition&quot; (2005), published by the German Dance Association (GTF), and &quot;Die Welt als virtuelles Environment&quot; (2007, TMA Hellerau). He edited (with Josephine Fenger) the 2011 GTF volume &quot;Tanz und WahnSinn/Choreomania&quot;, and also &quot;Tanz der Dinge / Things that Dance,&quot; Yearbook of the German Dance Association 2019, vol. 29. Bielfeld: transcript Verlag. His extensive output of articles includes:

* 2020 &quot;From Literature to Dance, Choreography, Digital Architectures, and Deep Underground.&quot; Podcast, u(bqt)lab
* 2020 A wop bop a loo bop a lop bam boom, Alienist Magazine # 8, 134-141.
* 2019 &quot;Sensory hallucinations in the extended choreographic,&quot; Theatre and Performance Design, Bauhaus 100 special issue, 5:1/2, 96-113.
* 2019 &quot;Low End Resilience Theory,&quot; PAJ: A Journal of Performance and Art, 123, 28-43. 
* 2016 Atmospheres of Dividual Performance Critical Stages 14.
* 2016 Kimospheres, or Shamans in the Blind Country Performance Paradigm 12
* 2016 &quot;Savage Cabinet of Curiosities PAJ: A Journal of Performance and Art, 114, pp. 19–30.
* 2015 / Dance Or We Are Lost: In memoriam Pina Bausch: in Reading Contemporary Performance: Theatricality across Genres, ed. Meiling Cheng/Gabrielle Cody, London: Routledge, 189-93.
* 2015 “Gestural Materialties and the Worn Dispositif,” chapter in Digital Movement: Essays in Motion Technology and Performance, ed. Nicolas Salazar Sutil/Sita Popat, Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 162–85.
* 2013 &quot;“The Sound of Costumes/Audible Choreography”, Artistic Innovation Salon, curated by Caridad Svich for TCG.
* 2013 Bauhaus, Constructivism, Performance, PAJ: A Journal of Performance and Art, 104, 39-52.
* 2013 The Sound of Movement Wearables, with Michèle Danjoux, Leonardo 46:3, 233-40.
* 2012 The Un-seeing Eyes of the Foot (In memoriam Kazuo Ohno), Performance Research 17:2, 132-38.
* 2011 After Dance: Dissolutions and Re-Traces,” corpus. Magazin für Tanz, Choreografie, Performance.
* 2010 Moveable Worlds/Digital Scenographies, International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media 6:1, 89-107.
* 2010 Corpo, Carne e Espírito: Musical Visuality of the Body in Blood, Sweat &amp; Theory: Research through Practice in Performance, ed John Freeman. Faringdon: Libri Publishing, pp. 246–61.
* 2009 Wearable Performance, with Michèle Danjoux, Digital Creativity 20:1-2, 95-113.
* 2008 After Choreography, Performance Research 13:1, 118-22.
* 2007 Performance and Technology, in: Dança em foco, ed. Maria Arlete Gonçalves, Rio de Janeiro: Oi Futuro, pp. 34–43.
* 2007 Bodies of Color, Performing Arts Journal 87, 35-46
* 2007 Data Art and Imaginary Landscapes, in: SWAN QUAKE: the user manual, ed. Scott deLahunta, Plymouth: Liquid Press/I-DAT, pp. 37–52.
* 2006 The Emergent Dress: Transformation and Intimacy in Streaming Media and Fashion Performance, with Michèle Danjoux, Performance Research, 11:4, 41-52.
* 2006 Interacting: Performance and Transmediality, in Monologues: Theatre, Performance, Subjectivity, ed. Clare Wallace, Prague: Litteraria Pragensia, pp. 297–325.
* 2006 Performance and Science, Performing Arts Journal 85, 22-35.
* 2006 Interacting, Contemporary Theatre Review 16:4, 389-405.
* 2005 User Testing for Participatory Artworks, International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media 1:2,147-73.
* 2005 Dance and Not Dance, Performing Arts Journal 80, 10-27.
* 2004 La Danse et la perception interactives, Nouvelles de Danse 52, 99-115.
* 2004 Der transmediale Tanz, in: Tanz Anders Wo: Tanz intra- und interkulturell, hg. Krassimira Kruschkova, Nele Lipp. Hamburg: LIT Verlag, pp. 23–56.
* 2003 A New Europe, Performing Arts Journal 75, 26-41.
* 2002 Dance and Telepresence, in Arte e Tecnologia na Cultura Contemporânea, ed. Maria Beatriz de Medeiros, Brasília: Universidade de Brasília, pp. 171–79.
* 2002 Experimentelle Tanzmedien, Interaktive Systeme, in Tanz, Theorie, Text. Jahrbuch der Gesellschaft für Tanzforschung, ed. Christa Zipprich/Gabriele Klein, Hamburg: LIT Verlag, pp. 477–98.
* 2001 Muoversi attraverso le tecnologie, in La scena digitale: nuovi media per la danza ed. Armando Menicacci and Emanuele Quinz . Bolzano, Italy: Marsilio, pp. 231–36.
* 1999 Contemporary Performance/Technology, Theatre Journal 61:4, 361-81.
* 1998 Art in America: A Conversation with Tania Bruguera, Performance Research 3:1, 24-31
* 1998 The Movement of Memory: The Physicality of Digital Performance, Leonardo 31:3, 165-72.
* 1997 Postmodernism and Theatrical Performance.&quot; In Hans Bertens and Douwe Fokkema, eds., International Postmodernism, vol.XI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Co., pp, 129-40.
* 1996 This is the theatre that was to be expected and foreseen, Performance Research 1:1, 32-46
* 1996 La melancolía de la jaula, Performing Arts Journal 52, 103-28
* 1991 Video Art/Performance: A Border Theory, Performing Arts Journal 39, 54-84.
* 1987 Texts, Plays, and Instabilities, South African Theatre Journal 1, 4-17.
* 1986 Pina Bausch: Dancing Across Borders, The Drama Review 30:2, 85-97.

==References==
==External links==
*Alien Nation Co. - Johannes Birringer
*http://interaktionslabor.de
*http://www.brunel.ac.uk/dap
*http://www.danssansjoux.org
*http://www.digitalcultures.org
*Live.Media and Performance Lab at EMPAC: Interview.
*Open Score: Performance, Media, Networks.
*Interaktionslabor 2009. Interview on media lab.

==Further reading==
*EMPAC Lab live blog 2010
*Dance-tech network profile
*AlienNation Co. website for early works
*Andreas Lenhard &amp; Uschi Schmidt Lehnhard, &quot;Interaktion / Kunst / Labor,&quot; Saarbrücker Hefte, 98 (2007), 47-50
*Linked-In profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6216544" start="0" end="18" title="Johannes Birringer" label="Johannes Birringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="43" end="56" title="choreographer" label="choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="101" end="111" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740415" start="154" end="167" title="Site-Specific Art" label="site-specific"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="187" end="198" title="performance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="203" end="215" title="Installation art" label="installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="1866" end="1887" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2115" end="2122" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="2164" end="2173" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="2201" end="2210" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q839721" start="2227" end="2238" title="interactive" label="interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262623" start="2302" end="2355" title="Nottingham Trent University, School of Art and Design" label="School of Art and Design, Nottingham Trent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="2572" end="2577" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="2582" end="2586" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="2622" end="2628" title="online" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="2708" end="2714" title="Visual arts" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="2719" end="2734" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845080" start="2963" end="2982" title="wearable technology" label="wearable technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="3770" end="3776" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q15750403" start="13867" end="13894" title="Contemporary Theatre Review" label="Contemporary Theatre Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758396" wikidata="Q1399300" url="?curid=758396" title="Feather River (disambiguation)">
<text>Feather River may refer to:

;Rivers
*Feather River in California in the United States, a principal tributary of the Sacramento River
*Feather River (Alaska) in Alaska in the United States
*Feather River (Idaho) in Idaho in the United States

;Other places
*Feather River, former name of Feather Falls, California

;Transportation
*Feather River Route a rail line, much of which travels through the Feather River Canyon in California.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1399312" start="38" end="51" title="Feather River" label="Feather River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891232" start="135" end="157" title="Feather River (Alaska)" label="Feather River (Alaska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="161" end="167" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="190" end="211" title="Feather River (Idaho)" label="Feather River (Idaho)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="215" end="220" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310495" start="288" end="313" title="Feather Falls, California" label="Feather Falls, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439597" start="332" end="351" title="Feather River Route" label="Feather River Route"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758397" wikidata="Q2279377" url="?curid=758397" title="Count Fenring">
<text>Count Hasimir Fenring is a fictional character in the &quot;Dune&quot; universe created by Frank Herbert. He is featured in the 1965 science fiction novel &quot;Dune&quot; by Frank Herbert, and is also a key character in the &quot;Prelude to Dune&quot; trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson. He later appears in the 2008 novel &quot;Paul of Dune&quot;, and the &quot;Caladan Trilogy&quot; (2020–2022).

Fenring is the longtime friend and advisor to Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, and a formidable fighter. He serves as Shaddam&#x27;s agent, emissary, or assassin as necessary. Fenring is married to Bene Gesserit Lady Margot.

==Description==
In &quot;Dune&quot;, Shaddam&#x27;s daughter Princess Irulan writes via epigraph, &quot;My father had only one real friend, I think. That was Count Hasimir Fenring...one of the deadliest fighters in the Imperium.&quot; She goes on to describe him as &quot;a dapper and ugly little man&quot;. Baron Vladimir Harkonnen calls Fenring &quot;a killer with the manners of a rabbit...the most dangerous kind.&quot; The Baron&#x27;s nephew Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen describes Fenring as &quot;a small man, weak-looking. The face was weaselish with overlarge dark eyes. There was gray at the temples. And his movements—he moved a hand or turned his head one way, then he spoke another way. It was difficult to follow.&quot;

As Shaddam&#x27;s chief counsellor, Fenring is described as &quot;the Emperor&#x27;s errand boy&quot; in the novel. He appears to suffer from a verbal tic, but his unusual speech pattern is actually a &quot;humming&quot; code employed to privately communicate with his Bene Gesserit wife Margot. Herbert writes that &quot;Fenring seldom did anything he felt to be unnecessary, or used two words where one would do, or held himself to a single meaning in a single phrase.&quot; Baron Harkonnen refers to Fenring as &quot;Ambassador to the Smugglers&quot;, indicating Shaddam IV&#x27;s interest in spice smuggling operations on Arrakis. Herbert also notes that Fenring had been trained by Margot in the Bene Gesserit method of acute observation. Paul Atreides notes that &quot;Fenring was one of the might-have-beens, an almost Kwisatz Haderach, crippled by a flaw in the genetic pattern—a eunuch, his talent concentrated into furtiveness and inner seclusion.&quot;

==Storylines==

===&quot;Dune&quot;===
Prior to the events of &quot;Dune&quot;, Fenring serves as the Imperial Agent on Arrakis during the Harkonnen regime, and then as Governor of Arrakis during the handover period between House Harkonnen and House Atreides. He is later the Siridar-Absentia of the Atreides homeworld of Caladan while the Atreides occupy Arrakis. In &quot;Dune&quot;, the Harkonnens, secretly aided by the Emperor&#x27;s fierce Sardaukar warriors, destroy the Atreides forces and reclaim control of Arrakis. Fenring and Margot visit the Harkonnen homeworld of Giedi Prime, where the Count informs Baron Harkonnen that Shaddam is displeased with the way the invasion of Arrakis was handled, and frustrated by his failure to suppress the disruptive native Fremen population. Fenring is also there on the Emperor&#x27;s behalf to assess the Harkonnen heir, Feyd, which irks the Baron. Margot is also observing Feyd for the Bene Gesserit, who count him as an important part of their breeding program. With the Count&#x27;s knowledge and acceptance, Margot has been tasked with retrieving Feyd&#x27;s genetic material through conception. Impressed with Feyd but lamenting his Harkonnen upbringing, Fenring notes, &quot;I can see now why we must have that bloodline&quot;.

When Shaddam is forced into a corner by Paul Atreides, the Emperor and his Truthsayer, the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Mohiam, realize that Shaddam&#x27;s only option is treachery. Fenring is summoned and ordered to kill Paul, but refuses, aware that Paul represents the success of the Bene Gesserit breeding program of which Fenring himself is a failure.

In &quot;Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses)&quot; in &quot;Dune&quot;, Herbert writes that Fenring is a cousin and former childhood companion of Shaddam, and is rumored to have poisoned Shaddam&#x27;s father, Elrood IX. Another epigraph by Irulan explains that &quot;the measure of Count Fenring&#x27;s friendship&quot; with Shaddam is shown by both Fenring&#x27;s efforts to conceal Shaddam&#x27;s complicity in the Harkonnen invasion, and also his refusal of Shaddam&#x27;s command to kill Paul. After Paul ascends the Imperial throne, Fenring joins Shaddam in his forced retirement on the prison planet Salusa Secundus, and Fenring dies in 10,225 A.G.

===&quot;Prelude to Dune&quot; series===
The &quot;Prelude to Dune&quot; prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson establishes that Fenring&#x27;s mother is Chaola, a Bene Gesserit and lady-in-waiting to Habla, the fourth wife of Shaddam&#x27;s father Elrood IX, and served as wet nurse to both her son and Shaddam. Though Fenring is a failure in the Bene Gesserit breeding program to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, he is a supremely intelligent and perceptive killer. It is noted in &quot;&quot;, &quot;Over the years, Fenring had murdered at least fifty men and a dozen women, some of whom had been his lovers, of either sex.&quot; One of these was Shaddam&#x27;s older brother Fafnir, killed to secure Shaddam&#x27;s position as heir. In the novel, the Imperial concubines call Fenring &quot;the Ferret&quot; because of &quot;his narrow face and pointed chin.&quot;

In &quot;Dune: House Atreides&quot;, Fenring assassinates Shaddam&#x27;s father, Elrood IX, using a slow-acting poison administered on orders from Shaddam himself. Shaddam subsequently gives Fenring the title of Imperial Spice Minister and orders him to supervise Elrood&#x27;s Project Amal, an early attempt by the Tleilaxu to create synthetic melange in order to remove dependence upon the planet Arrakis, by that time the only source of melange in the Known Universe. Although Tleilaxu Master Hidar Fen Ajidica manages to create an artificial melange (called &quot;ajidamal&quot;, or &quot;amal&quot;) that seems to have the original&#x27;s properties, it does not work properly. During the events of &quot;&quot;, Fenring uses two Spacing Guild heighliners to secretly test the synthetic melange. Disastrously, the first heighliner emerges from foldspace at the wrong point, strikes the defensive shields of Wallach IX and plummets into the atmosphere to its destruction. The flawed spice also disrupts and confuses the thoughts, feelings and prescience of D&#x27;murr Pilru, the Navigator of the second heighliner. Affected by the tainted melange, D&#x27;murr misguides his ship out of the Known Universe and collapses; with a fresh supply of real melange he is able to return the ship safely to Guild Headquarters before dying. All records and laboratories of Project Amal are destroyed by Fenring himself afterward when House Vernius retakes the planet Ix, and Shaddam later denies all knowledge of it. When Shaddam starts to act without Fenring&#x27;s counsel due to jealousy, he begins making grievous mishaps, in particular using atomic weapons and a biological plague, and threatening to destroy Arrakis. Eventually and with some reluctance, Shaddam again begins following Fenring&#x27;s advice.

===&quot;Sandworms of Dune&quot;===
In &quot;Hunters of Dune&quot; (2006), the first of Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson&#x27;s two-part finale to the original &quot;Dune&quot; series, an ancient knife is discovered on the Atreides homeworld of Caladan that is covered in traces of Paul Atreides&#x27; blood. This genetic material is used by the Face Dancer Khrone to create a ghola of Paul, named Paolo, as part of the thinking machine plot to dominate humanity.

In &quot;Sandworms of Dune&quot; (2007), the dagger is used by Paolo in his duel-to-the-death with the Bene Gesserit&#x27;s own Paul Atreides ghola. It is noted that, among the knife&#x27;s many notable uses, &quot;Hasimir Fenring stabbed Emperor Muad&#x27;Dib with it and nearly killed him&quot; sometime between the events of the novels &quot;Dune&quot; and &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; (1969).

===&quot;Paul of Dune&quot;===
Hasimir and Margot are raising Feyd and Margot&#x27;s daughter — whom they have named Marie — as their own in the Brian Herbert/Kevin J. Anderson novel &quot;Paul of Dune&quot; (2008). Between the events of &quot;Dune&quot; and &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; (1969), the Fenrings train their young child as both an assassin and a Bene Gesserit, but reject the interference of the Sisterhood itself in favor of their own plans for Marie to seize the Imperial throne from Paul Atreides. Marie is accepted into Paul&#x27;s court as a playmate for his young sister Alia; at a banquet with her visiting parents, six-year-old Marie and the Fenrings execute their well-planned assassination attempt on Paul. Alia manages to kill Marie, but Margot&#x27;s revelation of her daughter&#x27;s paternity surprises Paul enough to allow Hasimir to stab him near-mortally. Paul&#x27;s concubine Chani uses the poisonous Water of Life to help save him, and he lives; rather than kill the Fenrings, he banishes them to Salusa Secundus into permanent exile with Shaddam, whom they now loathe.

==In adaptations==
Both Fenring and his wife Margot are omitted from David Lynch&#x27;s 1984 film &quot;Dune&quot;.

Fenring plays a minor part in the 2000 miniseries &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Dune&quot;, where he is portrayed by Miroslav Táborský. His function here is more of an advisor to the Emperor. Additionally, some of Margot&#x27;s actions are attributed to Princess Irulan (essentially the Fenrings&#x27; visit to Giedi Prime) as part of director John Harrison&#x27;s expansion of Irulan&#x27;s role in the adaptation.

Fenring is also omitted from Denis Villeneuve’s 2024 film &quot;&quot;, although his wife Margot does appear.

The character of Fenring was also to appear in the film adaptation of &quot;Dune&quot; planned by Alejandro Jodorowsky in the 1970s.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2279377" start="0" end="21" title="Count Fenring" label="Count Hasimir Fenring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="54" end="79" title="Dune (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="91" end="104" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="133" end="148" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="161" end="165" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="231" end="246" title="Prelude to Dune" label="Prelude to Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="253" end="260" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="264" end="277" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="282" end="299" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756819" start="342" end="354" title="Paul of Dune" label="Paul of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="376" end="391" title="Caladan Trilogy" label="Caladan Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="458" end="474" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="475" end="485" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="606" end="619" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290625" start="620" end="631" title="Margot Fenring" label="Lady Margot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407875" start="695" end="710" title="Princess Irulan" label="Princess Irulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q669777" start="722" end="730" title="epigraph (literature)" label="epigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="942" end="966" title="Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Baron Vladimir Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="1082" end="1103" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738538" start="1506" end="1516" title="tic" label="verbal tic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="1958" end="1963" title="melange (fictional drug)" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="2106" end="2119" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="2188" end="2204" title="Kwisatz Haderach" label="Kwisatz Haderach"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="2250" end="2256" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="2447" end="2454" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="2466" end="2475" title="House Harkonnen" label="Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="2571" end="2585" title="House Atreides" label="House Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="2773" end="2782" title="Sardaukar" label="Sardaukar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="2905" end="2916" title="Giedi Prime" label="Giedi Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="3099" end="3105" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="3324" end="3340" title="Breeding program (Dune)" label="breeding program"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="3688" end="3698" title="Truthsayer" label="Truthsayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="3718" end="3733" title="Reverend Mother (Dune)" label="Reverend Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469721" start="3734" end="3740" title="Gaius Helen Mohiam" label="Mohiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4221" end="4230" title="Elrood IX" label="Elrood IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="4618" end="4633" title="Salusa Secundus" label="Salusa Secundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="4885" end="4890" title="Habla Corrino" label="Habla"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="4958" end="4967" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="5360" end="5366" title="Fafnir Corrino" label="Fafnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="5445" end="5455" title="concubinage" label="concubines"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="5828" end="5840" title="Project Amal" label="Project Amal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="5866" end="5874" title="Bene Tleilax" label="Tleilaxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="5895" end="5902" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="6046" end="6063" title="Ajidica" label="Hidar Fen Ajidica"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="6118" end="6126" title="ajidamal" label="ajidamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="6285" end="6298" title="Spacing Guild" label="Spacing Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="6299" end="6309" title="heighliner" label="heighliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="6399" end="6408" title="Holtzman effect" label="foldspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="6462" end="6472" title="Wallach IX" label="Wallach IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="6611" end="6628" title="D&amp;#x27;murr Pilru" label="D&amp;#x27;murr Pilru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="6634" end="6643" title="Guild Navigator" label="Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="6977" end="6990" title="House Vernius" label="House Vernius"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="7010" end="7012" title="Ix (Dune)" label="Ix"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="7190" end="7204" title="Atomics (Dune)" label="atomic weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q248899" start="7403" end="7418" title="Hunters of Dune" label="Hunters of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="7707" end="7718" title="Face Dancer" label="Face Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="7719" end="7725" title="Khrone" label="Khrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="7738" end="7743" title="ghola" label="ghola"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="7759" end="7764" title="Paolo (Dune)" label="Paolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="7781" end="7797" title="Thinking machines (Dune)" label="thinking machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q437349" start="7835" end="7852" title="Sandworms of Dune" label="Sandworms of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="8073" end="8086" title="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib" label="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="8192" end="8204" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290625" start="8337" end="8342" title="Marie Fenring" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756819" start="8409" end="8421" title="Paul of Dune" label="Paul of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="8806" end="8810" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="9114" end="9123" title="concubinage" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="9124" end="9129" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="9149" end="9162" title="Water of Life (Dune)" label="Water of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="9389" end="9400" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="9424" end="9428" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="9476" end="9486" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q987305" start="9493" end="9518" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858922" start="9551" end="9568" title="Miroslav Táborský" label="Miroslav Táborský"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="9769" end="9777" title="Film director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700383" start="9778" end="9791" title="John Harrison (filmmaker)" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="9880" end="9896" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="10060" end="10080" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758401" wikidata="Q268359" url="?curid=758401" title="Hatebreed">
<text>Hatebreed is an American hardcore punk band from Bridgeport, Connecticut, formed in 1994. The band released its debut album &quot;Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire&quot; in 1997, which gave the band a cult following. The band signed to Universal Records and released &quot;Perseverance&quot; in 2002, which hit the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The band is described to combine elements of hardcore and heavy metal. They have played a major role in the Connecticut hardcore scene.

== History ==
Hatebreed was formed in 1994 in Bridgeport, Connecticut. They began by recording a three song demo and selling it to locals in 1995 and those songs would eventually be released on a split 7&quot; with New York&#x27;s Neglect in the same year. They followed that with the highly acclaimed EP &quot;Under the Knife&quot; scheduled to come out on Big Wheel Recreation in 1995 but then was self-released 1996, and went out on tour around the east coast/midwest supporting UKHC band Voorhees. The following year they released &quot;Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire&quot; on Victory Records, then the home of some of the biggest bands in American hardcore. &quot;Satisfaction&quot; sold more copies than any other debut in the history of the record company.

Tours with heavy metal bands such as Slayer, Deftones, Entombed and Napalm Death influenced their music and brought them to the attention of many non-hardcore fans. These influences were apparent on the band&#x27;s next two releases, 2002&#x27;s &quot;Perseverance&quot;, and especially 2003&#x27;s &quot;The Rise of Brutality&quot;.

After the release of &quot;The Rise of Brutality&quot;, the band took part in the 2004 Unholy Alliance tour in Europe with Slayer, Slipknot and Mastodon. In June 2006, Hatebreed went on an extensive European tour which included a performance at the Download Festival in Castle Donington, UK. Immediately following this European tour, they played the main stage at Ozzfest 2006 alongside DragonForce, Lacuna Coil, Avenged Sevenfold, Disturbed, and co-headliners System of a Down.

The band&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Supremacy&quot;, was released in August 2006, their first through Roadrunner Records, featuring new guitarist Frank Novinec (who had previously spent time playing with Ringworm, Terror, and Integrity). Jasta described it as an &quot;all-out onslaught of completely adrenaline-charged, in-your-face brutality&quot;. On September 13, 2006, former guitarist Lou Richards committed suicide at the age of 35; he had played on &quot;Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire&quot; and &quot;Perseverance&quot; before leaving the band in 2002.

Hatebreed headlined the second stage on the 2007 Ozzfest tour. Hatebreed appeared at Wacken Open Air festival in 2008 alongside Iron Maiden, Children of Bodom, and Avantasia. In April 2008, Hatebreed signed a worldwide deal with Koch Records for the release of a live DVD, a live album, and a cover album. On September 2, they released their concert DVD, entitled &quot;Live Dominance&quot;. On February 9, 2009, guitarist Sean Martin quit the band. Sean quit the band to pursue other interests in music that are more studio-related. However, Sean remains close to and in contact with Hatebreed members.

In 2009, the band released &quot;For the Lions&quot; on May 5, a studio record consisting of covers of songs by artists that have influenced the band&#x27;s development. Artists covered included Metallica, D.R.I., Crowbar, and Cro-Mags. Also in the same year, Hatebreed&#x27;s sixth studio album, entitled &quot;Hatebreed&quot;, was released on September 29. 

In 2010, Hatebreed participated in the third annual Mayhem Festival, alongside 3 Inches of Blood, Shadows Fall, and other bands.
On February 17, 2011, it was announced that Hatebreed would partake in the fourth annual Mayhem Festival to yet again headline the Jägermeister stage for three dates only. Hatebreed also got to play on the 2013 Vans Warped Tour in Australia alongside bands like Parkway Drive, The Offspring, Simple Plan, The Used, We Came as Romans, Man Overboard, H2O and many more, as well as the United Kingdom Warped Tour alongside Coheed and Cambria, Rise Against, Enter Shikari, Flogging Molly, Like Moths to Flames, The Wonder Years, Sublime with Rome and much more.

Their seventh studio album, &quot;The Divinity of Purpose&quot;, was released on January 25, 2013 in Europe and on January 29 in North America. The cover art was done by Eliran Kantor (Testament, Sodom). Hatebreed released its eighth album, &quot;The Concrete Confessional&quot;, on May 13, 2016. Hatebreed was also announced to take part on the 2017 Vans Warped Tour, as they appeared on the Monster Energy Stage alongside other bands like Gwar, CKY, Carnifex, Municipal Waste, After the Burial, Silent Planet, Anti Flag and many more groups rounded out the lineup. After touring the early part of 2019 with Obituary, Cro-Mags, Terror, and Fit for an Autopsy, Jamey Jasta said the band would spend the second half of 2019 writing and recording a new album.

The band&#x27;s ninth studio album &quot;Weight of the False Self&quot; was released on November 27, 2020. In the summer of 2021, Hatebreed, along with Trivium, served as an opening act for Megadeth and Lamb of God on the &quot;Metal Tour of the Year&quot;. Hatebreed replaced In Flames, who were forced to withdraw from the tour due to international visa issues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Hatebreed is currently working on a new album, which is tentatively due for release in 2025.

==Grammy nomination==
In December 2004, it was announced that Hatebreed was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance at the 47th Grammy Awards in Los Angeles for their song &quot;Live for This&quot;, which appeared on their album &quot;The Rise of Brutality&quot;. The award was ultimately given to Motörhead for their cover of the Metallica song &quot;Whiplash&quot; which appeared on the album &quot;Metallic Attack: The Ultimate Tribute.&quot;

==Controversies==
In the mid-1990s, vocalist of emoviolence band In/Humanity, Chris Bickel produced a zine calling out Victory Records for their business practices. Bickel attended a Hatebreed show and was quickly surrounded by the band, which threatened him with violence and called him homophobic slurs. After the show, frontman and vocalist Jamey Jasta declared himself a homophobe and again threatened Bickel with violence in a voicemail. In/Humanity played this voicemail to open their shows, and when Hatebreed played In/Humanity&#x27;s hometown of Columbia, South Carolina, between-song banter included their hatred of Bickel and his band.

Hatebreed is a longtime sponsor of UFC fighter Chris Camozzi. At UFC 158 in Montreal on March 16, 2013, Camozzi claimed he was required by the UFC &quot;for some reason&quot; to cover Hatebreed&#x27;s logos, on his T-shirt and ring introduction banner, with black tape.

In 2016, former drummer Nick &quot;Nickel P&quot; Papantoniou (a member of the band from 1996 to 1997) was sentenced to 45 years in prison after being convicted of felony murder. That conviction was overturned in January 2023 when it was discovered by Attorney James Ruane and proven at trial that Papantoniou&#x27;s trial attorney had brokered a deal with the prosecution on behalf of another client to testify against Papantoniou and that deal was never disclosed to the court or Papantoniou. The court found Papantoniou&#x27;s original attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel and reversed the finding and ordered a new trial to occur.

==Musical style and influences==
Hatebreed&#x27;s musical style has been described as metalcore and hardcore punk, They are considered important to the development of metalcore, blending influences from hardcore and punk rock, as well as heavy metal subgenres such as thrash metal and groove metal, alongside other bands in the 1990s metalcore scene (such as Earth Crisis, All Out War, Integrity and Converge). Jasta has also called Hatebreed &#x27;Celtic Frost hardcore&#x27;.

Hatebreed&#x27;s influences include metal and hardcore bands such as Agnostic Front, Carcass, Celtic Frost, Earth Crisis, Entombed, Integrity, Killing Time, Metallica, Obituary, Pantera, Sepultura, Sheer Terror, Suicidal Tendencies, Cro-Mags, Sick of It All and Slayer.

== Band members ==


Current members
* Jamey Jasta – lead vocals 
* Wayne Lozinak – lead guitar, backing vocals 
* Matt Byrne – drums 
* Frank Novinec – rhythm guitar, backing vocals 

Current touring musicians
* Matt Bachand – bass 
Former members
* Larry Dwyer Jr. – rhythm guitar, backing vocals 
* Dave Russo – drums 
* Nick &quot;Nickel P&quot; Papantoniou – drums 
* Matt McIntosh – lead guitar, backing vocals 
* Jamie &quot;Pushbutton&quot; Muckinhaupt – drums 
* Rigg Ross – drums 
* Lou Richards – rhythm guitar, backing vocals 
* Sean Martin – lead guitar, backing vocals ; rhythm guitar 
* Chris Beattie – bass 
Timeline
==Discography==

;Studio albums
* &quot;Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Perseverance&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Rise of Brutality&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Supremacy&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Hatebreed&quot; (2009)
* &quot;The Divinity of Purpose&quot; (2013)
* &quot;The Concrete Confessional&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Weight of the False Self&quot; (2020)

==References==
===Further reading===
* 
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q268359" start="0" end="9" title="Hatebreed" label="Hatebreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="25" end="38" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="49" end="72" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526975" start="130" end="165" title="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire" label="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="203" end="217" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="238" end="255" title="Universal Records" label="Universal Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933985" start="275" end="287" title="Perseverance (Hatebreed album)" label="Perseverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="317" end="342" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="389" end="397" title="Hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="402" end="413" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="683" end="690" title="7&amp;quot;" label="7&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829487" start="792" end="807" title="Under the Knife (EP)" label="Under the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016442" start="973" end="981" title="Voorhees (band)" label="Voorhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526975" start="1022" end="1057" title="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire" label="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636558" start="1067" end="1082" title="Victory Records" label="Victory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1262" end="1273" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="1288" end="1294" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="1296" end="1304" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q526132" start="1306" end="1314" title="Entombed (band)" label="Entombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q321762" start="1319" end="1331" title="Napalm Death" label="Napalm Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933985" start="1503" end="1515" title="Perseverance (Hatebreed album)" label="Perseverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933468" start="1556" end="1577" title="The Rise of Brutality" label="The Rise of Brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556662" start="1673" end="1688" title="The Unholy Alliance (tour)" label="Unholy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="1709" end="1715" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="1717" end="1725" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q548844" start="1730" end="1738" title="Mastodon (band)" label="Mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="1835" end="1852" title="Download Festival" label="Download Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="1950" end="1957" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q212715" start="1973" end="1984" title="DragonForce" label="DragonForce"/>
<link wikidata="Q46573" start="1986" end="1997" title="Lacuna Coil" label="Lacuna Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q165193" start="1999" end="2016" title="Avenged Sevenfold" label="Avenged Sevenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q131366" start="2018" end="2027" title="Disturbed (band)" label="Disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q45165" start="2047" end="2063" title="System of a Down" label="System of a Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173474" start="2102" end="2111" title="Supremacy (Hatebreed album)" label="Supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628" start="2168" end="2186" title="Roadrunner Records" label="Roadrunner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154159" start="2270" end="2278" title="Ringworm (band)" label="Ringworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293533" start="2280" end="2286" title="Terror (band)" label="Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q944143" start="2292" end="2301" title="Integrity (band)" label="Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q268359" start="2457" end="2469" title="Lou Richards (musician)" label="Lou Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="2683" end="2690" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="2719" end="2734" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="2762" end="2773" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q171718" start="2775" end="2792" title="Children of Bodom" label="Children of Bodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q158641" start="2798" end="2807" title="Avantasia" label="Avantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="2863" end="2875" title="Koch Records" label="Koch Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467080" start="3272" end="3285" title="For the Lions" label="For the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="3434" end="3443" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q500350" start="3445" end="3451" title="Dirty Rotten Imbeciles" label="D.R.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q528912" start="3453" end="3460" title="Crowbar (American band)" label="Crowbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140657" start="3466" end="3474" title="Cro-Mags" label="Cro-Mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708701" start="3551" end="3560" title="Hatebreed (album)" label="Hatebreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797265" start="3652" end="3667" title="Mayhem Festival 2010" label="Mayhem Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q229628" start="3679" end="3696" title="3 Inches of Blood" label="3 Inches of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353720" start="3698" end="3710" title="Shadows Fall" label="Shadows Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797266" start="3818" end="3833" title="Mayhem Festival 2011" label="Mayhem Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q661871" start="3860" end="3872" title="Jägermeister" label="Jägermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q282855" start="3991" end="4004" title="Parkway Drive" label="Parkway Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="4006" end="4019" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q485825" start="4021" end="4032" title="Simple Plan" label="Simple Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q847970" start="4034" end="4042" title="The Used" label="The Used"/>
<link wikidata="Q375555" start="4044" end="4061" title="We Came as Romans" label="We Came as Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299" start="4149" end="4167" title="Coheed and Cambria" label="Coheed and Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q246352" start="4169" end="4181" title="Rise Against" label="Rise Against"/>
<link wikidata="Q912581" start="4183" end="4196" title="Enter Shikari" label="Enter Shikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q917861" start="4198" end="4212" title="Flogging Molly" label="Flogging Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547119" start="4214" end="4234" title="Like Moths to Flames" label="Like Moths to Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631506" start="4254" end="4271" title="Sublime with Rome" label="Sublime with Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450162" start="4322" end="4345" title="The Divinity of Purpose" label="The Divinity of Purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361320" start="4458" end="4471" title="Eliran Kantor" label="Eliran Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="4473" end="4482" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q156523" start="4484" end="4489" title="Sodom (band)" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022791" start="4535" end="4560" title="The Concrete Confessional" label="The Concrete Confessional"/>
<link wikidata="Q507863" start="4729" end="4733" title="Gwar" label="Gwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q736089" start="4735" end="4738" title="CKY (band)" label="CKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044027" start="4740" end="4748" title="Carnifex (band)" label="Carnifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="4750" end="4765" title="Municipal Waste" label="Municipal Waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q389089" start="4767" end="4783" title="After the Burial" label="After the Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712529" start="4785" end="4798" title="Silent Planet" label="Silent Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q574663" start="4800" end="4809" title="Anti Flag" label="Anti Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q334537" start="4897" end="4905" title="Obituary (band)" label="Obituary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140657" start="4907" end="4915" title="Cro-Mags" label="Cro-Mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293533" start="4917" end="4923" title="Terror (band)" label="Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421122" start="4929" end="4947" title="Fit for an Autopsy" label="Fit for an Autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104832824" start="5088" end="5112" title="Weight of the False Self" label="Weight of the False Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q390684" start="5199" end="5206" title="Trivium (band)" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="5237" end="5245" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207731" start="5250" end="5261" title="Lamb of God (band)" label="Lamb of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q258546" start="5324" end="5333" title="In Flames" label="In Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5424" end="5441" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q919095" start="5630" end="5669" title="Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542327" start="5677" end="5695" title="47th Grammy Awards" label="47th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933468" start="5789" end="5810" title="The Rise of Brutality" label="The Rise of Brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="5852" end="5861" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="5885" end="5894" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q763942" start="5906" end="5914" title="Whiplash (Metallica song)" label="Whiplash"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5955" end="5992" title="Metallic Attack: The Ultimate Tribute" label="Metallic Attack: The Ultimate Tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11363" start="6049" end="6060" title="emoviolence" label="emoviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="6103" end="6107" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636558" start="6120" end="6135" title="Victory Records" label="Victory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681367" start="6345" end="6356" title="Jamey Jasta" label="Jamey Jasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="6556" end="6580" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="6684" end="6687" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964673" start="6696" end="6709" title="Chris Camozzi" label="Chris Camozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122071" start="6714" end="6721" title="UFC 158" label="UFC 158"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="6725" end="6733" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392339" start="7084" end="7097" title="felony murder" label="felony murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183862" start="7657" end="7666" title="metalcore" label="metalcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="7671" end="7684" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="7787" end="7796" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="7809" end="7820" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="7839" end="7851" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="7856" end="7868" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q636135" start="7930" end="7942" title="Earth Crisis" label="Earth Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837517" start="7944" end="7955" title="All Out War (band)" label="All Out War"/>
<link wikidata="Q944143" start="7957" end="7966" title="Integrity (band)" label="Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q281894" start="7971" end="7979" title="Converge (band)" label="Converge"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="8020" end="8032" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q395013" start="8119" end="8133" title="Agnostic Front" label="Agnostic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q283835" start="8135" end="8142" title="Carcass (band)" label="Carcass"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="8144" end="8156" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q636135" start="8158" end="8170" title="Earth Crisis" label="Earth Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q526132" start="8172" end="8180" title="Entombed (band)" label="Entombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q944143" start="8182" end="8191" title="Integrity (band)" label="Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042201" start="8193" end="8205" title="Killing Time (American band)" label="Killing Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="8207" end="8216" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q334537" start="8218" end="8226" title="Obituary (band)" label="Obituary"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="8228" end="8235" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="8237" end="8246" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277708" start="8248" end="8260" title="Sheer Terror" label="Sheer Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q899341" start="8262" end="8281" title="Suicidal Tendencies" label="Suicidal Tendencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140657" start="8283" end="8291" title="Cro-Mags" label="Cro-Mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q931471" start="8293" end="8307" title="Sick of It All" label="Sick of It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="8312" end="8318" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681367" start="8360" end="8371" title="Jamey Jasta" label="Jamey Jasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526975" start="8994" end="9029" title="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire" label="Satisfaction Is the Death of Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933985" start="9051" end="9063" title="Perseverance (Hatebreed album)" label="Perseverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933468" start="9085" end="9106" title="The Rise of Brutality" label="The Rise of Brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173474" start="9128" end="9137" title="Supremacy (Hatebreed album)" label="Supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708701" start="9159" end="9168" title="Hatebreed (album)" label="Hatebreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450162" start="9190" end="9213" title="The Divinity of Purpose" label="The Divinity of Purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022791" start="9235" end="9260" title="The Concrete Confessional" label="The Concrete Confessional"/>
<link wikidata="Q104832824" start="9282" end="9306" title="Weight of the False Self" label="Weight of the False Self"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758403" wikidata="Q131260" url="?curid=758403" title="Candida (fungus)">
<text>Candida is a genus of yeasts. It is the most common cause of fungal infections worldwide and the largest genus of medically important yeasts.

The genus &quot;Candida&quot; encompasses about 200 species. Many species are harmless commensals or endosymbionts of hosts including humans. When mucosal barriers are disrupted or the immune system is compromised, however, they can invade and cause disease, known as an opportunistic infection. Candida is located on most mucosal surfaces and mainly the gastrointestinal tract, along with the skin. &quot;Candida albicans&quot; is one of the most commonly isolated species and can cause infections (candidiasis or thrush) in humans and other animals. In winemaking, some species of &quot;Candida&quot; can potentially spoil wines.

Many species are found in gut flora, including &quot;C. albicans&quot; in mammalian hosts, whereas others live as endosymbionts in insects. Systemic infections of the bloodstream and major organs (candidemia or invasive candidiasis), particularly in patients with an impaired immune system (immunocompromised), affect over 90,000 people a year in the US.

The genome of several &quot;Candida&quot; species has been sequenced.

Antibiotics promote yeast (fungal) infections, including gastrointestinal (GI) &quot;Candida&quot; overgrowth and penetration of the GI mucosa. While women are more susceptible to genital yeast infections, men can also be infected. Certain factors, such as prolonged antibiotic use, increase the risk for both men and women. People with diabetes or the immunocompromised, such as those infected with HIV, are more susceptible to yeast infections.

&quot;Candida antarctica&quot; and &quot;Candida rugosa&quot; are a source of industrially important lipases, while &quot;Candida krusei&quot; is prominently used to ferment cacao during chocolate production. Lipases from &quot;Candida rugosa&quot; are also used to digest fats in laboratory assays because of their broad range of activity.

==Biology==

When grown in a laboratory, &quot;Candida&quot; appears as large, round, white or cream (&quot;albicans&quot; means &quot;whitish&quot; in Latin) colonies, which emit a yeasty odor on agar plates at room temperature. &quot;C. albicans&quot; ferments glucose and maltose to acid and gas, sucrose to acid, and does not ferment lactose, which helps to distinguish it from other &quot;Candida&quot; species.

Recent molecular phylogenetic studies show that the genus &quot;Candida&quot;, as currently defined, is extremely polyphyletic (encompassing distantly-related species that do not form a natural group). Before the advent of inexpensive molecular methods, yeasts that were isolated from infected patients were often called &quot;Candida&quot; without clear evidence of relationship to other &quot;Candida&quot; species. For example, &quot;Candida glabrata&quot;, &quot;Candida guilliermondii&quot;, and &quot;Candida lusitaniae&quot; are clearly misclassified and will be placed in other genera once phylogenetic reorganization is complete (for example, see Khunnamwong &quot;et al.&quot; 2015).

Some species of &quot;Candida&quot; use a non-standard genetic code in the translation of their nuclear genes into the amino acid sequences of polypeptides. The difference in the genetic code between species possessing this alternative code is that the codon CUG (normally encoding the amino acid leucine) is translated by the yeast as a different amino acid, serine. The alternative translation of the CUG codon in these species is due to a novel nucleic acid sequence in the serine-tRNA (ser-tRNACAG), which has a guanosine located at position 33, 5&#x27; to the anticodon. In all other tRNAs, this position is normally occupied by a pyrimidine (often uridine). This genetic code change is the only such known alteration in cytoplasmic mRNA, in both the prokaryotes, and the eukaryotes, involving the reassignment of a sense codon. This novel genetic code may be a mechanism for more rapid adaptation to the organism&#x27;s environment, as well as playing an important role in the evolution of the genus &quot;Candida&quot; by creating genetic barriers that encouraged speciation.

==Pathogen==
&quot;Candida&quot; are almost universal in low numbers on healthy adult skin and &quot;C. albicans&quot; is part of the normal flora of the mucous membranes of the respiratory, gastrointestinal and female genital tracts. The dryness of skin compared to other tissues prevents the growth of the fungus, but damaged skin or skin in intertriginous regions is more amenable to rapid growth. A severe consequence of candida infection can be esophageal cancer, overgrowth with candida in the esophagus is the most important risk factor for developing esophageal cancer in patients with achalasia.

Overgrowth of several species, including &quot;C. albicans&quot;, can cause infections ranging from superficial, such as oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush) or vulvovaginal candidiasis (vaginal candidiasis) and subpreputial candidiasis, which may cause balanitis, to systemic, such as fungemia and invasive candidiasis. Oral candidiasis is common in elderly denture-wearers. In otherwise healthy individuals, these superficial infections can be cured with topical or systemic antifungal medications (commonly over-the-counter antifungal treatments like miconazole or clotrimazole). In debilitated or immunocompromised patients, or if introduced intravenously (into the bloodstream), candidiasis may become a systemic disease producing abscesses, thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, or infections of the eyes or other organs. Typically, relatively severe neutropenia (low neutrophils) is a prerequisite for &quot;Candida&quot; to pass through the defenses of the skin and cause disease in deeper tissues; in such cases, mechanical disruption of the infected skin sites is typically a factor in the fungal invasion of the deeper tissues. The most common way to treat invasive candida infections is with the use of amphotericin or fluconazole; other methods would include surgery.

==Applications==
&quot;C. albicans&quot; has been used in combination with carbon nanotubes (CNT) to produce stable electrically conductive bio-nano-composite tissue materials that have been used as temperature-sensing elements.

==Species==
Among &quot;Candida&quot; species, &quot;C. albicans&quot;, which is a normal constituent of the human flora, a commensal of the skin and the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts, is responsible for the majority of &quot;Candida&quot; bloodstream infections (candidemia). Yet, there is an increasing incidence of infections caused by &quot;C. glabrata&quot; and &quot;C. rugosa&quot;, which could be because they are frequently less susceptible to the currently used azole-group of antifungals. Other medically important species include &quot;C. parapsilosis&quot;, &quot;C. tropicalis&quot;, &quot;C. dubliniensis&quot;. and the more recently emerging pathogen &quot;C. auris&quot;.

Other &quot;Candida&quot; species, such as &quot;C. oleophila&quot;, have been used as biological control agents in fruit.

* &quot;C. albicans&quot;
* &quot;C. ascalaphidarum&quot;
* &quot;C. amphixiae&quot;
* &quot;C. antarctica&quot;
* &quot;C. argentea&quot;
* &quot;C. atlantica&quot;
* &quot;C. atmosphaerica&quot;
* &quot;C. auris&quot;
* &quot;C. blankii&quot;
* &quot;C. blattae&quot;
* &quot;C. boidinii&quot;
* &quot;C. bracarensis&quot;
* &quot;C. bromeliacearum&quot;
* &quot;C. carpophila&quot;
* &quot;C. carvajalis&quot;
* &quot;C. catenulata&quot;
* &quot;C. cerambycidarum&quot;
* &quot;C. chauliodes&quot;
* &quot;C. corydali&quot;
* &quot;C. crusei&quot;
* &quot;C. dosseyi&quot;
* &quot;C. dubliniensis&quot;
* &quot;C. ergatensis&quot;
* &quot;C. fructus&quot;
* &quot;C. glabrata&quot;
* &quot;C. fermentati&quot;
* &quot;C. guilliermondii&quot;
* &quot;C. haemulonii&quot;
* &quot;C. humilis&quot;
* &quot;C. insectamens&quot;
* &quot;C. insectorum&quot;
* &quot;C. intermedia&quot;
* &quot;C. jeffresii&quot;
* &quot;C. kefyr&quot;
* &quot;C. keroseneae&quot;
* &quot;C. krusei&quot;
* &quot;C. lipolytica&quot;
* &quot;C. lusitaniae&quot;
* &quot;C. lyxosophila&quot;
* &quot;C. maltosa&quot;
* &quot;C. marina&quot;
* &quot;C. membranifaciens&quot;
* &quot;C. mogii&quot;
* &quot;C. oleophila&quot;
* &quot;C. oregonensis&quot;
* &quot;C. parapsilosis&quot;
* &quot;C. quercitrusa&quot;
* &quot;C. rhizophoriensis&quot;
* &quot;C. rugosa&quot;
* &quot;C. sake&quot;
* &quot;C. sharkiensis&quot;
* &quot;C. shehatea&quot;
* &quot;C. temnochilae&quot;
* &quot;C. tenuis&quot;
* &quot;C. theae&quot;
* &quot;C. tolerans&quot;
* &quot;C. tropicalis&quot;
* &quot;C. tsuchiyae&quot;
* &quot;C. sinolaborantium&quot;
* &quot;C. sojae&quot;
* &quot;C. subhashii&quot;
* &quot;C. viswanathii&quot;
* &quot;C. ubatubensis&quot;
* &quot;C. utilis&quot;
* &quot;C. zemplinina&quot;
== References ==
== External links ==
* Labs working on Candida</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="22" end="27" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="61" end="78" title="fungal infections" label="fungal infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="230" end="240" title="Commensalism" label="commensals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531856" start="244" end="256" title="endosymbiont" label="endosymbiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="277" end="282" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="290" end="297" title="Mucous membrane" label="mucosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="328" end="341" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q835718" start="414" end="437" title="opportunistic infection" label="opportunistic infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="498" end="520" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="549" end="565" title="Candida albicans" label="Candida albicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="643" end="654" title="candidiasis" label="candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237250" start="698" end="708" title="yeast in winemaking" label="winemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q831320" start="762" end="773" title="wine fault" label="spoil wines"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="802" end="811" title="gut flora" label="gut flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="850" end="856" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414805" start="916" end="935" title="Systemic disease" label="Systemic infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="973" end="983" title="candidemia" label="candidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887808" start="987" end="1007" title="invasive candidiasis" label="invasive candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="1067" end="1084" title="immunocompromised" label="immunocompromised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="1136" end="1142" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1203" end="1213" title="Antibiotic" label="Antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325400" start="1336" end="1345" title="Intestinal mucosal barrier" label="GI mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="1540" end="1548" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="1603" end="1606" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108064186" start="1657" end="1675" title="Candida antarctica" label="Candida antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131260" start="1692" end="1706" title="Candida rugosa" label="Candida rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="1752" end="1758" title="lipase" label="lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q29110387" start="1773" end="1787" title="Candida krusei" label="Candida krusei"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="1825" end="1830" title="Cocoa bean" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q131260" start="1879" end="1893" title="Candida rugosa" label="Candida rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="1924" end="1927" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296168" start="2022" end="2032" title="Medical laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2145" end="2150" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q574816" start="2190" end="2200" title="agar plate" label="agar plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="2256" end="2263" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170002" start="2268" end="2275" title="maltose" label="maltose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="2293" end="2300" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="2331" end="2338" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="2428" end="2440" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="2525" end="2537" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="2665" end="2670" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q139137" start="2848" end="2864" title="Candida glabrata" label="Candida glabrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583635" start="2878" end="2900" title="Candida guilliermondii" label="Candida guilliermondii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031728" start="2918" end="2936" title="Candida lusitaniae" label="Candida lusitaniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2997" end="3003" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="3161" end="3173" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="3181" end="3192" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068120" start="3202" end="3214" title="nuclear gene" label="nuclear gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="3225" end="3235" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="3249" end="3261" title="polypeptides" label="polypeptides"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="3359" end="3364" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483745" start="3403" end="3410" title="leucine" label="leucine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="3466" end="3472" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="3590" end="3594" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422462" start="3622" end="3631" title="guanosine" label="guanosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="3671" end="3680" title="anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="3742" end="3752" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422573" start="3760" end="3767" title="uridine" label="uridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="3844" end="3848" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="3862" end="3872" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="3883" end="3892" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="3927" end="3938" title="sense codon" label="sense codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="4089" end="4098" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532908" start="4144" end="4159" title="genetic barrier" label="genetic barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="4177" end="4187" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="4276" end="4280" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671433" start="4534" end="4548" title="intertriginous" label="intertriginous"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="4640" end="4657" title="esophageal cancer" label="esophageal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="4690" end="4699" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q661015" start="4784" end="4793" title="achalasia" label="achalasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886899" start="4917" end="4942" title="Oral candidiasis" label="oropharyngeal candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q977090" start="4955" end="4979" title="Vaginal yeast infection" label="vulvovaginal candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138584" start="5048" end="5057" title="balanitis" label="balanitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="5080" end="5088" title="fungemia" label="fungemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887808" start="5093" end="5113" title="invasive candidiasis" label="invasive candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="5153" end="5160" title="Dentures" label="denture"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="5271" end="5292" title="antifungal medication" label="antifungal medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q410534" start="5348" end="5358" title="miconazole" label="miconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q413546" start="5362" end="5374" title="clotrimazole" label="clotrimazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="5464" end="5475" title="bloodstream" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="5530" end="5537" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q377978" start="5541" end="5557" title="thrombophlebitis" label="thrombophlebitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="5559" end="5571" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="5645" end="5656" title="neutropenia" label="neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="5662" end="5672" title="neutrophil" label="neutrophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q412223" start="6003" end="6015" title="amphotericin" label="amphotericin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411478" start="6019" end="6030" title="fluconazole" label="fluconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="6145" end="6161" title="carbon nanotubes" label="carbon nanotubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500347" start="6409" end="6420" title="human flora" label="human flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q139137" start="6657" end="6668" title="Candida glabrata" label="C. glabrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q131260" start="6685" end="6694" title="Candida rugosa" label="C. rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q419639" start="6784" end="6789" title="azole" label="azole"/>
<link wikidata="Q144068" start="6860" end="6875" title="Candida parapsilosis" label="C. parapsilosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q143138" start="6889" end="6902" title="Candida tropicalis" label="C. tropicalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247005" start="6916" end="6931" title="Candida dubliniensis" label="C. dubliniensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816853" start="6985" end="6993" title="Candida auris" label="C. auris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865913" start="7051" end="7063" title="Candida oleophila" label="C. oleophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="7089" end="7107" title="biological control" label="biological control"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="7134" end="7145" title="Candida albicans" label="C. albicans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7160" end="7177" title="Candida ascalaphidarum" label="C. ascalaphidarum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7192" end="7204" title="Candida amphixiae" label="C. amphixiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q108064186" start="7219" end="7232" title="Candida antarctica" label="C. antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7247" end="7258" title="Candida argentea" label="C. argentea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7273" end="7285" title="Candida atlantica" label="C. atlantica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7300" end="7316" title="Candida atmosphaerica" label="C. atmosphaerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816853" start="7331" end="7339" title="Candida auris" label="C. auris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031727" start="7354" end="7364" title="Candida blankii" label="C. blankii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7379" end="7389" title="Candida blattae" label="C. blattae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051004" start="7404" end="7415" title="Candida boidinii" label="C. boidinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386378" start="7430" end="7444" title="Candida bracarensis" label="C. bracarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975415" start="7459" end="7476" title="Candida bromeliacearum" label="C. bromeliacearum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7491" end="7504" title="Candida carpophila" label="C. carpophila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7519" end="7532" title="Candida carvajalis" label="C. carvajalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441488" start="7547" end="7560" title="Candida catenulata" label="C. catenulata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7575" end="7592" title="Candida cerambycidarum" label="C. cerambycidarum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7607" end="7620" title="Candida chauliodes" label="C. chauliodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7635" end="7646" title="Candida corydali" label="C. corydali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7661" end="7670" title="Candida crusei" label="C. crusei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7685" end="7695" title="Candida dosseyi" label="C. dosseyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247005" start="7710" end="7725" title="Candida dubliniensis" label="C. dubliniensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7740" end="7753" title="Candida ergatensis" label="C. ergatensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7768" end="7778" title="Candida fructus" label="C. fructus"/>
<link wikidata="Q139137" start="7793" end="7804" title="Candida glabrata" label="C. glabrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7819" end="7832" title="Candida fermentati" label="C. fermentati"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583635" start="7847" end="7864" title="Candida guilliermondii" label="C. guilliermondii"/>
<link wikidata="Q118202949" start="7879" end="7892" title="Candida haemulonii" label="C. haemulonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441539" start="7907" end="7917" title="Candida humilis" label="C. humilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441544" start="7932" end="7946" title="Candida insectamens" label="C. insectamens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7961" end="7974" title="Candida insectorum" label="C. insectorum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7989" end="8002" title="Candida intermedia" label="C. intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8017" end="8029" title="Candida jeffresii" label="C. jeffresii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222586" start="8044" end="8052" title="Candida kefyr" label="C. kefyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632656" start="8067" end="8080" title="Candida keroseneae" label="C. keroseneae"/>
<link wikidata="Q29110387" start="8095" end="8104" title="Candida krusei" label="C. krusei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8119" end="8132" title="Candida lipolytica" label="C. lipolytica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031728" start="8147" end="8160" title="Candida lusitaniae" label="C. lusitaniae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8175" end="8189" title="Candida lyxosophila" label="C. lyxosophila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8204" end="8214" title="Candida maltosa" label="C. maltosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27803772" start="8229" end="8238" title="Candida marina" label="C. marina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8253" end="8271" title="Candida membranifaciens" label="C. membranifaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441572" start="8286" end="8294" title="Candida mogii" label="C. mogii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865913" start="8309" end="8321" title="Candida oleophila" label="C. oleophila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8336" end="8350" title="Candida oregonensis" label="C. oregonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144068" start="8365" end="8380" title="Candida parapsilosis" label="C. parapsilosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8395" end="8409" title="Candida quercitrusa" label="C. quercitrusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996318" start="8424" end="8442" title="Candida rhizophoriensis" label="C. rhizophoriensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131260" start="8457" end="8466" title="Candida rugosa" label="C. rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8481" end="8488" title="Candida sake" label="C. sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996319" start="8503" end="8517" title="Candida sharkiensis" label="C. sharkiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8532" end="8543" title="Candida shehatea" label="C. shehatea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8558" end="8572" title="Candida temnochilae" label="C. temnochilae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8587" end="8596" title="Candida tenuis" label="C. tenuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031729" start="8611" end="8619" title="Candida theae" label="C. theae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441654" start="8634" end="8645" title="Candida tolerans" label="C. tolerans"/>
<link wikidata="Q143138" start="8660" end="8673" title="Candida tropicalis" label="C. tropicalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8688" end="8700" title="Candida tsuchiyae" label="C. tsuchiyae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8715" end="8733" title="Candida sinolaborantium" label="C. sinolaborantium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8748" end="8756" title="Candida sojae" label="C. sojae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8771" end="8783" title="Candida subhashii" label="C. subhashii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031737" start="8798" end="8812" title="Candida viswanathii" label="C. viswanathii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975420" start="8827" end="8841" title="Candida ubatubensis" label="C. ubatubensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527729" start="8856" end="8865" title="Torula" label="C. utilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264691" start="8880" end="8893" title="Candida zemplinina" label="C. zemplinina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758406" wikidata="Q59179" url="?curid=758406" title="Vignale">
<text>Vignale is the luxury car sub-brand of Ford Motor Company used in automobiles sold in Europe. The former company Carrozzeria Alfredo Vignale was an Italian automobile coachbuilder established in 1948 at Via Cigliano, Turin, by Alfredo Vignale (1913–69). After its founder&#x27;s death in 1969, Carrozzeria Vignale was acquired by De Tomaso (founded by Argentine businessman and race driver Alejandro de Tomaso). The studio ceased operation in 1973, but ownership of the name was taken over by Ford Motor Company (which had majority ownership of De Tomaso).

Since then, Ford has continued to use the name sporadically to the present day. Up to present days, Ford of Europe released &quot;Vignale&quot; versions of models Mondeo, Edge, Fiesta, Focus, and Kuga, among others.

== History ==

The first body on a Fiat 500 Topolino base was made in 1948, followed by a special Fiat 1100. Most customers were Italian firms, such as Cisitalia, Alfa Romeo, Ferrari, Fiat, Maserati, Lancia. In 1952, Vignale collaborated with Briggs Cunningham to jointly produce the Continental C-3. A close cooperation was maintained with Giovanni Michelotti, who in 1959 opened his own design studio and in 1962 definitely concluded the cooperation. 
Also Rodolfo Bonetto designed a couple of cars in the early 1950s before moving to Boneschi. Later Vignale designs were created by Virginio Vairo. Vignale also designed and built cars themselves, usually low volume variants of the main production cars of these automobile manufacturers. Amongst them were 850, Samantha, Eveline and the Vignale Gamine, based on the Fiat 500. In 1968, Vignale designed the body of their last prototype, the Tatra 613. Vignale was taken over by De Tomaso in 1969 who already owned Carrozzeria Ghia. Shortly after selling, Alfredo Vignale died in a car crash on November 16, 1969. Both coachbuilders were sold to Ford in 1973 but the Vignale brand was discontinued.

At the 1993 Geneva Motor Show, Aston Martin, at the time owned by Ford, produced a concept car called Lagonda Vignale. Ford then used the Vignale name in the Ford Focus Vignale concept car introduced at the 2004 Paris Motor Show, however the production model was named as Ford Focus Coupé-Cabriolet.

In September 2013, Ford of Europe announced plans to resurrect the &quot;Vignale&quot; name as an upscale luxury sub-brand of Ford. The cars would be visually distincted from regular Ford products and have an improved dealership experience. Exclusive services, such as free lifetime car washes, will be offered as well. The first Ford model to receive the &quot;Vignale&quot; name was the 2015 Ford Mondeo.

On 1 March 2016 Ford of Europe announced a Kuga &quot;Vignale&quot; concept vehicle at the Geneva Motor Show where the company also announced the line-up of Vignale products, S-Max, Edge, and Mondeo &quot;Vignale&quot; five-door models debut alongside Kuga Vignale Concept, offering a vision of the future of upscale SUVs as well as revealing Vignale Ambassadors and the signature Vignale collection.

== Designs ==
List of cars designed and bodied at Carrozzeria Vignale or coachbuilt to a third-party design.


* Abarth 204A Berlinetta
* Abarth 205A Berlinetta
* Alfa Romeo 412 Barchetta, 1951
* Alfa Romeo 1900 &quot;La Fleche&quot; Spider and Coupé.
* Alfa Romeo 2000 Coupé
* American Motors AMX 1966 Coupé
* Aston Martin DB2/4 Coupé
* Cisitalia 202, 202 CMM
* Cunningham C-3 Coupé and Cabriolet
* Daihatsu Compagno
* De Tomaso Pantera, early production
* Ferrari 166 MM Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 166 Inter Coupé
* Ferrari 212 Export Barchetta, Spider, Cabriolet and Coupé
* Ferrari 212 Inter Coupé, Spider and Cabriolet
* Ferrari 225 S Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 250 S Coupé
* Ferrari 250 MM Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 250 Europa Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 250 Europa GT Coupé
* Ferrari 340 America Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 340 Mexico Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 340 MM Spider
* Ferrari 342 America Cabriolet
* Ferrari 625 TF Coupé and Spider
* Ferrari 375 America Coupé
* Ferrari 330 GT Shooting brake, rebodied in 1967
* Fiat 600 Coupé, Spider
* Fiat 850 Coupé, Spider, Berlina
* Fiat 1400 Cabriolet
* Fiat 1300 and 1500 Sportiva fastback.
* Fiat 1500 Coupé
* Fiat 124 Coupé &quot;Eveline&quot;
* Fiat 125 Coupé &quot;Samantha&quot; 
* Fiat 8V Coupé, Cabriolet and &quot;Demon Rouge&quot;
* Ford-Cisitalia 808 coupé and roadster
* Jensen Interceptor, early production
* Jensen FF, early production
* Jensen Nova concept car
* Lancia Appia Cabriolet, 1957; Lusso Coupé, prototype and series production cars
* Lancia Aprilia Coupé for Vignale, 1949
* Lancia Aurelia B50 Coupé and Berlina; B52 Coupé
* Lancia Aurelia Nardi Blue Ray 1 and 2, commissioned by Enrico Nardi
* Lancia Flavia Cabriolet, would become the last Michelotti design for Vignale
* Lincoln by Vignale, a 1987 show car
* Maserati A6G 2000 Coupé, Paris Show car
* Maserati A6GCS/53 Spider Corsa, commissioned by Tony Parravano and rebodied by Scaglietti in 1955.
* Maserati 3500 GT Spyder, prototypes and series production cars
* Maserati Sebring 1962, prototype and series production cars
* Maserati Mexico prototype, based on a Maserati 5000 GT chassis rebodied in 1965.
* Maserati Mexico series production car 
* Maserati Indy
* Matra M530 Sport prototype
* O.S.C.A. MT4-2AD Coupé
* Packard Eight &#x27;Victoria&#x27; Vignale Cabriolet (built in 1948 on a 1939 chassis)
* Standard Vanguard Vignale
* Tatra 613 prototypes and production cars
* Triumph Italia
* Vignale Gamine by Alfredo Vignale

==Notable designers==
* Alfredo Vignale
* Giovanni Michelotti
* Virginio Vairo

==References==
===Bibliography===

==External links==

* Coachbuild.com Encyclopedia: Vignale
* Vignale Gamine
* About Carrozzeria Vignale
* Lancia Aurelia B52 Vignale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59179" start="0" end="7" title="Vignale" label="Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="15" end="25" title="luxury car" label="luxury car"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="30" end="35" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="39" end="57" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="86" end="92" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q59179" start="113" end="140" title="Vignale" label="Carrozzeria Alfredo Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="156" end="166" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="167" end="179" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="217" end="222" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173085" start="330" end="339" title="De Tomaso" label="De Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q172234" start="390" end="409" title="Alejandro de Tomaso" label="Alejandro de Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="493" end="511" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q571934" start="658" end="672" title="Ford of Europe" label="Ford of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q275747" start="721" end="727" title="Ford Mondeo" label="Mondeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962328" start="729" end="733" title="Ford Edge" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077171" start="735" end="741" title="Ford Fiesta" label="Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209029" start="743" end="748" title="Ford Focus" label="Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668293" start="754" end="758" title="Ford Kuga" label="Kuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q636082" start="810" end="827" title="Fiat 500 Topolino" label="Fiat 500 Topolino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410426" start="873" end="882" title="Fiat 1100" label="Fiat 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="904" end="911" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093218" start="927" end="936" title="Cisitalia" label="Cisitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="938" end="948" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="950" end="957" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="959" end="963" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="965" end="973" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="975" end="981" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q915579" start="1018" end="1035" title="Briggs Cunningham" label="Briggs Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q112741051" start="1059" end="1074" title="Cunningham C-3" label="Continental C-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q606379" start="1116" end="1135" title="Giovanni Michelotti" label="Giovanni Michelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642103" start="1312" end="1320" title="Carrozzeria Boneschi" label="Boneschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941159" start="1360" end="1374" title="Virginio Vairo" label="Virginio Vairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928948" start="1565" end="1579" title="Vignale Gamine" label="Vignale Gamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="1594" end="1602" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615446" start="1668" end="1677" title="Tatra 613" label="Tatra 613"/>
<link wikidata="Q173085" start="1705" end="1714" title="De Tomaso" label="De Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="1741" end="1757" title="Carrozzeria Ghia" label="Carrozzeria Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1872" end="1876" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1933" end="1955" title="Geneva Motor Show#1993" label="1993 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="1957" end="1969" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750722" start="2028" end="2043" title="Aston Martin Lagonda Vignale" label="Lagonda Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2084" end="2102" title="Ford Focus (International)#Focus ST" label="Ford Focus Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966530" start="2133" end="2154" title="2004 Paris Motor Show" label="2004 Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2198" end="2224" title="Ford Focus (second generation, Europe)#Coupé-Cabriolet" label="Ford Focus Coupé-Cabriolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q571934" start="2246" end="2260" title="Ford of Europe" label="Ford of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q275747" start="2621" end="2632" title="Ford Mondeo" label="Ford Mondeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="2703" end="2718" title="concept car" label="concept vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q737526" start="2810" end="2815" title="Ford S-Max" label="S-Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q962328" start="2817" end="2821" title="Ford Edge" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q668293" start="2887" end="2891" title="Ford Kuga" label="Kuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625614" start="3150" end="3161" title="Abarth Cisitalia 204A" label="Abarth 204A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612629" start="3175" end="3197" title="Abarth 205A Berlinetta" label="Abarth 205A Berlinetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="3200" end="3210" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q980705" start="3233" end="3248" title="Alfa Romeo 1900" label="Alfa Romeo 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887809" start="3291" end="3306" title="Alfa Romeo 2000" label="Alfa Romeo 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q294663" start="3315" end="3334" title="American Motors AMX" label="American Motors AMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q749805" start="3348" end="3366" title="Aston Martin DB2/4" label="Aston Martin DB2/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093218" start="3375" end="3388" title="Cisitalia 202" label="Cisitalia 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q112741051" start="3400" end="3414" title="Cunningham C-3" label="Cunningham C-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157557" start="3437" end="3454" title="Daihatsu Compagno" label="Daihatsu Compagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180394" start="3457" end="3474" title="De Tomaso Pantera" label="De Tomaso Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147481" start="3495" end="3509" title="Ferrari 166 MM" label="Ferrari 166 MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576842" start="3529" end="3546" title="Ferrari 166 Inter" label="Ferrari 166 Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q785322" start="3555" end="3573" title="Ferrari 212 Export" label="Ferrari 212 Export"/>
<link wikidata="Q556469" start="3615" end="3632" title="Ferrari 212 Inter" label="Ferrari 212 Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407622" start="3663" end="3676" title="Ferrari 225 S" label="Ferrari 225 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069667" start="3696" end="3709" title="Ferrari 250 S" label="Ferrari 250 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069664" start="3718" end="3732" title="Ferrari 250 MM" label="Ferrari 250 MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353522" start="3752" end="3763" title="Ferrari 250" label="Ferrari 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069663" start="3790" end="3811" title="Ferrari 250 Europa GT" label="Ferrari 250 Europa GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892959" start="3820" end="3839" title="Ferrari America" label="Ferrari 340 America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633802" start="3859" end="3877" title="Ferrari 340 Mexico" label="Ferrari 340 Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633802" start="3897" end="3911" title="Ferrari 340 MM" label="Ferrari 340 MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892959" start="3921" end="3940" title="Ferrari America" label="Ferrari 342 America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126922" start="3953" end="3967" title="Ferrari 625 TF" label="Ferrari 625 TF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892959" start="3987" end="4006" title="Ferrari America" label="Ferrari 375 America"/>
<link wikidata="Q773154" start="4015" end="4026" title="Ferrari 330" label="Ferrari 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125433" start="4065" end="4073" title="Fiat 600" label="Fiat 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360944" start="4090" end="4098" title="Fiat 850" label="Fiat 850"/>
<link wikidata="Q647590" start="4124" end="4133" title="Fiat 1400 and 1900" label="Fiat 1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328423" start="4146" end="4164" title="Fiat 1300 and 1500" label="Fiat 1300 and 1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q494744" start="4204" end="4238" title="Fiat 124" label="Fiat 124 Coupé &amp;quot;Eveline&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q605272" start="4241" end="4276" title="Fiat 125" label="Fiat 125 Coupé &amp;quot;Samantha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410513" start="4280" end="4287" title="Fiat 8V" label="Fiat 8V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687448" start="4375" end="4393" title="Jensen Interceptor" label="Jensen Interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687449" start="4414" end="4423" title="Jensen FF" label="Jensen FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801826" start="4470" end="4482" title="Lancia Appia" label="Lancia Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926873" start="4552" end="4566" title="Lancia Aprilia" label="Lancia Aprilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801839" start="4593" end="4607" title="Lancia Aurelia" label="Lancia Aurelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801839" start="4643" end="4657" title="Lancia Aurelia" label="Lancia Aurelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054639" start="4698" end="4710" title="Enrico Nardi" label="Enrico Nardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q944280" start="4713" end="4726" title="Lancia Flavia" label="Lancia Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556825" start="4830" end="4842" title="Maserati A6G" label="Maserati A6G"/>
<link wikidata="Q556825" start="4872" end="4886" title="Maserati A6GCS" label="Maserati A6GCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850430" start="4973" end="4989" title="Maserati 3500 GT" label="Maserati 3500 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907047" start="5038" end="5054" title="Maserati Sebring" label="Maserati Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907023" start="5100" end="5115" title="Maserati Mexico" label="Maserati Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907012" start="5138" end="5154" title="Maserati 5000 GT" label="Maserati 5000 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907023" start="5183" end="5198" title="Maserati Mexico" label="Maserati Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767422" start="5224" end="5237" title="Maserati Indy" label="Maserati Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698418" start="5240" end="5250" title="Matra M530" label="Matra M530"/>
<link wikidata="Q936574" start="5269" end="5277" title="O.S.C.A." label="O.S.C.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q750433" start="5294" end="5307" title="Packard One-Twenty" label="Packard Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q338701" start="5383" end="5400" title="Standard Vanguard" label="Standard Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615446" start="5411" end="5420" title="Tatra 613" label="Tatra 613"/>
<link wikidata="Q847221" start="5454" end="5468" title="Triumph Italia" label="Triumph Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928948" start="5471" end="5485" title="Vignale Gamine" label="Vignale Gamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q606379" start="5548" end="5567" title="Giovanni Michelotti" label="Giovanni Michelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941159" start="5570" end="5584" title="Virginio Vairo" label="Virginio Vairo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758407" wikidata="Q1137640" url="?curid=758407" title="Haleakalā National Park">
<text>Haleakalā National Park is a national park of the United States located on the island of Maui, Hawaii. Named after Haleakalā, a dormant volcano within its boundaries, the park covers an area of , of which is a wilderness area. The land was designated a national park in 1976 and its boundaries expanded in 2005.

==History==
Haleakalā was originally part of Hawaii National Park along with the volcanoes of Mauna Loa and Kilauea on the island of Hawaii, created in 1916. Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park was made into a separate national park in 1961 by Bill S. 3623. The park area was designated an International Biosphere Reserve in 1980. The name &quot;Haleakalā&quot; is Hawaiian for &quot;house of the sun.&quot; According to a local legend, the demigod Maui imprisoned the sun here in order to lengthen the day. The Hawaiian National Park Language Correction Act of 2000 was proposed to observe the Hawaiian spelling, but it did not become law.

The park features the dormant Haleakalā (East Maui) Volcano, which last erupted sometime between 1480 and 1600 AD. The park is divided into two distinct sections: the summit area and the coastal Kipahulu area.

Haleakalā National Park has been a part of the Pacific West Region since its inception in 1961.

==Summit==
An extremely winding but well maintained road leads up the mountain. The summit area includes Haleakalā Crater, the summit of the volcano, and the area surrounding the summit. This part of the park is accessed by Hawaii State Road 378. There is a visitor center, with parking and restrooms, near the summit. At the summit itself is another parking lot and a simple observatory without facilities.
The main feature of this part of the park is Haleakalā Crater which, despite its name, is geologically an erosional valley. It is across, wide, and deep. The interior of the crater is dotted by numerous volcanic features, including large cinder cones. Two main trails lead into the crater from the summit area: the Halemau&#x27;u and Sliding Sands trails, both of which are designated as National Recreation Trails. Hikers in the crater can stay in one of three cabins.

Visitors frequently come to the summit of the volcano to watch the sunrise and/or sunset. One attraction of the park is Hosmer&#x27;s Grove, a unique forest of trees including deodar (&quot;Cedrus deodara&quot;) from the Himalayas, sugi (&quot;Cryptomeria japonica&quot;) from Japan, eucalyptus from Australia, and several species from North America (pine, spruce, cypress, fir, and others). Native plants and trees are also present in the forest but are not common because the taller alien trees leave them little light to grow.

The park is known for its volcanic features, its long scenic drive with numerous overlooks, and the unusually clear views of the night sky available. Haleakalā is one of the best places in the United States for amateur astronomy, and binoculars and telescopes are available for rent from many local merchants. &quot;Nēnē&quot; (Hawaiian geese, &quot;Branta sandvicensis&quot;) can also be seen in their natural habitat in Haleakalā Crater. Although &quot;nēnē&quot; died out entirely in the park, in 1946 they were re-introduced with the help of the Boy Scouts, who carried young birds into the crater in their backpacks.

==Climate==
At its lowest, near the ocean, the National Park has a tropical rainforest climate bordering a tropical monsoon climate. However, as altitudes progresses the climate becomes oceanic/Mediterranean, reaching, at the very top of Haleakalā, an alpine climate.

==Issues==

=== Feral ungulates ===
Grazing and rooting feral deer, goats, and pigs have been destroying native vegetation. They trample the ground and break down the native plants and cause soil erosion. Biodiversity has been compromised and is negatively affecting the groundwater reserve. 

=== Endangered species ===
=== Deferred Maintenance === 
As of 2018, the Park has deferred maintenance valued at $24,382,236. 49.8% of this number is from unpaved roads. The rest of the deferred maintenance cost range from trails, water systems, buildings, and campgrounds. To help combat this problem the Haleakalā friends group runs monthly service trips. This includes cleaning and scrubbing the cabins, the eradication of thistles, blackberries, and heterothecas. They also work on improving the nene habitat by removing invasive grass.

==Kipahulu==

The second section of the park is the Kipahulu section. Visitors cannot drive directly to this section from the summit area; they must take a winding coastal road that travels around the windward coast of the island. This part of the park lies within the lower part of Kipahulu Valley. It is separated from the summit area of the park by the upper portion of the valley. This area is designated the Kipahulu Valley Biological Reserve and is closed to the public to preserve the native plant and animal species in this fragile rainforest.

This section of the park features more than two dozen pools along Palikea Stream in the gulch called Oheo. These pools contain rare native freshwater fish. Visitors may choose to swim in these pools, or they may choose to hike a trail that takes visitors up to the base of Waimoku Falls.

==Flora and fauna==

More endangered species live in Haleakalā National Park than any other national park in the United States. Once traveling to this part of the island became more frequent, native species were destroyed. One example is the &quot;āhinahina&quot; (Haleakalā silversword, &quot;Argyroxiphium sandwicense macrocephalum&quot;), which formerly covered Haleakalā Mountain to a degree where the mountain looked as if it were covered with snow. Other endangered species include the endangered Haleakalā schiedea (&quot;Schiedea haleakalensis&quot;). Over 850 species of plants grow in the park and there are four endemic species of geraniums that are also found in the park.

The park is home to many tardigrade species surviving in the extreme environment near the mountain summit. In the 1980s, local biologist Sam Gon III discovered 31 tardigrade species here and described Haleakalā as the &quot;richest place on Earth for tardigrades&quot;.

The park is also home to 3 endemic Hawaiian Honeycreepers only on east Maui. These include Maui Alauahio, Akohekohe, and the Critically Endangered Kiwikiu with around 200 members left.

Native Invertebrates that live in the park include Insects, Spiders, and Snails. The insects and spiders live throughout the Rainforests and Shrublands of the park. While the snails are only found in the Park’s rainforests generally in the Kipahulu valley. Many of the park’s rarest snails are in the Partulina Genus. They are called Kāhuli in Hawaiian.

==Haleakalā Observatory==

Haleakalā Observatory is an observation site located near the visitor center. It lies above the tropical inversion layer and so experiences excellent viewing conditions and very clear skies. For over 40 years, the University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy has managed this site, conducting dedicated astrophysical experiments. One of its missions, the Maui Space Surveillance System (MSSS), tracks satellites and debris orbiting the Earth. The buildings are on a gated road just past the summit and are not within the park boundary.

== Superintendents of Haleakalā National Park ==
The first superintendent of Haleakalā National Park was John Stratton. The current one is Natalie Gates, she has been in this position since 2013. Although, there is not a full list of superintendents on public record, the following has been reported. 

John W. Stratton 10/19/1961 – 5/11/1963

Neal G. Guse 7/01/1963 – 7/15/1967

Forrest M. Benson Jr. 8/27/1967 – 6/14/1969

Lynn H. Thompson 6/29/1969 – 11/16/1970

Russell Cahill 1/17/1971 – 4/27/1974

Hugo H. Huntzinger 5/26/1974 – 12/19/1987

Peter G. Sanchez 12/20/1987 – 3/26/1988

Donald W. Reeser 3/27/1988 – ?

Sarah Creachbuam 2009 – 2012

Natalie Gates March 2013 – Present

==Gallery==
==See also==
* List of national parks of the United States

==References==
==External links==
* Haleakalā National Park – National Park Service
* Friends of Haleakalā National Park – nonprofit organization
* Haleakalā Biosphere Reserve (archive) – UNESCO website
* East Maui Watershed Partnership – nonprofit organization for cultural interpretation and restoration in Kipahulu district of Haleakalā National Park
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137640" start="0" end="23" title="Haleakalā National Park" label="Haleakalā National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="29" end="63" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="89" end="93" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q515719" start="115" end="124" title="Haleakalā" label="Haleakalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="210" end="225" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q159762" start="407" end="416" title="Mauna Loa" label="Mauna Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188698" start="421" end="428" title="Kilauea" label="Kilauea"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="432" end="452" title="Hawaii (island)" label="the island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q205952" start="471" end="502" title="Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park" label="Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="599" end="630" title="Biosphere reserve" label="International Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="674" end="682" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q515719" start="981" end="990" title="Haleakalā" label="Haleakalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q515719" start="1364" end="1380" title="Haleakalā" label="Haleakalā Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="1905" end="1916" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="2055" end="2080" title="National Recreation Trail" label="National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225686" start="2258" end="2277" title="Hosmer&amp;#x27;s Grove" label="Hosmer&amp;#x27;s Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q146935" start="2328" end="2342" title="Cedrus deodara" label="Cedrus deodara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="2359" end="2368" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147388" start="2382" end="2402" title="Cryptomeria" label="Cryptomeria japonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2415" end="2420" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="2422" end="2432" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2438" end="2447" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2474" end="2487" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="2489" end="2493" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="2495" end="2501" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="2503" end="2510" title="Cupressaceae" label="cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="2512" end="2515" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="2880" end="2897" title="amateur astronomy" label="amateur astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="2903" end="2913" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="2918" end="2927" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q687695" start="2997" end="3011" title="Hawaiian goose" label="Hawaiian geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438549" start="3219" end="3229" title="Scouting in Hawaii" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="3359" end="3386" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="3399" end="3423" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="3478" end="3485" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3486" end="3499" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q515719" start="3530" end="3539" title="Haleakalā" label="Haleakalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="3544" end="3558" title="alpine climate" label="alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="3617" end="3622" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414604" start="4449" end="4457" title="Kipahulu" label="Kipahulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q388423" start="4553" end="4573" title="Hana Highway" label="winding coastal road"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="4598" end="4606" title="Windward and leeward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817150" start="4937" end="4947" title="Hawaiian tropical rainforests" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q111449017" start="5051" end="5055" title="Pools of &amp;#x27;Ohe&amp;#x27;o" label="Oheo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5223" end="5236" title="Waimoku Falls" label="Waimoku Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="5331" end="5344" title="National Park Service" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455727" start="5504" end="5525" title="Haleakalā silversword" label="Haleakalā silversword"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431254" start="5742" end="5760" title="Schiedea haleakalensis" label="Haleakalā schiedea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194" start="5950" end="5960" title="tardigrade" label="tardigrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q118384187" start="6062" end="6069" title="Sam Gon" label="Sam Gon"/>
<link wikidata="Q904159" start="6231" end="6253" title="Hawaiian honeycreeper" label="Hawaiian Honeycreepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308758" start="6287" end="6300" title="Maui ʻalauahio" label="Maui Alauahio"/>
<link wikidata="Q591208" start="6302" end="6311" title="ʻAkohekohe" label="Akohekohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092092" start="6321" end="6350" title="Maui parrotbill" label="Critically Endangered Kiwikiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="6433" end="6440" title="Insect" label="Insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="6442" end="6449" title="Spider" label="Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="6455" end="6461" title="Snail" label="Snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817150" start="6507" end="6518" title="Hawaiian tropical rainforests" label="Rainforests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414604" start="6622" end="6637" title="Kipahulu, Hawaii" label="Kipahulu valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140867" start="6683" end="6692" title="Partulina" label="Partulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="6726" end="6734" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641443" start="6764" end="6785" title="Haleakalā Observatory" label="Haleakalā Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="6869" end="6884" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="6978" end="6998" title="University of Hawaii" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="8014" end="8057" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="8121" end="8142" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8247" end="8253" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758411" wikidata="Q588895" url="?curid=758411" title="2001 NBA draft">
<text>The 2001 NBA draft took place on June 27, 2001, in New York City, New York. Kwame Brown became the first high school player to be drafted with the first overall pick in the history of the NBA. The selection of Kwame Brown by the Washington Wizards, over players that have gone on to have more successful NBA careers, has been a source of great criticism by numerous media outlets. Several international players from this draft, Pau Gasol (Spain), Tony Parker (France) and Mehmet Okur (Turkey), became NBA All-Stars.

The Minnesota Timberwolves forfeited their first-round pick due to salary cap violations. It would be the first of two first rounders that would have to forfeit their picks during the early 2000s.

Eight of the players selected in this draft would never play in an NBA game in their professional basketball careers. Both of the players drafted by the New York Knicks (Michael Wright and Eric Chenowith) were among this group.
==Draft selections==



==Notable undrafted players==

These players were not selected in the draft but have played at least one game in the NBA.
==Early entrants==
===College underclassmen===
This year would officially mark the very first year where the number of underclassmen that declared their entry into the NBA draft would exceed the number of selections made with 75 players that fit the underclassmen criteria declaring their initial entry for the NBA draft. However, it would also mark the largest number of dropped players yet with 23 of those players either coming from college or overseas deciding to withdraw from the draft for one reason or another. The following college basketball players successfully applied for early draft entrance.
* Gilbert Arenas – G, Arizona (sophomore)
* Brandon Armstrong – G, Pepperdine (junior)
* Malcolm Battles – F, Point Mark (junior)
* Tavorris Bell – F, Rhode Island (junior)
* Preston Bennett – F, Grayson (freshman)
* Michael Bradley – F, Villanova (junior)
* Jamison Brewer – G, Auburn (sophomore)
* Kedrick Brown – F, Okaloosa-Walton CC (sophomore)
* SirValiant Brown – G, George Washington (sophomore)
* Nick Burwell – G, Orange Coast (sophomore)
* Jason Collins – C, Stanford (junior)
* Omar Cook – G, St. John&#x27;s (freshman)
* Samuel Dalembert – C/F, Seton Hall (sophomore)
* Maurice Evans – G, Texas (junior)
* Benjamin Eze – F, Southern Idaho (freshman)
* Alton Ford – F, Houston (freshman)
* Joseph Forte – G, North Carolina (sophomore)
* Jerry Green – G, UC Irvine (junior)
* Eddie Griffin – F, Seton Hall (freshman)
* Rob Griffin – F, Kentucky Wesleyan (junior)
* Trenton Hassell – G, Austin Peay (junior)
* Kirk Haston – F, Indiana (junior)
* Draper Housley – G, Lee College (sophomore)
* Steven Hunter – C/F, DePaul (sophomore)
* Richard Jefferson – F, Arizona (junior)
* Joe Johnson – F/G, Arkansas (sophomore)
* D. A. Layne – G, Georgia (junior)
* Zach Marbury – G, Rhode Island (sophomore)
* Jamario Moon – F, Meridian (freshman)
* Troy Murphy – F, Notre Dame (junior)
* Zach Randolph – F, Michigan State (freshman)
* Jason Richardson – G, Michigan State (sophomore)
* Kenny Satterfield – G, Cincinnati (sophomore)
* Bobby Simmons – F, DePaul (junior)
* Will Solomon – G, Clemson (junior)
* Clifton Terry – F, Kennedy–King (sophomore)
* Gerald Wallace – F/G, Alabama (freshman)
* Rodney White – F, Charlotte (freshman)
* Michael Wright – F, Arizona (junior)
===High school players===
This would be the seventh straight year in a row where at least one high school player would declare their entry into the NBA draft directly out of high school after previously only allowing it one time back in 1975. This year would also mark the year with the highest amount of players coming directly out of high school yet with six players deciding to make the jump into an opportunity at the NBA (though only five of them would get it). Not only that, but it marked the first time that a high schooler would be taken as the #1 pick of the NBA draft. The following high school players successfully applied for early draft entrance.
* Kwame Brown – F, Glynn Academy (Brunswick, Georgia)
* Tyson Chandler – F/C, Dominguez High School (Compton, California)
* Ousmane Cisse – F, St. Jude Educational Institute (Montgomery, Alabama)
* Eddy Curry – C/F, Thornwood High School (South Holland, Illinois)
* DeSagana Diop – C, Oak Hill Academy (Mouth of Wilson, Virginia)
* Tony Key – C, Centennial High School (Compton, California)
===International players===
The following international players successfully applied for early draft entrance.
* Denis Ershov – C, Pulkovo Saint Petersburg (Russia)
* Antonis Fotsis – F, Panathinaikos (Greece)
* Pau Gasol – F, FC Barcelona (Spain)
* Raül López – G, Real Madrid (Spain)
* Tony Parker – G, Paris Basket Racing (France)
* Vladimir Radmanović – F, FMP (FR Yugoslavia)
===Other eligible players===
==See also==
* List of first overall NBA draft picks
* NBA records

==References==
==External links==
* NBA.com: 2001 NBA Draft
* Basketball Reference: 2001 NBA Draft</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q588895" start="4" end="18" title="2001 NBA draft" label="2001 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="51" end="64" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q317037" start="76" end="87" title="Kwame Brown" label="Kwame Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="229" end="247" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193052" start="428" end="437" title="Pau Gasol" label="Pau Gasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193108" start="447" end="458" title="Tony Parker" label="Tony Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q317045" start="472" end="483" title="Mehmet Okur" label="Mehmet Okur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740530" start="501" end="514" title="NBA All-Stars" label="NBA All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170558" start="521" end="543" title="Minnesota Timberwolves" label="Minnesota Timberwolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="584" end="594" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="868" end="883" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q661226" start="904" end="918" title="Eric Chenowith" label="Eric Chenowith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="1622" end="1640" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q310108" start="1698" end="1712" title="Gilbert Arenas" label="Gilbert Arenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791464" start="1718" end="1725" title="Arizona Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617911" start="1740" end="1757" title="Brandon Armstrong" label="Brandon Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166404" start="1763" end="1773" title="Pepperdine Waves men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Pepperdine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208107" start="1806" end="1816" title="Point Park Pioneers" label="Point Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689157" start="1828" end="1841" title="Tavorris Bell" label="Tavorris Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320948" start="1847" end="1859" title="Rhode Island Rams men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598396" start="1892" end="1899" title="Grayson College" label="Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619538" start="1913" end="1928" title="Michael Bradley (basketball)" label="Michael Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930886" start="1934" end="1943" title="Villanova Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q975550" start="1955" end="1969" title="Jamison Brewer" label="Jamison Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819312" start="1975" end="1981" title="Auburn Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Auburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607286" start="1996" end="2009" title="Kedrick Brown" label="Kedrick Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060041" start="2015" end="2033" title="Northwest Florida State College" label="Okaloosa-Walton CC"/>
<link wikidata="Q88536234" start="2048" end="2064" title="SirValiant Brown" label="SirValiant Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984247" start="2070" end="2087" title="George Washington Colonials men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099536" start="2120" end="2132" title="Orange Coast College" label="Orange Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317740" start="2147" end="2160" title="Jason Collins" label="Jason Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598726" start="2166" end="2174" title="Stanford Cardinal men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q971463" start="2186" end="2195" title="Omar Cook" label="Omar Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588820" start="2201" end="2216" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Red Storm men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q371821" start="2230" end="2246" title="Samuel Dalembert" label="Samuel Dalembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456785" start="2254" end="2264" title="Seton Hall Pirates men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Seton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738595" start="2279" end="2292" title="Maurice Evans (basketball)" label="Maurice Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707830" start="2298" end="2303" title="Texas Longhorns men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638247" start="2315" end="2327" title="Benjamin Eze" label="Benjamin Eze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146837" start="2333" end="2347" title="College of Southern Idaho" label="Southern Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613321" start="2361" end="2371" title="Alton Ford" label="Alton Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916449" start="2377" end="2384" title="Houston Cougars men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q729319" start="2398" end="2410" title="Joseph Forte" label="Joseph Forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412061" start="2416" end="2430" title="North Carolina Tar Heels men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687827" start="2445" end="2456" title="Jerry Green (basketball, born 1980)" label="Jerry Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864172" start="2462" end="2471" title="UC Irvine Anteaters men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="UC Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q941832" start="2483" end="2496" title="Eddie Griffin (basketball)" label="Eddie Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456785" start="2502" end="2512" title="Seton Hall Pirates men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Seton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392424" start="2543" end="2560" title="Kentucky Wesleyan Panthers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Kentucky Wesleyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560840" start="2572" end="2587" title="Trenton Hassell" label="Trenton Hassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823226" start="2593" end="2604" title="Austin Peay Governors men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Austin Peay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620628" start="2616" end="2627" title="Kirk Haston" label="Kirk Haston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023245" start="2633" end="2640" title="Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2672" end="2683" title="Lee College#Athletics" label="Lee College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529656" start="2698" end="2711" title="Steven Hunter" label="Steven Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244031" start="2719" end="2725" title="DePaul Blue Demons men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="DePaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q377693" start="2740" end="2757" title="Richard Jefferson" label="Richard Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791464" start="2763" end="2770" title="Arizona Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q132208" start="2782" end="2793" title="Joe Johnson (basketball)" label="Joe Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866524" start="2801" end="2809" title="Arkansas Razorbacks men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547369" start="2841" end="2848" title="Georgia Bulldogs men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320948" start="2878" end="2890" title="Rhode Island Rams men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q556685" start="2905" end="2917" title="Jamario Moon" label="Jamario Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819301" start="2923" end="2931" title="Meridian Community College" label="Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q456702" start="2945" end="2956" title="Troy Murphy" label="Troy Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063408" start="2962" end="2972" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q139376" start="2984" end="2997" title="Zach Randolph" label="Zach Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856893" start="3003" end="3017" title="Michigan State Spartans men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Michigan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685" start="3031" end="3047" title="Jason Richardson" label="Jason Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856893" start="3053" end="3067" title="Michigan State Spartans men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Michigan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q370011" start="3082" end="3099" title="Kenny Satterfield" label="Kenny Satterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120215" start="3105" end="3115" title="Cincinnati Bearcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477269" start="3130" end="3143" title="Bobby Simmons" label="Bobby Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244031" start="3149" end="3155" title="DePaul Blue Demons men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="DePaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088051" start="3167" end="3179" title="Will Solomon" label="Will Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131568" start="3185" end="3192" title="Clemson Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Clemson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389707" start="3223" end="3235" title="Kennedy–King College" label="Kennedy–King"/>
<link wikidata="Q317583" start="3250" end="3264" title="Gerald Wallace" label="Gerald Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705230" start="3272" end="3279" title="Alabama Crimson Tide men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714935" start="3293" end="3305" title="Rodney White" label="Rodney White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085814" start="3311" end="3320" title="Charlotte 49ers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602217" start="3334" end="3348" title="Michael Wright (basketball)" label="Michael Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791464" start="3354" end="3361" title="Arizona Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q338241" start="3608" end="3612" title="1975 NBA draft" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q317037" start="4034" end="4045" title="Kwame Brown" label="Kwame Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572959" start="4051" end="4064" title="Glynn Academy" label="Glynn Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q994144" start="4066" end="4084" title="Brunswick, Georgia" label="Brunswick, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297146" start="4088" end="4102" title="Tyson Chandler" label="Tyson Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752537" start="4110" end="4131" title="Dominguez High School" label="Dominguez High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="4133" end="4152" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q389708" start="4156" end="4169" title="Ousmane Cisse" label="Ousmane Cisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589407" start="4175" end="4205" title="St. Jude Educational Institute" label="St. Jude Educational Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="4207" end="4226" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q446513" start="4230" end="4240" title="Eddy Curry" label="Eddy Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796596" start="4248" end="4269" title="Thornwood High School" label="Thornwood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q404614" start="4271" end="4294" title="South Holland, Illinois" label="South Holland, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179612" start="4298" end="4311" title="DeSagana Diop" label="DeSagana Diop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073561" start="4317" end="4333" title="Oak Hill Academy (Mouth of Wilson, Virginia)" label="Oak Hill Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926358" start="4335" end="4360" title="Mouth of Wilson, Virginia" label="Mouth of Wilson, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059155" start="4378" end="4400" title="Centennial High School (Compton, California)" label="Centennial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="4402" end="4421" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q471572" start="4590" end="4604" title="Antonis Fotsis" label="Antonis Fotsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q739287" start="4610" end="4623" title="Panathinaikos B.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q29274" start="4625" end="4631" title="Greek Basket League" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q193052" start="4635" end="4644" title="Pau Gasol" label="Pau Gasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q54893" start="4650" end="4662" title="FC Barcelona Bàsquet" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126104" start="4664" end="4669" title="Liga ACB" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q360894" start="4673" end="4683" title="Raül López (basketball)" label="Raül López"/>
<link wikidata="Q54922" start="4689" end="4700" title="Real Madrid Baloncesto" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126104" start="4702" end="4707" title="Liga ACB" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193108" start="4711" end="4722" title="Tony Parker" label="Tony Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q638938" start="4728" end="4747" title="Paris Basket Racing" label="Paris Basket Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331514" start="4749" end="4755" title="Ligue nationale de basket" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q357295" start="4759" end="4778" title="Vladimir Radmanović" label="Vladimir Radmanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389285" start="4784" end="4787" title="KK FMP (1991–2011)" label="FMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4510963" start="4789" end="4802" title="YUBA League" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q144104" start="4848" end="4885" title="List of first overall NBA draft picks" label="List of first overall NBA draft picks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454148" start="4888" end="4899" title="NBA records" label="NBA records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758413" wikidata="Q315545" url="?curid=758413" title="James Jeans">
<text>Sir James Hopwood Jeans (11 September 1877 – 16 September 1946) was an English physicist, mathematician and an astronomer. He served as a secretary of the Royal Society from 1919 to 1929, and was the president of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1925 to 1927, and won its Gold Medal.

==Early life==
Born in Ormskirk, Lancashire, the son of William Tulloch Jeans, a parliamentary correspondent and author. Jeans was educated at Merchant Taylors&#x27; School, Wilson&#x27;s Grammar School, Camberwell and Trinity College, Cambridge.
As a gifted student, Jeans was counselled to take an aggressive approach to the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos competition:
==Career==
Jeans was elected Fellow of Trinity College in October 1901, and taught at Cambridge, but went to Princeton University in 1904 as a professor of applied mathematics. He returned to Cambridge in 1910.

He made important contributions in many areas of physics, including quantum theory, the theory of radiation and stellar evolution. His analysis of rotating bodies led him to conclude that Pierre-Simon Laplace&#x27;s theory that the solar system formed from a single cloud of gas was incorrect, proposing instead that the planets condensed from material drawn out of the sun by a hypothetical catastrophic near-collision with a passing star. This theory is not accepted today.

Jeans, along with Arthur Eddington, is a founder of British cosmology. In 1928, Jeans was the first to conjecture a steady state cosmology based on a hypothesized continuous creation of matter in the universe. In his book &quot;Astronomy and Cosmogony&quot; (1928) he stated: &quot;The type of conjecture which presents itself, somewhat insistently, is that the centers of the nebulae are of the nature &#x27;singular points&#x27; at which matter is poured into our universe from some other, and entirely extraneous spatial dimension, so that, to a denizen of our universe, they appear as points at which matter is being continually created.&quot; This theory fell out of favour when the 1965 discovery of the cosmic microwave background was widely interpreted as the tell-tale signature of the Big Bang.

His scientific reputation is grounded in the monographs &quot;The Dynamical Theory of Gases&quot; (1904), &quot;Theoretical Mechanics&quot; (1906), and &quot;Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism&quot; (1908). After retiring in 1929, he wrote a number of books for the lay public, including &quot;The Stars in Their Courses&quot; (1931), &quot;The Universe Around Us&quot;, &quot;Through Space and Time&quot; (1934), &quot;The New Background of Science&quot; (1933), and &quot;The Mysterious Universe.&quot; These books made Jeans fairly well known as an expositor of the revolutionary scientific discoveries of his day, especially in relativity and physical cosmology.

In 1939, the Journal of the British Astronomical Association reported that Jeans was going to stand as a candidate for parliament for the Cambridge University constituency. The election, expected to take place in 1939 or 1940, did not take place until 1945, and without his involvement.

He also wrote the book &quot;Physics and Philosophy&quot; (1943) where he explores the different views on reality from two different perspectives: science and philosophy. On his religious views, Jeans was an agnostic Freemason.

==Personal life==
Jeans married twice, first to the American poet Charlotte Tiffany Mitchell in 1907, who died, and then to the Austrian organist and harpsichordist Suzanne Hock (better known as Susi Jeans) in 1935. Susi and Jeans had three children: George, Christopher, and Catherine. As a birthday present for his wife, he wrote the book &quot;Science and Music&quot;.

=== Death ===
Jeans died in 1947 with the presence of his wife and Joy Adamson, who suggested to the widow to create a death mask of Jeans. It is now held by the Royal Society.

==Major accomplishments==
One of Jeans&#x27; major discoveries, named Jeans length, is a critical radius of an interstellar cloud in space. It depends on the temperature, and density of the cloud, and the mass of the particles composing the cloud. A cloud that is smaller than its Jeans length will not have sufficient gravity to overcome the repulsive gas pressure forces and condense to form a star, whereas a cloud that is larger than its Jeans length will collapse.

:formula_1

Jeans came up with another version of this equation, called Jeans mass or Jeans instability, that solves for the critical mass a cloud must attain before being able to collapse.

Jeans also helped to discover the Rayleigh–Jeans law, which relates the energy density of black-body radiation to the temperature of the emission source.

:formula_2

Jeans is also credited with calculating the rate of atmospheric escape from a planet due to kinetic energy of the gas molecules, a process known as Jeans escape.

==Idealism==
Jeans espoused a philosophy of science rooted in the metaphysical doctrine of idealism and opposed to materialism in his speaking engagements and books. His popular science publications first advanced these ideas in 1929&#x27;s &quot;The Universe Around Us&quot; when he likened &quot;discussing the creation of the universe in terms of time and space,&quot; to, &quot;trying to discover the artist and the action of painting, by going to the edge of the canvas.&quot; But he turned to this idea as the primary subject of his best-selling 1930 book, &quot;The Mysterious Universe&quot;, where he asserted that a picture of the universe as a &quot;non-mechanical reality&quot; was emerging from the science of the day.

In a 1931 interview published in &quot;The Observer&quot;, Jeans was asked if he believed that life was an accident or if it was, &quot;part of some great scheme.&quot; He said that he favored, &quot;the idealistic theory that consciousness is fundamental, and that the material universe is derivative from consciousness,&quot; going on to suggest that, &quot;each individual consciousness ought to be compared to a brain-cell in a universal mind.&quot;

In his 1934 address to the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Aberdeen as the Association&#x27;s president, Jeans spoke specifically to the work of Descartes and its relevance to the modern philosophy of science. He argued that, &quot;There is no longer room for the kind of dualism which has haunted philosophy since the days of Descartes.&quot;

When Daniel Helsing reviewed &quot;The Mysterious Universe&quot; for Physics Today in 2020, he summarized the philosophical conclusions of the book, &quot;Jeans argues that we must give up science&#x27;s long-cherished materialistic and mechanical worldview, which posits that nature operates like a machine and consists solely of material particles interacting with each other.&quot; His evaluation of Jeans contrasted these philosophical views with modern science communicators such as Neil deGrasse Tyson and Sean Carroll who he suggested, &quot;would likely take issue with Jeans&#x27;s idealism.&quot;

==Awards and honours==
* Fellow of the Royal Society in May 1906
* Bakerian Lecture to Royal Society in 1917.
* Royal Medal of the Royal Society in 1919.
* Hopkins Prize of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 1921–1924.
* Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1922.
* He was knighted in 1928.
* Franklin Medal of the Franklin Institute in 1931.
* In 1933 Jeans was invited to deliver the Royal Institution Christmas Lecture on &quot;Through Space and Time&quot;.
* Mukerjee Medal of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science in 1937.
* President of the 25th session of the Indian Science Congress in 1938.
* Calcutta Medal of the Indian Science Congress Association in 1938.
* Lorimer Medal of the Astronomical Society of Edinburgh in 1938 for which he gave the Lorimer Lecture: &quot;The Depths of Space&quot;.
* Member of the Order of Merit in 1939.
* The crater Jeans on the Moon is named after him, as is the crater Jeans on Mars.
* The String Quartet No.7 by Robert Simpson was written in tribute to him on the centenary of his birth, 1977.

==Bibliography==
The Astronmical Horizon https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B000NIS57O?ref=myi_title_dp- The Philip Maurice Deneke Lecture 1944 - Published Oxford University Press 1945
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==References==
==Sources==
* (quoting Jeans, The Mysterious Universe, p. 134).
*
==External links==
* Britannica article includes photo

;Works of Jeans available online from the Internet Archive
*1904. &quot;The Dynamical Theory of Gases&quot;
*1906. &quot;Theoretical Mechanics&quot;
*1908. &quot;Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism&quot;
*1947. &quot;The Growth of Physical Science&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315545" start="0" end="23" title="James Jeans" label="Sir James Hopwood Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="79" end="88" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="90" end="103" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="111" end="121" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="155" end="168" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="217" end="243" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="275" end="285" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020958" start="311" end="319" title="Ormskirk" label="Ormskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="321" end="331" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176977" start="344" end="365" title="William Tulloch Jeans" label="William Tulloch Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921431" start="431" end="460" title="Merchant Taylors&amp;#x27; School, Northwood" label="Merchant Taylors&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022921" start="462" end="490" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s School" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="492" end="502" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="507" end="533" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="615" end="644" title="Cambridge Mathematical Tripos" label="Cambridge Mathematical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="687" end="693" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="767" end="787" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="938" end="952" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="968" end="977" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="982" end="999" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="1058" end="1078" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="1365" end="1381" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="1407" end="1416" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="1463" end="1485" title="steady state cosmology" label="steady state cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="2057" end="2084" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="2142" end="2150" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771601" start="2508" end="2530" title="The Universe Around Us" label="The Universe Around Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752862" start="2641" end="2664" title="The Mysterious Universe" label="The Mysterious Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="2799" end="2809" title="theory of relativity" label="relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="2814" end="2832" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296120" start="2848" end="2895" title="Journal of the British Astronomical Association" label="Journal of the British Astronomical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025572" start="2973" end="3006" title="Cambridge University (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cambridge University constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3340" end="3349" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="3489" end="3494" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="3502" end="3513" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648992" start="3547" end="3557" title="Susi Jeans" label="Susi Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q93645" start="3792" end="3803" title="Joy Adamson" label="Joy Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40555" start="3844" end="3854" title="death mask" label="death mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="3887" end="3900" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130216" start="3973" end="3985" title="Jeans length" label="Jeans length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054444" start="4014" end="4032" title="interstellar cloud" label="interstellar cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130216" start="4460" end="4477" title="Jeans instability" label="Jeans instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q849484" start="4599" end="4617" title="Rayleigh–Jeans law" label="Rayleigh–Jeans law"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="4655" end="4675" title="black-body radiation" label="black-body radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568436" start="4784" end="4802" title="atmospheric escape" label="atmospheric escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="4986" end="4994" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="5010" end="5021" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771601" start="5142" end="5164" title="The Universe Around Us" label="The Universe Around Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752862" start="5464" end="5487" title="The Mysterious Universe" label="The Mysterious Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="5666" end="5678" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894142" start="6059" end="6073" title="universal mind" label="universal mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="6257" end="6266" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="6384" end="6391" title="Mind-body dualism" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310903" start="6945" end="6964" title="Neil deGrasse Tyson" label="Neil deGrasse Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129354" start="6969" end="6981" title="Sean M. Carroll" label="Sean Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="7090" end="7117" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107771" start="7132" end="7148" title="Bakerian Lecture" label="Bakerian Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="7152" end="7165" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q746756" start="7177" end="7188" title="Royal Medal" label="Royal Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="7196" end="7209" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7221" end="7234" title="Hopkins Prize" label="Hopkins Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025493" start="7242" end="7273" title="Cambridge Philosophical Society" label="Cambridge Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="7287" end="7331" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="7350" end="7356" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141777" start="7370" end="7384" title="Franklin Medal" label="Franklin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="7392" end="7410" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="7463" end="7498" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Royal Institution Christmas Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347871" start="7562" end="7611" title="Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science" label="Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7660" end="7683" title="Indian Science Congress Association#Indian Science Congress sessions" label="Indian Science Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633050" start="7717" end="7752" title="Indian Science Congress Association" label="Indian Science Congress Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q107596477" start="7785" end="7818" title="Astronomical Society of Edinburgh" label="Astronomical Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="7915" end="7929" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807749" start="7952" end="7957" title="Jeans (lunar crater)" label="Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8007" end="8012" title="List of craters on Mars: H-N#J" label="Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936004" start="8051" end="8065" title="Robert Simpson (composer)" label="Robert Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="8506" end="8522" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758416" wikidata="Q6549879" url="?curid=758416" title="Knock Three Times">
<text>&quot;Knock Three Times&quot; 
is a popular song credited simply to &quot;Dawn&quot;, obscuring the actual performers. The song was released as a single which hit No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in January 1971 and eventually sold six million copies. It reached No. 2 on &quot;&#x27;Billboard&quot;″s &quot;Easy Listening&quot; survey. Outside the US, &quot;Knock Three Times&quot; also claimed the No. 1 spot on the UK Singles Chart.

==Background==
&quot;Knock Three Times&quot; has roots in the Tokens. The first Dawn song &quot;Candida&quot; was produced by Tokens member Hank Medress and his business partner Dave Appell in May 1970. Session musicians and some Tokens members sang and played drums on the track. Medress did not like the sound of the lead singer, and replaced him with his friend Tony Orlando who had already enjoyed limited success singing &quot;Bless You&quot; and &quot;Halfway to Paradise&quot; in 1961. By 1970, Orlando had abandoned his singing career and was working as an executive at April-Blackwood Music, a subsidiary of Columbia Records. He was hoping for a promotion which made him worried about the conflict of interest inherent in his recording vocals for competitor Bell Records, so he only agreed to sing anonymously. &quot;Candida&quot; turned out to be a hit song, and Bell asked Orlando to sing another tune anonymously. Dawn was not an actual musical group at the time; the name was chosen because Bell Records executive Steve Wax had a daughter named Lisa Dawn Wax.

==Recording and release==
&quot;Candida&quot; co-writer Irwin Levine joined with Larry Brown to write &quot;Knock Three Times&quot;. As &quot;Candida&quot; was peaking on the US pop chart in October 1970, Medress brought Orlando back to the studio with backing singers Jay Siegel of the Tokens, Robin Grean, and Toni Wine. Wine remembers Linda November singing on this session. The singers were veterans of the &quot;Candida&quot; recording session, and Wine was co-writer of &quot;Candida&quot; with Levine. They recorded &quot;Knock Three Times&quot; together. This was the first time Orlando met any of the musicians involved with &quot;Candida&quot;. 

&quot;Knock Three Times&quot; hit No. 1 in January 1971. Bell Records promised Orlando royalties from the song, and he confessed his outside involvement to his employer, who told him it was fine as long as he did not tour, and instructed him to put some April-Blackwood Music songs on the associated album, &quot;Candida&quot;. Orlando agreed at first, but soon quit his job to begin touring. To promote the song, a touring version of Dawn was needed. Producer Tony Camillo recommended the duo of cousins Telma Hopkins and Joyce Vincent, who expected only a short employment contract as Dawn. The women liked working with Orlando, and after the tour was finished, the three recorded more hit songs as Tony Orlando and Dawn, starting with 1973&#x27;s &quot;Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree&quot;.

==Personnel==
;Studio session 1970 as Dawn
*Tony Orlando – lead vocals
*Toni Wine – backing vocals
*Jay Siegel – backing vocals
*Robin Grean – backing vocals
*Linda November – backing vocals 

;Touring group from 1971 billed as Tony Orlando and Dawn 
*Tony Orlando – lead vocals
*Telma Hopkins – backing vocals
*Joyce Vincent – backing vocals

==Cover versions==
The song was covered by Billy &quot;Crash&quot; Craddock in 1971 and became a No. 3 country hit. Craddock&#x27;s version had a faster tempo and included Cajun fiddles. The song largely introduced Craddock and his country rock-styled sound to a wider country audience, and began a string of hits that continued into the early 1980s.

==Popular culture==
&quot;Knock Three Times&quot; appears in several motion pictures including &quot;Now and Then&quot;.

Several Larry Craig–themed parodies (all titled &quot;Tap Three Times&quot;) were recorded by various artists such as Paul and Storm and the Capitol Steps in 2007 following the senator&#x27;s sex scandal in which he was arrested for tapping his foot (to allegedly solicit sex) in a public airport restroom.

==Chart performance==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===
===All-time charts===


==Certifications==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6549879" start="6" end="23" title="Knock Three Times" label="Knock Three Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="36" end="48" title="popular song" label="popular song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178760" start="74" end="78" title="Tony Orlando and Dawn" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="146" end="152" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="176" end="205" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="428" end="444" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231" start="505" end="515" title="the Tokens" label="the Tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031722" start="543" end="550" title="Candida (song)" label="Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132347" start="587" end="599" title="Hank Medress" label="Hank Medress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228243" start="625" end="636" title="Dave Appell" label="Dave Appell"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="812" end="824" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973432" start="879" end="888" title="Bless You (Tony Orlando song)" label="Bless You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641971" start="905" end="924" title="Halfway to Paradise" label="Halfway to Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="1064" end="1080" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="1145" end="1165" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883239" start="1214" end="1226" title="Bell Records" label="Bell Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075084" start="1577" end="1589" title="Irwin Levine" label="Irwin Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456618" start="1602" end="1613" title="L. Russell Brown" label="Larry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821357" start="1833" end="1842" title="Toni Wine" label="Toni Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551862" start="1859" end="1873" title="Linda November" label="Linda November"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031719" start="2491" end="2498" title="Candida (album)" label="Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822014" start="2639" end="2651" title="Tony Camillo" label="Tony Camillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q272896" start="2683" end="2696" title="Telma Hopkins" label="Telma Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297647" start="2701" end="2714" title="Joyce Vincent Wilson" label="Joyce Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178760" start="2879" end="2900" title="Tony Orlando and Dawn" label="Tony Orlando and Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349961" start="2934" end="2976" title="Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree" label="Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="3029" end="3041" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821357" start="3057" end="3066" title="Toni Wine" label="Toni Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551862" start="3144" end="3158" title="Linda November" label="Linda November"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178760" start="3213" end="3234" title="Tony Orlando and Dawn" label="Tony Orlando and Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="3237" end="3249" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q272896" start="3265" end="3278" title="Telma Hopkins" label="Telma Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297647" start="3297" end="3310" title="Joyce Vincent Wilson" label="Joyce Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q863285" start="3372" end="3404" title="Billy &amp;quot;Crash&amp;quot; Craddock" label="Billy &amp;quot;Crash&amp;quot; Craddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="3432" end="3439" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="3501" end="3506" title="Cajun" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="3507" end="3514" title="Violin" label="fiddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q614966" start="3782" end="3794" title="Now and Then (film)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q371025" start="3811" end="3822" title="Larry Craig" label="Larry Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154562" start="3921" end="3935" title="Paul and Storm" label="Paul and Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q144914" start="3940" end="3957" title="the Capitol Steps" label="the Capitol Steps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758426" wikidata="Q1011711" url="?curid=758426" title="Phonsavan">
<text>Phonsavan (also spelled Phonesavanh, , ), population 37,507, is the capital of Xiangkhouang Province. Phonsavan was built in the late-1970s and replaced old Xiang Khouang (today known as Muang Khoune), which was destroyed during the Second Indochina War.

Phonsavan is known for the nearby Plain of Jars, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The main economic activities in Phonsavan are based on governmental administration, mining by Chinese and Australian companies, tourism, and the work of non-governmental organizations clearing unexploded ordnance (UXO).

== History ==
While the origin of the Plain of Jars people is unknown, the recorded history of Xiangkhouang is interlinked with the Tai Phuan. The Tai Phuan or Phuan people are a Buddhist Tai-Lao ethnic group that migrated to Laos from southern China and by the 13th century had formed the independent principality of Muang Phuan at the Plain of Jars, with Xiangkhouang (contemporary Muang Khoun) as the capital. They prospered from the overland trade in metals and forest products. In the mid-14th century, Muang Phuan was incorporated into the Lan Xang kingdom under King Fa Ngum.

The Phuan population were able to retain a high degree of autonomy, although they had to pay tax and tribute to Lan Xang. During the 16th century expressive Buddhist art and architecture flourished. The capital was dotted with temples in a distinct Xiangkhouang style, with simple low roofs and a characteristic &quot;waist&quot; at the foundation. In 1930, Le Boulanger described it as &quot;a large and beautiful city, protected by wide moats and forts occupying the surrounding hills; and the opulence of the sixty-two pagodas and their stupas, of which the flanks concealed treasures, obtained the capital a fame that spread fear wide and far.&quot;

After the Kingdom of Siam (contemporary Thailand) extended control to Laotian territories east of the Mekong in the 1770s, Muang Phuan became a Siamese vassal state and also maintained tributary relations with Đại Việt (contemporary Vietnam). To exert greater control of the lands and people of Muang Phuan, the Siamese launched three separate campaigns (1777–1779, 1834–1836, and 1875–1876) to resettle large parts of the Phuan population to the south into regions under firm Siamese control. Subsequent invasions by Haw marauders and splinter groups of ex-Taiping Rebellion revolutionaries from southern China plundered Luang Prabang and Xiangkhouang in the 1870s, and desecrated and destroyed the temples of the Phuan region.

The Franco-Siamese treaties of the 1890s placed Xiangkhouang under colonial rule as part of French Indochina until shortly after World War II. The French used Xiangkhouang as their provincial capital. A few ruined colonial public buildings remain, such as the governor&#x27;s residence, church, and the French school.

During the Laotian Civil War, Xiangkhouang was the scene of extensive ground battles and intense aerial bombardment due to its strategic importance. Houaphanh and Xiangkhouang provinces were strongholds of Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese allies. The covert air campaign conducted by the United States Air Force, either to neutralize communist forces or to drop unused ordnance after returning from missions in Vietnam, turned Laos into the most heavily-bombed nation in world history.

Phonsavan was built after the fighting ended in 1975 to replace the former provincial capital, Muang Khoun (old Xiang Khouang), which was destroyed by wartime bombing and only partially rebuilt since.

== Climate ==
Phonsavan has humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cwa&quot;) tempered by its high elevation (1,100 m). The city has long, warm, wet summers and short, dry winters. Average June temperature is 23.6 °C, average December (the coldest month) temperature is 14.8 °C.

==See also==
*Ban Phou Pheung Noi

== References ==
==External links==
*
*Eco-tourism Laos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1011711" start="0" end="9" title="Phonsavan" label="Phonsavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011711" start="24" end="35" title="Phonsavan" label="Phonesavanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q465947" start="79" end="100" title="Xiangkhouang Province" label="Xiangkhouang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402644" start="187" end="199" title="Khoune district" label="Muang Khoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="233" end="253" title="Vietnam War" label="Second Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q870258" start="290" end="303" title="Plain of Jars" label="Plain of Jars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="314" end="333" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="488" end="517" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="528" end="547" title="unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367016" start="688" end="697" title="Phuan people" label="Tai Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="801" end="806" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186434" start="874" end="885" title="Muang Phuan" label="Muang Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q853477" start="1102" end="1110" title="Lan Xang" label="Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q532364" start="1130" end="1137" title="Fa Ngum" label="Fa Ngum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="1297" end="1309" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="1805" end="1820" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1835" end="1843" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="1897" end="1903" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q430309" start="2005" end="2013" title="Đại Việt" label="Đại Việt"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="2028" end="2035" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164157" start="2300" end="2326" title="Haw wars" label="invasions by Haw marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="2353" end="2370" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="2617" end="2633" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2654" end="2666" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="2855" end="2872" title="Laotian Civil War" label="Laotian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q502997" start="2993" end="3002" title="Houaphanh province" label="Houaphanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q465947" start="3007" end="3019" title="Xiangkhouang province" label="Xiangkhouang"/>
<link wikidata="Q858887" start="3050" end="3060" title="Pathet Lao" label="Pathet Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="3078" end="3091" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096792" start="3107" end="3126" title="Operation Barrel Roll" label="covert air campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3144" end="3167" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402644" start="3438" end="3449" title="Khoune district" label="Muang Khoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3573" end="3598" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3600" end="3606" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108795881" start="3840" end="3859" title="Ban Phou Pheung Noi" label="Ban Phou Pheung Noi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758427" wikidata="Q2632045" url="?curid=758427" title="Anglo-Australian Telescope">
<text>The Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) is a 3.9-metre equatorially mounted telescope operated by the Australian Astronomical Observatory and situated at the Siding Spring Observatory, Australia, at an altitude of a little over 1,100 m. In 2009, the telescope was ranked as having the fifth-highest-impact of the world&#x27;s optical telescopes. In 2001–2003, it was considered the most scientifically productive 4-metre-class optical telescope in the world based on scientific publications using data from the telescope.

The telescope was commissioned in 1974 with a view to allowing high-quality observations of the sky from the Southern Hemisphere. At the time, most major telescopes were located in the Northern Hemisphere, leaving the southern skies poorly observed. It was the largest telescope in the Southern Hemisphere from 1974 to 1976, then a close second to the Víctor M. Blanco Telescope from 1976 until 1998, when the first ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT) was opened. The AAT was credited with stimulating a resurgence in British optical astronomy. It was built by the United Kingdom in partnership with Australia but has been entirely funded by Australia since 2010. Observing time is available to astronomers worldwide.

The AAT was one of the last large telescopes built with an equatorial mount. More recent large telescopes have instead adopted the more compact and mechanically stable altazimuth mount. The AAT was, however, one of the first telescopes to be fully computer-controlled, and set new standards for pointing and tracking accuracy.

== History ==
British astronomer Richard van der Riet Woolley pushed for a large optical telescope for the Southern Hemisphere in 1959. In 1965, Macfarlane Burnet, president of the Australian Academy of Science, wrote to the federal education minister John Gorton inviting the federal government to support a joint British-Australian telescope project. Gorton was supportive, and nominated the Australian National University and CSIRO as Australia&#x27;s representatives in the joint venture; he was unsuccessful in his attempts to induce NASA to join the project. Gorton brought the proposal before cabinet in April 1967, which endorsed the scheme and agreed to contribute half the capital and running costs. An agreement with the British was finalised a few weeks later and a Joint Policy Committee started work on construction planning in August 1967. It took until September 1969 for plans to be finalised. The agreement initially committed the specification to a telescope design based on the American Kitt Peak telescope until its deficiencies were known. Both the horseshoe mount and the gearing system needed improvements. Although the revised gear system was considerably more expensive it was significantly more accurate, lending itself well to future applications.

The mirror blank was made by Owens-Illinois in Toledo, Ohio. It was then transported to Newcastle, England, where Sir Howard Grubb, Parsons and Co took two years to grind and polish the mirror&#x27;s surface. Mitsubishi Electric built the mount which was constructed by August 1973. First light occurred on 27 April 1974. The telescope was officially opened by Prince Charles on 16 October 1974.

== Structure and telescope ==
The telescope is housed within a seven-story, circular, concrete building topped with a 36m diameter rotating steel dome. It was designed to withstand the high winds prevailing at that location. The slit is narrow. The dome is required to move with the telescope to avoid obstruction. The top of the dome is 50m above ground level.

The telescope tube structure is supported inside a massive 12m diameter horseshoe, which rotates around the polar axis (parallel to Earth&#x27;s axis) for tracking the sky. The total moving mass is 260 tonnes.

The telescope has various foci for flexible instrumentation: originally there were three top-end rings which can be exchanged using the dome crane during the daytime. One was for f/3.3 prime-focus, with corrector lenses and a cage for a human observer taking photographs (rarely used after the 1980s); one has a large secondary mirror giving an f/8 Cassegrain focus; and a third top-end has smaller f/15 and f/36 secondary mirrors. A fourth top-end was built in the 1990s to give a 2-degree field of view at prime focus, with 400 optical fibres feeding the 2dF instrument and its later enhancements AAOmega and HERMES.

== Instruments ==

The AAT is equipped with a number of instruments, including:
* The Two Degree Field facility (2dF), a robotic optical fibre positioner for obtaining spectroscopy of up to 400 objects over a 2° field of view simultaneously.
* The University College London Échelle Spectrograph (UCLES), a high-resolution optical spectrograph which has been used to discover many extrasolar planets. 
* IRIS2, a wide-field infrared camera and spectrograph.

The newest instrument, HERMES, was commissioned in 2015. It is a new high-resolution spectrograph to be used with the 2dF fibre positioner. HERMES is mainly being used for the &#x27;Galactic Archaeology with Hermes&#x27; (GALAH) Survey, which aims to reconstruct the history of our galaxy&#x27;s formation from precise multi-element (~25 elements) abundances of 1  million stars derived from HERMES spectra.

=== Comparisons ===

== See also ==
*List of largest optical reflecting telescopes
*List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century
== References ==
== External links ==
* Online catalogue of building project papers (part of the Royal Greenwich Observatory Archives held at Cambridge University Library)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2632045" start="4" end="30" title="Anglo-Australian Telescope" label="Anglo-Australian Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632045" start="32" end="35" title="Anglo-Australian Telescope" label="AAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061971" start="52" end="72" title="Equatorial mount" label="equatorially mounted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608932" start="99" end="134" title="Australian Astronomical Observatory" label="Australian Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q930096" start="155" end="180" title="Siding Spring Observatory" label="Siding Spring Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944666" start="872" end="898" title="Víctor M. Blanco Telescope" label="Víctor M. Blanco Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="940" end="960" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061971" start="1293" end="1309" title="equatorial mount" label="equatorial mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q677971" start="1402" end="1418" title="altazimuth mount" label="altazimuth mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397435" start="1595" end="1623" title="Richard van der Riet Woolley" label="Richard van der Riet Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193550" start="1707" end="1724" title="Macfarlane Burnet" label="Macfarlane Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q514105" start="1743" end="1772" title="Australian Academy of Science" label="Australian Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="1814" end="1825" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="1956" end="1986" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="1991" end="1996" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2101" end="2105" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q592248" start="2569" end="2578" title="Kitt Peak National Observatory" label="Kitt Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061971" start="2633" end="2648" title="Horseshoe mounting" label="horseshoe mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q180106" start="2868" end="2882" title="Owens-Illinois" label="Owens-Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289932" start="2953" end="2985" title="Sir Howard Grubb, Parsons and Co" label="Sir Howard Grubb, Parsons and Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q53257" start="3048" end="3067" title="Mitsubishi Electric" label="Mitsubishi Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306940" start="3122" end="3133" title="First light (astronomy)" label="First light"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="3200" end="3214" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048295" start="4159" end="4169" title="Cassegrain reflector" label="Cassegrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608932" start="4409" end="4416" title="AAOmega spectrograph" label="AAOmega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="4543" end="4546" title="2dF instrument" label="2dF"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4559" end="4572" title="optical fiber" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="4598" end="4610" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4642" end="4655" title="field of view#Astronomy" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="4678" end="4703" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="4810" end="4828" title="extrasolar planets" label="extrasolar planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="4853" end="4861" title="infrared astronomy" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638347" start="5334" end="5379" title="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes" label="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625026" start="5381" end="5435" title="List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century" label="List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758428" wikidata="Q4791412" url="?curid=758428" title="Arizona State Prison Complex – Eyman">
<text>Arizona State Prison Complex – Eyman is a state prison for men located in Florence, Arizona. Eyman is one of 13 prison facilities operated by the Arizona Department of Corrections (ADC).

On May 3, 1991, Governor Fife Symington provided an opening address, officially opening ASPC–Eyman. In addition, ASPC–Eyman/Rynning Unit also officially opened. The complex was named after Frank Eyman who was a Warden at Florence. The Meadows Unit was named after Della Meadows who worked 35 years as the Wardens&#x27; secretary during her tenure with the Arizona Department of Corrections. Special Management Unit II (SMU II) was renamed Browning Unit on June 2, 2008, after Army Staff Sgt. Charles R. Browning, who died serving in Afghanistan and worked at SMU II.

ASPC–Eyman has an inmate capacity of approximately 4,544 in 8 housing units at security levels 3, 4 and 5. The ADC uses a score classification system to assess inmates appropriate custody and security level placement. The scores range from 2 to 5, with 5 being the highest risk or need. ASPC–Eyman is a modern, medium to high security prison.

Browning Unit (Formerly SMU II) in Eyman contains Arizona&#x27;s one of two male death row cell blocks. The execution chamber for the State of Arizona is located at the Central Unit of the Arizona State Prison Complex – Florence.

==Notable inmates==
* Mark Goudeau – Serial killer known as The Baseline Killer. Sentenced to death.
* Aaron Gunches – Murderer. Sentenced to death.
* Dale Hausner – Serial killer. Sentenced to death. Committed suicide in prison in 2013.
* Leroy Nash – Murderer sentenced to death. Died of natural causes on February 12, 2010, at the age of 94. Oldest prisoner in Arizona at time of death.
* Richard Djerf – Murderer. Sentenced to death. One of twenty Arizona death row inmates who has exhausted all appeals.

== See also ==

*Prison
*List of U.S. state prisons
*List of Arizona state prisons

==References==
== External links ==
*Arizona Department of Corrections
*Eyman Prison</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4791412" start="0" end="36" title="Arizona State Prison Complex – Eyman" label="Arizona State Prison Complex – Eyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q845754" start="74" end="82" title="Florence, Arizona" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="84" end="91" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791291" start="146" end="179" title="Arizona Department of Corrections" label="Arizona Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q699900" start="213" end="227" title="Fife Symington" label="Fife Symington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241620" start="377" end="388" title="Frank Eyman" label="Frank Eyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="1181" end="1190" title="death row" label="death row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791413" start="1289" end="1328" title="Arizona State Prison Complex – Florence" label="Arizona State Prison Complex – Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866662" start="1353" end="1365" title="Mark Goudeau" label="Mark Goudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q117188286" start="1434" end="1447" title="Aaron Gunches" label="Aaron Gunches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454669" start="1482" end="1494" title="Dale Hausner and Samuel Dieteman" label="Dale Hausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003221" start="1571" end="1581" title="Leroy Nash" label="Leroy Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200148" start="1723" end="1736" title="Richard Djerf" label="Richard Djerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="1858" end="1864" title="Prison" label="Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202130" start="1866" end="1892" title="List of U.S. state prisons" label="List of U.S. state prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562211" start="1894" end="1923" title="List of Arizona state prisons" label="List of Arizona state prisons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758431" wikidata="Q1143416" url="?curid=758431" title="Hot Springs National Park">
<text>Hot Springs National Park is a national park of the United States in central Garland County, Arkansas, adjacent to the city of Hot Springs. Hot Springs Reservation was initially created by an act of the United States Congress on April 20, 1832, to be preserved for future recreation. Established before the concept of a national park existed, it was the first time that land had been set aside by the federal government to preserve its use as an area for recreation. The hot spring water has been popularly believed for centuries to possess medicinal properties, and was a subject of legend among several Native American tribes. Following federal protection in 1832, the city developed into a successful spa town.

Incorporated January 10, 1851, the city was known in the early 20th century as the home to Major League Baseball spring training, illegal gambling, speakeasies during the Prohibition era, and gangsters such as Al Capone, horse racing at Oaklawn Park, the Army and Navy Hospital, and 42nd President Bill Clinton. The area was established as a national park on March 4, 1921. Until the redesignation of Jefferson National Expansion Memorial as Gateway Arch National Park in 2018, Hot Springs was the smallest national park by area in the United States. Since Hot Springs National Park is the oldest park maintained by the National Park Service, it was the first to receive its own US quarter in April 2010 as part of the America the Beautiful Quarters coin series.

The hot springs flow from the western slope of Hot Springs Mountain, part of the Ouachita Mountain range. In the park, the hot springs have not been preserved in their unaltered state as natural surface phenomena. They have been managed to conserve the production of uncontaminated hot water for public use. The mountains within the park are also managed within this conservation philosophy to preserve the hydrological system that feeds the springs.

The park includes portions of downtown Hot Springs, making it one of the most accessible national parks. There are numerous hiking trails and camping areas. Bathing in spring water is available in approved facilities at extra cost. The entire Bathhouse Row area is designated as a National Historic Landmark District; it contains the grandest collection of bathhouses of its kind in North America, including many outstanding examples of Gilded Age architecture. The row&#x27;s Fordyce Bathhouse serves as the park&#x27;s visitor center; the Buckstaff and Quapaw are the only facilities in 2015 still operating as bathhouses. Other buildings of the row are being restored or are used for other purposes.

==Discovery and protection==
For many years, this area was visited by chiefs and tribes of numerous indigenous peoples. They called it the &quot;Valley of the Vapors&quot; at the time of Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto&#x27;s arrival in the area in 1541. He was the first known European to see the springs. Members of many Native American tribes had been gathering in the valley for over 8,000 years to enjoy the healing properties of the thermal springs. Around the 18th century the Caddo settled in the area, followed by the Choctaw, Cherokee, and other tribes from the Southeast across the Mississippi River. There was agreement among the tribes that they would put aside their weapons and partake of the healing waters in peace while in the valley. The Quapaw lived in the Arkansas River delta area and visited the springs.
In 1673 Father Marquette and Jolliet explored the area and claimed it for France. The Treaty of Paris 1763 ceded the land back to Spain; however, in 1800 control was returned to France until the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.

In December 1804 William Dunbar and George Hunter made an expedition to the Ouachita Mountains and the springs at the request of President Thomas Jefferson, to study the native peoples and flora and fauna. They found one log cabin and a few rudimentary shelters used by people visiting the springs for their healing properties. In 1807 Jean Emmanual Prudhomme, of French colonial descent, became the first European-American settler of modern Hot Springs. After he regained his health following two years of bathing in the hot water and eating local foods, he returned home to his plantation on the Red River in Louisiana. Not long afterward trappers John Perciful and Isaac Cates arrived; Perciful put up more cabins for visitors.

On August 24, 1818, the Quapaw Indians ceded the land around the hot springs to the United States in a treaty after having been forced to a reservation south of the site. They were removed to Indian Territory in the 1830s. After Arkansas became a territory in 1819, the Arkansas Territorial Legislature requested in 1820 that the springs and adjoining mountains be set aside as a federal reservation. Twelve years later, in 1832, the 22nd United States Congress formed the national reservation, granting federal protection of the thermal waters and giving Hot Springs the honor of being the first area to be designated for federal government protection. The Hot Springs Reservation was set aside for public use as a park on June 16, 1880.

== National park ==
By act of Congress in 1921, the site&#x27;s name was officially changed from the Hot Springs Reservation to Hot Springs National Park. The government acquired more land, expanding it to more than , including Hot Springs Mountain, North Mountain, West Mountain, Sugarloaf Mountain, and Whittington Lake Park. It later was expanded to .

The springs are grouped about the base of the Hot Springs Mountain, with a flow of well over a half million gallons a day. The hot water is supplied to the various bathhouses, with resulting income from concession fees going to the U.S. Treasury. The park has miles of roads and trails over the mountains. The park is open throughout the year.

The first bathhouses were little more than brush huts and log cabins placed over excavations cut in the rocks to receive hot water that flowed from the springs. Entrepreneurs soon developed more elaborate bathing facilities, featuring wooden troughs delivering water from hillside springs to bathhouses along the east bank of Hot Springs Creek. Some of the tufa covering the hillside was excavated to accommodate the bathhouses. The narrow street along the west side of the creek was connected to the bathhouses by narrow bridges.

After direct federal supervision was exercised beginning in 1877, major improvements were made. The creek was covered with stone arches, and above it a street wide was built. All the squatters were evicted, rubbish cleaned up, and a centralized plumbing system was begun. This was completed around 1890. In 1950, central cooling towers limited the maximum temperature of the springs to a safe level, so individual bathhouses no longer needed their own cooling systems.

The park operates a public campground at Gulpha Gorge, about from downtown Hot Springs.

== City of Hot Springs ==
The city of Hot Springs (incorporated 1851) is governed under State and municipal law. In the 1870s, African Americans in town were concentrated in Happy Valley, north of Hot Springs Mountain. There were churches of various denominations, including Baptist for white and black congregations.

The National Park Service exercises no control or supervision over any matters connected with the city. The city starts on the other side of Central Avenue from Bathhouse Row. Its development has extended beyond the narrow valley in which the springs are located, spreading out over the open plain to the south and east. The climate is good throughout the year. The elevation of the city is above sea level, with surrounding hills rising another 600 feet. In the first half of the 20th century, the city operated primarily as a summer resort, but hotels have now long stayed open during the winter due to many northerly patrons coming to escape the winter cold.

During the peak popularity of the hot springs, until the 1950s, the many patients staying for three weeks, six weeks, or longer were a large source of business for the numerous hotels, boarding houses, doctors, and drugstores. As the daily treatments required only an hour or two, the visitors&#x27; idle time created opportunities for other businesses in the town.

== Bathing customs ==

It was believed the waters benefited diseases of the skin and blood, nervous affections, rheumatism and kindred diseases, and the &quot;various diseases of women&quot;. In the case of tuberculosis and lung diseases, and acute and inflammatory diseases, the use of the waters was considered injurious and in many cases very dangerous.

The earliest bathing procedure consisted of merely reclining in natural pools of hot springs and cool creek water for long periods of time. During the 1820s crude vapor baths stood over the springs, and bathers breathed in the vapors for extended periods of time. Wooden tubs were added to some bathhouses in the 1830s. Physicians began arriving in the 1850s, although many visitors did without their services; visitors remained from one week to two months. After the Civil War a tub bath of 15 to 20 minutes was common.

During the 1870s the bathing regimen became more diverse, and physicians prescribed various types of baths for patients. The period of time for tub baths became six to ten minutes and the time in the steam bath shortened to two minutes, with only one bath a day.

The treatment was by drinking and bathing in the waters, producing a profuse perspiration, which was considered an active agent in fighting disease. The advice of a physician who was familiar with the use of the waters was considered necessary to avoid injury. In many cases medicine was required before using the waters, although it had been observed that the amount of drugs given was &quot;enough to sicken a well man.&quot;

The hot baths were usually taken once a day for three weeks, when a rest was necessary (often with a week at the sulphur springs near the Ouachita River). A second three weeks&#x27; course was then taken, followed again by an abstinence from bathing for several days. The usual stay at the springs was from one to three months, but many invalids stayed a year and longer.

The process described in 1878 was a hot bath of for about 3 minutes (timed with a sand-glass). This was followed by another three minutes with all but the head in a steam box, or if milder treatment was prescribed, sitting atop the steam box covered with a blanket. During this the bather is also drinking hot water from their coffee-pot. After these eight to ten minutes of treatment, the bather is well rubbed down and thoroughly dried. The blanket-covered customer then would walk briskly back to their quarters to lie down for at least a half-hour to let the body recover its normal temperature. Sleeping at this stage was considered dangerous.

The bathhouses began using vapor cabinets around 1884. The bather sat in the cabinet for 10–20 minutes with the lid closed tightly around the neck, with vapor from the hot water rising through the floor of the cabinet, with temperatures around . Toward the end of the 1880s Russian and Victorian Turkish baths were offered, and in the 1890s German needle baths and Scotch douches (concentrated stream of hot or cold water, often used on the back) were added.

Although details of services were left to bathhouse operators, the Park&#x27;s superintendent set various rules. In the 1930s a tub bath could not take more than 20 minutes and shower no more than 90 seconds. During the next decade shower time was reduced to a minute, with maximum temperatures specified for several services. After a bath of about , the patient might spend 2–5 minutes in a vapor cabinet, get 15 minutes of packs (wet, hot or cold), followed by a tepid needle shower, and light massage and alcohol rub.

By 1980 one reporter described getting a 20-minute bath, two minutes in a steam bath, 15 minutes wrapped with hot packs, and resting in a cooling room for 20–30 minutes. The current modern facilities are oriented toward spa style or pool services.

== Pay bathhouses ==
There have been nearly two dozen pay bathhouses operating at the same time, with about nine of those within the park&#x27;s &quot;Bathhouse Row.&quot; (Facilities have been reworked over the years, and the Quapaw operate a bath incorporating two previously separate bathhouses). Nine of the bathhouses were associated with hotels, hospitals, or sanatoria. The water is the same for all, but the prices charged for the baths have varied according to the equipment, accommodations and services offered by each facility. The charges for the services of the attendants are the same and include the necessities except towels, blankets, bathrobes, laundering, rubbing mercury, and handling of invalids.

The area was popular with baseball players in the early 20th century, and was used by some teams for spring training. In 1929, prices for single baths ranged from $1 to $1.40, while a course of 21 baths was $16 to $24. Facilities were segregated until civil rights legislation in the 1960s. Baths were offered for whites at the Arlington Hotel, Fordyce, Buckstaff, the 500-room Eastman Hotel, Maurice, La Mar, Majestic Hotel, Quapaw, Hale, Imperial, Moody Hotel, Ozark, St. Joseph&#x27;s Infirmary, Superior, Ozark Sanatorium, Rockafellow, and Alhambra, and for people of color at the Pythian, Woodmen of Union and National Baptist Hotel and Sanitorium.

At present on Bathhouse Row only the Buckstaff and Quapaw are operating as bathhouses. The Fordyce is open as a visitor center; its staff gives tours of the facilities that have been historically renovated to their original appearance. The Ozark is housing the Museum of Contemporary Art; its space can be rented as reception hall. The Arlington Hotel, Austin Hotel and Convention Center, and The Springs Hotel &amp; Spa also offer hot spring baths using the Park water.

== Army and Navy Hospital ==

The former Army and Navy General Hospital was also supplied with water from the springs. It is located behind the south end of Bathhouse Row along the base of Hot Springs Mountain. It was administered by the War Department for the benefit of military members, officers of the Public Health Service, and honorably discharged veterans. The waters of the hot springs had an established reputation in benefiting those suffering from illnesses. Admission to the hospital was reserved for cases &quot;of a serious and obstinate character, which, though resisting ordinary methods of relief, were promised a rapid and permanent recovery from the use of the waters of the spring.&quot;

=== Subsequent usage and abandonment ===
The present facility was built in 1933 as the second Army-Navy hospital. It has been used and operated by the state for over 60 years, first as the Hot Springs Rehabilitation Center, then for a short time as the Arkansas Career Training Institute, and the Arkansas Career Development Center until May 2019.

After declining enrollment at the Arkansas Career Development Center, the building was vacated in 2019. It is unclear as to who currently is the owner of the property.

As the building was built by the U.S. Federal Government originally to be used by the city of Hot Springs as a hospital, there is a case that the Army and Navy Hospital building would have to be used for that purpose for new occupants. Those seeking to preserve the building estimate it could cost $1 million per year to maintain and speculate that both the state and federal government are letting the property remain in limbo due to the cost of operating it.

It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the &quot;Army and Navy General Hospital Historic District&quot;.

== Disasters ==

In November 1864 during the American Civil War, a large part of &quot;the valley&quot; (the central portion of the city along Hot Springs Creek) was burned - presumably by Union troops.

As in many other cities, fire has been a risk, especially before city services were developed. On March 5, 1878, a large fire burned for eight hours in the city, claiming nearly 150 buildings, including hotels, bath houses, and restaurants. On February 26, 1905, a fire started in the Grand Central Hotel on Chapel Street and burned 25 blocks of the southern section of Hot Springs. On September 5, 1913, a laundry worker was ironing and accidentally started a fire at 424 Church Street, which spread rapidly due to strong winds and burned nearly 60 blocks of the south part of the city.

The city has also been subject to flooding because of the narrow valley. On May 14, 1923, a severe rainstorm hit the city. With mountains surrounding three sides of the city, water flooded down the slopes of the mountains, funneling to Central Avenue and reaching a depth of nine feet. A lightning strike during the storm caused a fire that destroyed several commercial businesses in downtown Hot Springs. On February 15, 1956, a severe flood filled Central Avenue with three feet of rushing water, causing significant property damage. On May 19, 1990, a series of storms dropped more than of rain into the city, causing flash floods. A wave of water six feet high washed through downtown Hot Springs, causing extensive damage. During the flood, Carpenter Dam Bridge was washed away.

=== The Majestic Hotel ===
On February 27, 2014, fire broke out at the Majestic Hotel on Park Avenue just outside the boundaries of the national park. It took 75 firefighters over 22 hours to extinguish the blaze in the yellow brick portion (oldest section of the hotel).

The surviving portion of the Majestic was condemned and remaining property was auctioned off in October 2014. As a result of the fire, Abandoned Atlas Foundation president Michael Schwarz began production on a documentary regarding the Majestic titled &quot;Forever Majestic.&quot; The documentary takes place just after the 2014 fire and follows two activists as they try to save the hotel from condemnation.

Despite the efforts of activists, after remaining vacant for over two years, the Hot Springs Board of Directors voted to demolish the building. The remainder of the Majestic was razed in the Fall of 2016.

The site of the former Majestic Hotel was sold to a property developer, but as of 2022 the company backed out of the project.

== Government Free Baths ==
Congress established a free bathhouse for the indigent here on December 16, 1878. The &quot;Ral Hole&quot; mudpit and pool were closed, and the first Government Free Bathhouse operated at the site. The Government Free Bathhouse was a concrete building fully equipped for bathing large numbers of people under sanitary conditions. In 1878 the Army and Navy opened a free dispensary on the second floor, which remained open for two years. In 1916 the Public Health Service opened a clinic for the examination and treatment of indigents taking the free baths. 100,000 baths a year were given to the poor. Applicants for free baths were required to make an oath that they were without and unable to obtain means to pay for the baths, with violations being a misdemeanor subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Tickets were issued to those who, after examination, were found to be suffering from diseases which were reasonably expected to be benefited from the baths.

During the 1880s a few of the open springs gradually dried up. &quot;Corn Hole&quot;, a popular spring where people soaked their feet, dried up in 1882. Other open springs were either covered over by the National Park Service or the bathhouse owners to prevent their pollution.

A new free bathhouse was built in 1904, with separate facilities for black and white patrons. The materials used in construction were of poor quality. A new bathhouse was built off the reservation in 1922.
The Park Service reminded people that they had to provide their own board and lodging and to have return travel fare, due to many destitute invalids who arrived each year in the mistaken belief that there was a public institution at which they would be cared for free of charge. The free bathhouse closed in 1957, as it was more economical to have the few indigent customers served by the commercial bathhouses. The poor applied at park headquarters and upon approval by a physician were sent to a participating bathhouse, which was reimbursed by the government.

==Climate==

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Hot Springs National Park has a Humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;). According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at Hot Springs National Park Visitor Center at 627 ft (191 m) elevation is 7b with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of 9.5 °F (-12.5 °C).

== Flora and fauna ==

According to the A. W. Kuchler U.S. Potential natural vegetation Types, Hot Springs has an Oak/Hickory/Pine (&quot;111&quot;) potential vegetation type and a Southern Mixed forest (&quot;26&quot;) potential vegetation form.

The area is primarily forest. The northern slopes of the ridges and basins provide a suitable habitat for deciduous forest dominated by oak and hickory. Pines predominate on the south sides of the ridges. There are of unlogged pine and oak forests on North and Hot Springs Mountains, and on Sugarloaf Mountain. These old-growth forests contain shortleaf pine, blackjack oak, and white oak; many of the trees over 130 years old, and a few over 200 years old.

Plains bison, elk, cougar and red wolf left the region after European settlement. Present day fauna include white-tailed deer, wild turkey, squirrel, rabbit, Virginia opossum, gray fox, coyote, skunk, raccoon, gopher, long-tailed weasel, mink, rat, chipmunk, frog, and nine-banded armadillo. Some migratory birds following the Mississippi Flyway spend part of the year in the vicinity.

==Geology==
The thermal springs are situated in the Ouachita Mountains of central Arkansas. The springs emerge in a gap between Hot Springs Mountain and West Mountain in an area about long by wide at altitudes from . The springs predominantly are composed of hot water from thousands of feet underground mixed with some shallow cold ground water. Currently, there are 43 thermal springs in the park that are presumed to be flowing. Thermal water from 33 of the thermal springs is collected and monitored at a central reservoir, which distributes the combined discharge for public use and consumption. Rock types in the area include shale units which generally impede ground-water movement, while fractured chert, novaculite, and sandstone units generally support ground-water movement.
The water comes from rain which falls in mountains to the north and northeast. Flowing downward through cracked rock at about one foot per year, the meteoric water migrates to estimated minimum depths of and achieves high temperatures in the deep section of the flow path before rising along fault and fracture conduits. Under artesian pressure, the thermal waters rise and emerge through the Hot Springs Sandstone between the traces of two thrust faults, along several northeast-trending lineaments. Some rainwater from near the springs mixes with the deep hot water before discharge. The trip down takes about 4,000 years while the hot water takes about a year to reach the surface.

The heat comes from the natural heating of rocks as depth increases. The composition of the water indicates it is heated rainwater which has not approached a magmatic source, so no volcanic action is involved in the formation of these hot springs. The result is the mildly alkaline, pleasant tasting solution with dissolved calcium carbonate.

=== Rock types ===
The exposed rock types in the vicinity of the thermal springs are sedimentary rocks of Mississippian to Ordovician age, with the exception of younger igneous rocks (Cretaceous age) exposed in two small areas about southeast of the thermal springs (Potash Sulphur Spring and Magnet Cove, respectively), and in many small dikes and sills. Most dikes are less than wide. There have been 80 dikes noted about southeast of Hot Springs, on and near the Ouachita River. There is no indication that igneous rock occurs where the thermal springs discharge.
The sedimentary rocks in the vicinity of the thermal springs consist of shale, chert, novaculite, sandstone, and conglomerate.
* The Stanley Shale is predominantly a clayey, thinly fissile, black to green shale, with large amounts of sandstone interbedded throughout the formation. The sandstone, when freshly exposed, is a hard, fine-grained, feldspathic, silty sandstone, but weathers easily to a soft, clayey porous material ranging from green to brown in color. Almost all of the low-lying areas in the city of Hot Springs are composed of the Stanley Shale, and it surrounds Hot Springs Mountain on the south, east, and west sides.
* The Hot Springs Sandstone Member of the Stanley Shale, hereafter referred to as the Hot Springs Sandstone, consists of fine- to medium-grained sandstone with some shale and conglomerate. The sandstone is gray, hard and quartzitic, reaching thicknesses up to . The shale predominantly occurs at the top of the unit, and the principal bed of the conglomerate occurs at the bottom.
* The Arkansas Novaculite consists of lower, middle, and upper members. The lower member is a massive fractured novaculite, and is the dominant member on Hot Springs Mountain, with a thickness of about The middle member is a black clay shale interbedded with novaculite, about thick on Hot Springs Mountain. The upper member is chiefly a massive, highly calcareous light gray to black novaculite. It reaches a maximum thickness of in the area.
* The Polk Creek Shale and Missouri Mountain Shale overlie the Bigfork Chert and generally consist of shale with minor thin layers of quartzitic sandstone. The Polk Creek Shale is a black, fissile, graphitic shale. The Missouri Mountain Shale varies in color, and is soft and argillaceous.
* The Bigfork Chert overlies the Womble Shale and consists almost entirely of chert and silty chert in layers thick, separated by minor thin beds of black shale. The chert is very brittle and intensely fractured from folding.
* The Womble Shale is the oldest geologic unit that underlies all other exposed units. It is black, hard, and argillaceous shale.

During most of the Paleozoic Era, what became the Ouachita Mountains was the bottom of a shallow sea, where several sedimentary layers were created. About 500 million years ago a collision of the South American Plate with the North American Plate caused the shale and sandstone layers to fracture and fissure, creating mountains of the folded rocks. The thermal springs emerge from the plunging crest line of a large overturned anticline in the Zigzag Mountains of the Ouachita anticlinorium. The overturned anticline plunges toward the southwest into the Mazarn Basin. There are two recognized major thrust faults trending nearly parallel to fold axes that define the northern and southern limits of the thermal springs discharge area. The northern fault extends nearly parallel to Fountain Street northeastward about onto the southeast flank of North Mountain, and dips about 26 degrees north. At the northern extent of the thermal springs, this fault is suggested to form along the bedding contact of the Hot Springs Sandstone and Stanley Shale, with the Stanley Shale forming the hanging wall of the fault. The southern fault extends northeastward about roughly along the axis of the Hot Springs anticline, and dips about 44 degrees north. It has been proposed that a fault splits away from the southern fault, trends west and connects with the northern fault. A natural ravine trends along the location of this fault. Extensive cracks, joints, and fissures in the Bigfork Chert, Arkansas Novaculite, and the Hot Springs Sandstone allow the water to flow in the thermal springs area. Dissolved minerals in the water precipitate to form the white to tan travertine or &quot;tufa rock&quot; seen near the openings of the hot springs.

== Composition of the water ==
The water all comes from the same deep source, but surface appearance of the springs differed. What was called Mud Spring had a tepid ooze where there was no danger of being scalded. Springs acquired names such as Magnesia, Big Iron, and Arsenic. Big Iron&#x27;s water, with significant dissolved iron, would precipitate ocherous crusts and stains. Arsenic Spring, on the other hand, contains no detectable traces of its namesake substance. The water from many springs is now combined in one supply, with the total amount of water varying from a day. The temperature averages about . Maximum temperatures have declined about since records have been kept.

In 1905 curative characteristics were being ascribed to radium and Bertram Boltwood of Yale examined these waters. There is a measurable level of radioactivity primarily due to dissolved radon gas, with some radium. At the time collection and distribution equipment was designed to retain the radon gas, while now it is designed to allow it to escape. The level of exposure to radiation that results from bathing appears to be similar to the level that would result from sitting in the sun for the same period of time. The park water is considered well within safe limits and similar to other natural waters throughout the world.

Drinking water is dispensed from several hot water jug fountains. The hot water is naturally potable. Two cold water springs (Happy Hollow and Whittington Springs) are treated using ozone filtration. Regulations prohibit private individuals from selling the park&#x27;s waters.

== See also ==
* List of national parks of the United States
* Niagara Falls State Park - the first state park in the United States

== References ==
==External links==

* of the National Park Service
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143416" start="0" end="25" title="Hot Springs National Park" label="Hot Springs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="31" end="65" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q61077" start="77" end="101" title="Garland County, Arkansas" label="Garland County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79924" start="127" end="138" title="Hot Springs, Arkansas" label="Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="203" end="225" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="471" end="481" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946461" start="704" end="712" title="spa town" label="spa town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="806" end="827" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="886" end="901" title="Prohibition era" label="Prohibition era"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="925" end="934" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1013" end="1025" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="1157" end="1183" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150083" start="1394" end="1404" title="quarter (United States coin)" label="US quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q463177" start="1434" end="1464" title="America the Beautiful Quarters" label="America the Beautiful Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033447" start="1560" end="1577" title="Ouachita Mountains" label="Ouachita Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869025" start="2174" end="2187" title="Bathhouse Row" label="Bathhouse Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="2212" end="2238" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="2368" end="2378" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="2379" end="2391" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="2839" end="2855" title="Hernando de Soto (explorer)" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="3121" end="3126" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="3164" end="3171" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="3173" end="3181" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="3394" end="3400" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="3414" end="3428" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="3473" end="3489" title="Father Marquette" label="Father Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="3494" end="3501" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="3551" end="3571" title="Treaty of Paris 1763" label="Treaty of Paris 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="3660" end="3678" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568576" start="3706" end="3720" title="William Dunbar (explorer)" label="William Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3725" end="3738" title="George Hunter (explorer)" label="George Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="4613" end="4629" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631442" start="4855" end="4882" title="22nd United States Congress" label="22nd United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="8509" end="8521" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759615" start="11172" end="11179" title="Russian bath" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038387" start="11184" end="11207" title="Victorian Turkish baths" label="Victorian Turkish baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="12100" end="12103" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792350" start="13176" end="13191" title="Arlington Hotel (Hot Springs National Park, Arkansas)" label="Arlington Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="15235" end="15258" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="15684" end="15720" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q79924" start="16977" end="16988" title="Hot Springs, Arkansas" label="Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17777" end="17803" title="Abandoned Atlas Foundation" label="Abandoned Atlas Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20454" end="20483" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="20524" end="20549" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="Humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="20586" end="20625" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="20637" end="20651" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648514" start="20844" end="20857" title="A. W. Kuchler" label="A. W. Kuchler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106435" start="20863" end="20891" title="Potential natural vegetation" label="Potential natural vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="20918" end="20921" title="Oak" label="Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="20922" end="20929" title="Hickory" label="Hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="20930" end="20934" title="Pine" label="Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="20994" end="21006" title="Mixed forest" label="Mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="21158" end="21167" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="21188" end="21191" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="21196" end="21203" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="21205" end="21209" title="Pine" label="Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="21369" end="21386" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237846" start="21396" end="21410" title="Pinus echinata" label="shortleaf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q845791" start="21412" end="21425" title="blackjack oak" label="blackjack oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163388" start="21431" end="21440" title="white oak" label="white oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447861" start="21511" end="21523" title="Plains bison" label="Plains bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q743254" start="21525" end="21528" title="Manitoban elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044439" start="21530" end="21536" title="North American cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200442" start="21541" end="21549" title="red wolf" label="red wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="21619" end="21636" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="21638" end="21649" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9482" start="21651" end="21659" title="squirrel" label="squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="21661" end="21667" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q147267" start="21669" end="21685" title="Virginia opossum" label="Virginia opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="21687" end="21695" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="21697" end="21703" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q368495" start="21705" end="21710" title="striped skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="21712" end="21719" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756901" start="21721" end="21727" title="gopher (animal)" label="gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q125749307" start="21729" end="21747" title="long-tailed weasel" label="long-tailed weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="21749" end="21753" title="American mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="21755" end="21758" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752125" start="21760" end="21768" title="chipmunk" label="chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="21770" end="21774" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q649549" start="21780" end="21801" title="nine-banded armadillo" label="nine-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847799" start="21838" end="21856" title="Mississippi Flyway" label="Mississippi Flyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="22530" end="22535" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="22604" end="22609" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783184" start="22611" end="22621" title="novaculite" label="novaculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="22627" end="22636" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q636340" start="23390" end="23437" title="geothermal gradient" label="the natural heating of rocks as depth increases"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="23643" end="23651" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="23799" end="23815" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="23820" end="23833" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="23837" end="23847" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="23883" end="23895" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="23898" end="23908" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731423" start="24007" end="24018" title="Magnet Cove igneous complex" label="Magnet Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="24053" end="24058" title="Dike (geology)" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q830230" start="24063" end="24068" title="Sill (geology)" label="sills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041614" start="24180" end="24194" title="Ouachita River" label="Ouachita River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="24447" end="24451" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="24625" end="24636" title="Feldspar" label="feldspathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="24638" end="24642" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="25138" end="25148" title="Quartzite" label="quartzitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="25940" end="25949" title="Graphite" label="graphitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="26018" end="26030" title="argillaceous" label="argillaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="26408" end="26417" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q119490" start="26585" end="26605" title="South American Plate" label="South American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="26615" end="26635" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="26817" end="26826" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="26990" end="27002" title="thrust fault" label="thrust fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="27256" end="27260" title="Strike and dip" label="dips"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="28046" end="28056" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="28066" end="28075" title="tufa" label="tufa rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="28574" end="28596" title="arsenic" label="its namesake substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="28869" end="28875" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q828438" start="28880" end="28896" title="Bertram Boltwood" label="Bertram Boltwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="28959" end="28972" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="29000" end="29005" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="29021" end="29027" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="29537" end="29544" title="Potable water" label="potable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="29740" end="29783" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031716" start="29786" end="29810" title="Niagara Falls State Park" label="Niagara Falls State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="29823" end="29833" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="29902" end="29923" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758437" wikidata="Q6920894" url="?curid=758437" title="Mount Gibbs">
<text>Mount Gibbs is located in the Sierra Nevada of the U.S. state of California, south of Mount Dana. The mountain was named in honor of Oliver Gibbs, a professor at Harvard University and friend of Josiah Whitney. The summit marks the boundary between Yosemite National Park and the Ansel Adams Wilderness, and Mount Gibbs is the sixth-highest mountain, of Yosemite.

The peak is accessible either from the west, starting at Tioga Pass Road, or from the east, via Bloody Canyon from the trailhead at Walker Lake. Overnight camping is not permitted on the western side of the mountain, which is part of the protected watershed of Dana Meadows and Tioga Pass. In the summer the mountain has only patchy snow, on the northern slope. The easiest ascent is via the ridge extending west from the peak; there is a steep section of loose, unstable rock, leading to the gentle ridge that forms the top of the mountain. Although the top is above the tree line, there is some sparse plant life, including wildflowers. The view of Mono Lake from the summit is partially obstructed by an outcropping to the northeast.


== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6920894" start="0" end="11" title="Mount Gibbs" label="Mount Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="30" end="43" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="51" end="61" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="65" end="75" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862168" start="86" end="96" title="Mount Dana" label="Mount Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q369422" start="133" end="145" title="Oliver Wolcott Gibbs" label="Oliver Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="162" end="180" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493080" start="195" end="209" title="Josiah Whitney" label="Josiah Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="249" end="271" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q569492" start="280" end="302" title="Ansel Adams Wilderness" label="Ansel Adams Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q758090" start="422" end="437" title="Tioga Pass Road" label="Tioga Pass Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4248065" start="626" end="638" title="Dana Meadows (California)" label="Dana Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="1016" end="1025" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758438" wikidata="Q271874" url="?curid=758438" title="Tamia">
<text>Tamia Marilyn Washington Hill (born May 9, 1975) is a Canadian singer and songwriter. Born and raised in Windsor, Ontario, Tamia performed in various singing and dancing competitions as a child. In 1994, after signing a development deal with Warner Bros. Records, she was asked by veteran producer Quincy Jones to appear on his album &quot;Q&#x27;s Jook Joint&quot; (1995), earning her Grammy Award nominations for their collaboration on &quot;You Put a Move on My Heart&quot; and &quot;Slow Jams&quot;. Her self-titled debut album was released in 1998 and followed by a series of successful albums with Elektra Records, including &quot;A Nu Day&quot; (2000) and &quot;More&quot; (2004). Several songs from these albums became hit singles on the pop and R&amp;B record charts, including &quot;So Into You&quot;, &quot;Stranger in My House&quot;, and &quot;Imagination&quot;, as well as her collaborations &quot;Into You&quot;, &quot;Missing You&quot;, and &quot;Spend My Life with You&quot;.

Since her departure from Elektra, Tamia has released most of her projects independently on her own label Plus One Music Group, through ventures with Def Jam Recordings, eOne Music, and others. In 2015, her sixth album &quot;Love Life&quot; debuted and peaked at number two on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums, becoming her highest-charting album on the chart. An NAACP Image Award recipient for her work with singer Eric Benét, Tamia is a six-time Grammy Award nominee and has been nominated for numerous other awards and accolades, including a Soul Train Music Award, a Source Award, and four Juno Awards. She has been married to former basketball player Grant Hill since 1999; they have two daughters. Diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 2003, Tamia is an advocate for the National Multiple Sclerosis Society (NMSS) on behalf of others affected by the disease.

==Early life==
Tamia Marilyn Washington was born on May 9, 1975, in Windsor, Ontario. The only daughter of a White father and Black mother, Barbara Washington-Peden, she has three younger brothers named Tiras, Tajhee, and Trajan. Washington-Peden gave birth to Tamia when she was 17 years old and raised her children as a single mom. Aside from the music she heard and sang at church, Tamia was exposed to diverse music from an early age by her mother. As early as age six, she was on stage singing at the local church, and by age 12, had already been involved in several musicals which helped hone her musical skills. Tamia studied piano and voice with renowned Windsor musician, Eugene Davis, who was also instrumental in encouraging her to pursue her vocal talent. It was not long before she was able to develop her skills in the Walkerville Centre for Creative Arts program for visual and performing arts students, introduced at Walkerville Collegiate Institute in Windsor.

Along with attending high school at Walkerville, she made several appearances in local theater and choral concerts before winning Canada&#x27;s prestigious YTV Achievement Award for vocal performance in 1993. In 1994, Tamia performed at a multiple sclerosis benefit in Aspen, Colorado, when she met music manager, Lionel Richie&#x27;s ex-wife Brenda, who was cosponsoring the event and introduced herself to Tamia after the show. A few months later, Tamia, who was being courted by Warner Bros. Records at the time, called Richie to say that she was coming to Los Angeles, California, for a photo session, resulting in her lasting stay and a management deal with Richie. Weeks later, Richie arranged for her to perform at a star-studded party that she held for singer Luther Vandross. Her performance reportedly impressed all in attendance, including veteran producer Quincy Jones, who took notice and later offered her the chance to appear on his album &quot;Q&#x27;s Jook Joint&quot; (1995).

==Career==
===1995–1998: Collaborations and &quot;Tamia&quot;===

&quot;You Put a Move on My Heart&quot;, a Mica Paris cover, was one out of several Jones songs Tamia recorded vocals for. Selected as the first single from &quot;Q&#x27;s Jook Joint&quot;, it became a moderate commercial success, reaching the top twenty of the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs, but earned acclaim from critics, resulting in a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance at the 39th ceremony. Tamia along with Babyface, Portrait, and Barry White received a second nomination that night for &quot;Slow Jams&quot;, the second single from Jones&#x27; album, which fared similarly on the charts, peaking at number two on the New Zealand Singles Chart, and received a third nod in the Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals category for her performance on &quot;Missing You&quot;, a collaboration with singers Brandy, Gladys Knight, and Chaka Khan for the soundtrack of the 1996 film &quot;Set It Off&quot;. A top thirty success on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).

In 1997, Tamia made her film debut in the action-thriller &quot;Speed 2: Cruise Control&quot;. Playing the cruise liner&#x27;s musical entertainer, she performed the Diane Warren-penned single &quot;Make Tonight Beautiful&quot;, which was released as part of the film&#x27;s soundtrack. The same year, she has also appeared in television sitcoms such as &quot;Rock Me Baby&quot; and &quot;Kenan &amp; Kel&quot; and recorded the all-star charity single &quot;Love Shouldn&#x27;t Hurt&quot; for the National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse along with All-4-One, Michael Bolton, and others. Following this, Jones enlisted the services of several producers to work on Tamia&#x27;s debut self-titled album, including Jermaine Dupri, Tim &amp; Bob, and Mario Winans, many of which would become frequent producers on subsequent projects. Upon its April 1998 release, &quot;Tamia&quot; received a mixed to positive reception by critics, who complimented Tamia&#x27;s vocal performance and the progression from her earlier recordings but found the material uneven. It debuted and peaked at number sixty-seven on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Five singles were released from the album, including the top twenty entries &quot;Imagination&quot; and &quot;So Into You&quot;. In 1999, &quot;Tamia&quot; garnered her two Juno Award nominations for Best New Solo Artist and R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year.

===1999–2005: &quot;A Nu Day&quot; and &quot;More&quot;===
In 1999, Tamia collaborated with American singer Eric Benét on his single &quot;Spend My Life with You&quot;. The song reached the top of &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart and earned her a fourth Grammy Award nomination as well as the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song. Frustrated by Qwest&#x27;s label politics, Tamia transitioned to Elektra Records the same year and began work on her second album &quot;A Nu Day&quot;. Rapper Missy Elliott, frequent co-producer Bink, Dallas Austin, and Shep Crawford worked with Tamia on the majority project, which she declared &quot;not as ballad-driven as&quot; her debut album and felt it was &quot;more aggressive in terms of the formats of the songs&quot;. Released in October 2000, &quot;A Nu Day&quot; received a mixed response from critics, who complimented her more stylish sound but found the material inconsistent. It debuted and peaked at number forty-six on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and became her first top ten entry on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums, peaking at number eight. A steady seller, it reached gold status in the US and produced three of Tamia&#x27;s commercially most successful singles, including her only US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 top ten hit single &quot;Stranger in My House&quot;. In 2001, &quot;A Nu Day&quot; was nominated in the R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year category at the annual Juno Awards.

In 2003, Tamia appeared on the international top ten hit &quot;Into You&quot;, a collaboration with rapper Fabolous from his second studio album &quot;Street Dreams&quot; (2003) based on her 1998 single &quot;So Into You&quot;. It reached the top five in Australia and the US and was followed by &quot;Officially Missing You&quot;, the lead single from her third album. Initially titled &quot;Still&quot;, the project was indefinitely bumped from its original August 2003 schedule after Tamia&#x27;s multiple sclerosis diagnosis and subsequent treatment. With the illness in remission, she resumed work later that year and arranged additional recording sessions to revamp parts of the album. Finally released in April 2004, &quot;More&quot; was released to generally mixed reception from music critics and debuted and peaked at number 17 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and number four on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums, with first week sales of 71,000 copies, marking the highest-selling and highest-charting opening of Tamia&#x27;s catalogue yet. In support of &quot;More&quot;, Tamia was featured as a special guest on the Verizon Ladies First Tour, co-headlined by Beyoncé, Alicia Keys, and Missy Elliott, which became one of the biggest concert tours of the year. In 2005, &quot;More&quot; became Tamia&#x27;s third consecutive album to earn a Juno Award nomination in the R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year category.

===2005–2013: &quot;Between Friends&quot; and &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;===
In order to gain more creative control over future projects, Tamia left Elektra amid its merger with Atlantic Records in 2005 and decided to go independent, founding her own record label Plus One Music Group. Unlike previous projects, she only consulted longtime contributor Shep Crawford to work with her on her fourth studio album. A rather intimate process, the pair met on a daily basis in a recording studio in Orlando, Florida, to write and produce new songs, with Rodney &quot;Darkchild&quot; Jerkins providing additional material late into the production of the album. Alluding to her working relationship with Crawford, it was eventually titled &quot;Between Friends&quot;, and first released in May 2006 in South Africa, followed by a worldwide distribution in the fourth quarter of 2006. A moderate commercial success, it peaked at number 66 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, while peaking at number 2 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Independent Albums. Its first two singles, &quot;Can&#x27;t Get Enough&quot; and &quot;Me&quot;, both reached the top 30 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.

In November 2009, &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, a compilation album, was released in South Africa. The same year, Tamia announced that she was working with Crawford to form a supergroup called TDK along with singers Kelly Price and Deborah Cox. Their joint album &quot;The Queen Project&quot; failed to materialize, however, due to timing issues and label politics. In August 2012, Tamia&#x27;s fifth studio &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot; was released on Plus One and EMI Music. She worked with a vast of different producers on the album, including Chuck Harmony, the Runners, and Carvin &amp; Ivan. &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot; earned a mixed reception from music critics and debuted at 23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and at number six on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums. The lead single &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;, co-written by Claude Kelly and Salaam Remi, peaked at number 24 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. Both the single and its parent album received nominations in the Best R&amp;B Song and Best R&amp;B Album categories at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards, while garnering Tamia a Soul Train Music Award nomination at the 2012 Soul Train Music Awards. In support of &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;, Tamia joined R. Kelly during his the Single Ladies Tour from October until December 2012.

===2014–present: &quot;Love Life&quot; and &quot;Passion Like Fire&quot;===
In August 2014, Tamia signed with Def Jam Recordings, marking her return to major label ranks. Her sixth album, &quot;Love Life&quot;, was completed in ten days and released on June 9, 2015, in the United States in collaboration with her own label, Plus One Music Group. A departure from her previous independent projects, she worked with a wider range of high-profile producers on its songs, including Polow da Don as well as Oak Felder and Pop Wansel from duo Pop &amp; Oak as well as frequent collaborators Christopher &quot;Tricky&quot; Stewart and The-Dream. &quot;Love Life&quot; earned generally favorable reviews from critics, who summed it as &quot;grown-up, worn-in R&amp;B at its finest&quot;, and debuted at number 24 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 16,000 copies in the week ending June 14, 2015. It also debuted on top of &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Top R&amp;B Albums and at number two on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums, becoming Tamia&#x27;s highest-charting album ever on both charts, and produced three singles, including lead single &quot;Sandwich and a Soda&quot; and follow-up “Stuck with Me” both of which reached the top twenty on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Adult R&amp;B Songs.

Tamia&#x27;s seventh album, &quot;Passion Like Fire&quot;, was released in September 2018 through Plus One, 21 Entertainment, and eOne Music. A breakaway from her previous album, she worked with a smaller team of collaborators on the album, involving longtime contributors Lil&#x27; Ronnie, Shep Crawford, and Salaam Remi. While critical reception was generally lukewarm, the album debuted at number 145 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, becoming her lowest-charting album yet, also reaching number 17 on Top R&amp;B Albums chart. Its release was preceded by the singles &quot;Leave It Smokin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Today I Do&quot;, the former of which became her biggest hit in years, peaking at number two on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Adult R&amp;B Songs. In support of the album, Tamia embarked on the Passion Like Fire Tour which launched on September 18, 2018, and visited most of the major US cities. In 2019, she was awarded the Soul Music Icon Award at the fourth annual Black Music Honors. In 2023, Tamia was awarded an honorary Doctor of Music degree from Morris Brown College in Atlanta, Georgia.

==Personal life==
Singer Anita Baker introduced Tamia to American basketball player Grant Hill through a blind date in Detroit, Michigan, in 1996. After a courtship of about three years, the pair wed on July 24, 1999, in a private reception in Battle Creek. The ceremony was officiated by Hill&#x27;s cousin, Rev. John H. Grant, and attended by 250 guests. The couple initially resided in Detroit, but later relocated to Orlando when Hill left the Detroit Pistons to sign with the Orlando Magic team. They have two daughters, Myla Grace (born January 23, 2002), and Lael Rose Hill (born August 9, 2007).

In 2003, amid the recording of her third album &quot;More&quot;, doctors at Duke University Hospital in Durham, North Carolina, diagnosed Tamia with multiple sclerosis, a demyelinating disease in which the insulating covers of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord are damaged, after she had been experiencing mystifying bouts of fatigue and numbness in her hands, feet, and legs. While the music project was indefinitely bumped from its original August 2003 schedule, she went into subsequent treatment, using corticosteroids to help delay the onset of more severe symptoms. Diagnosed early, the illness has since been in remission though she has occasional but controllable symptoms.

==Discography==
* &quot;Tamia&quot; (1998)
* &quot;A Nu Day&quot; (2000)
* &quot;More&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Between Friends&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Love Life&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Passion Like Fire&quot; (2018)

==Tours==
;Headlining 
* 1998 Tour (1998)
* A Nu Day Tour (2001)
* 2005 Tour (2005)
* Between Friends Tour (2007)
* Beautiful Surprise Tour (2013–2014)
* Love Life Tour (2015)
* Passion Like Fire Tour (2018–2019)

;Co-headlining
* Tamia and Joe Tour (2024) 
* The Queen Project (2009) 
* Soul Summer Concert Series (2008–2009) 

;Opening act
* Verizon Ladies First Tour (2004) 
* Single Ladies Tour (2012) 
==Awards and nominations==
;Grammy Awards
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot; | 1997
| &quot;Missing You&quot; 
| Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals
|-
| &quot;You Put a Move on My Heart&quot; 
| Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance
|-
| &quot;Slow Jams&quot; 
| Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals
|-
| 2000
| &quot;Spend My Life with You&quot; 
| Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 2013
| &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;
| Best R&amp;B Song
|-
| &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;
| Best R&amp;B Album
|}

;NAACP Image Award
| 2000
| &quot;Spend My Life with You&quot; 
| Outstanding Song
|}

;Juno Award
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 1999
| Breakthrough Artist of the Year
|-
| &quot;Tamia&quot;
| R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year
|-
| 2001
| &quot;A Nu Day&quot;
| R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year
|-
| 2004
| &quot;Officially Missing You&quot;
| R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year
|-
| 2005
| &quot;More&quot;
| R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year
|}

;Soul Train Music Awards
| 2012
| Best Independent/Soul Artist
|}

;UB Honors Awards
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 2012
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | &quot;Beautiful Surprise&quot;
| Best Independent Urban Album
|-
| Best R&amp;B Album Of The Year
|}

;RLM World Music Awards
| 2013
| Best Female Artist
|}

;Billboard R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Awards
| 2007
| Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Artist - Female
|}

;Source Awards
| 2003
| &quot;Into You&quot; 
| R&amp;B/Rap Collaboration Of The Year
|}

==See also==
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; number-one dance club songs
* List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart
* List of people with multiple sclerosis

==References==
==External links==

; Official
* 
* YouTube

; Interviews
* Interview with Al Sharpton on AskDoctorV.com (April 25, 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q271874" start="0" end="29" title="Tamia" label="Tamia Marilyn Washington Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="105" end="121" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="242" end="262" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="298" end="310" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265249" start="340" end="359" title="Q&amp;#x27;s Jook Joint" label="Q&amp;#x27;s Jook Joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="386" end="398" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723675" start="444" end="470" title="You Put a Move on My Heart" label="You Put a Move on My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19978381" start="487" end="496" title="Slow Jams" label="Slow Jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681214" start="508" end="531" title="Tamia (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="604" end="619" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658670" start="637" end="645" title="A Nu Day" label="A Nu Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588988" start="669" end="673" title="More (Tamia album)" label="More"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="746" end="749" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="754" end="761" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260298" start="793" end="804" title="So Into You (Tamia song)" label="So Into You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975825" start="818" end="838" title="Stranger in My House (Tamia song)" label="Stranger in My House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002586" start="856" end="867" title="Imagination (Tamia song)" label="Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503638" start="911" end="919" title="Into You (Fabolous song)" label="Into You"/>
<link wikidata="Q729245" start="933" end="944" title="Missing You (Brandy, Gladys Knight, Tamia, and Chaka Khan song)" label="Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576271" start="962" end="984" title="Spend My Life with You" label="Spend My Life with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="1142" end="1160" title="Def Jam Recordings" label="Def Jam Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="1162" end="1172" title="MNRK Music Group" label="eOne Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954581" start="1217" end="1226" title="Love Life (Tamia album)" label="Love Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1275" end="1284" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="1293" end="1319" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="1374" end="1391" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q739041" start="1427" end="1437" title="Eric Benét" label="Eric Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q959013" start="1556" end="1578" title="Soul Train Music Awards" label="Soul Train Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140254" start="1582" end="1594" title="The Source" label="Source Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="1605" end="1616" title="Juno Awards" label="Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q311895" start="1667" end="1677" title="Grant Hill" label="Grant Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="1730" end="1748" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974429" start="1787" end="1822" title="National Multiple Sclerosis Society" label="National Multiple Sclerosis Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="1944" end="1960" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q365539" start="2002" end="2007" title="Black Canadians" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204559" start="2198" end="2208" title="Single parent" label="single mom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962397" start="2809" end="2841" title="Walkerville Collegiate Institute" label="Walkerville Collegiate Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565412" start="2891" end="2902" title="Walkerville, Ontario" label="Walkerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519808" start="3011" end="3032" title="YTV Achievement Awards" label="YTV Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="3094" end="3112" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="3124" end="3139" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="3169" end="3182" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="3337" end="3357" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3415" end="3438" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q311306" start="3623" end="3638" title="Luther Vandross" label="Luther Vandross"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="3723" end="3735" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265249" start="3815" end="3834" title="Q&amp;#x27;s Jook Joint" label="Q&amp;#x27;s Jook Joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723675" start="3922" end="3948" title="You Put a Move on My Heart" label="You Put a Move on My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827833" start="3958" end="3968" title="Mica Paris" label="Mica Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="4186" end="4195" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="4202" end="4227" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4277" end="4289" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934625" start="4305" end="4342" title="Grammy Award for Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542308" start="4350" end="4363" title="39th Annual Grammy Awards" label="39th ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q344983" start="4382" end="4390" title="Babyface (musician)" label="Babyface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232233" start="4392" end="4400" title="Portrait (band)" label="Portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q213647" start="4406" end="4417" title="Barry White" label="Barry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q19978381" start="4468" end="4477" title="Slow Jams" label="Slow Jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918641" start="4593" end="4618" title="Official New Zealand Music Chart" label="New Zealand Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q691203" start="4652" end="4686" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals" label="Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q729245" start="4725" end="4736" title="Missing You (Brandy, Gladys Knight, Tamia, and Chaka Khan song)" label="Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q690974" start="4773" end="4779" title="Brandy Norwood" label="Brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235952" start="4781" end="4794" title="Gladys Knight" label="Gladys Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="4800" end="4810" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q962544" start="4853" end="4863" title="Set It Off (film)" label="Set It Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4902" end="4931" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="4962" end="5003" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5077" end="5100" title="Speed 2: Cruise Control" label="Speed 2: Cruise Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q237354" start="5179" end="5191" title="Diane Warren" label="Diane Warren"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5276" end="5298" title="Speed 2: Cruise Control (soundtrack)" label="film&amp;#x27;s soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354571" start="5373" end="5385" title="Rock Me Baby (TV series)" label="Rock Me Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065187" start="5402" end="5417" title="Kenan &amp;amp; Kel" label="Kenan &amp;amp; Kel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956148" start="5450" end="5464" title="Charity record" label="charity single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291981" start="5574" end="5583" title="All-4-One" label="All-4-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q312514" start="5585" end="5599" title="Michael Bolton" label="Michael Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681214" start="5708" end="5725" title="Tamia (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q349434" start="5737" end="5751" title="Jermaine Dupri" label="Jermaine Dupri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803059" start="5753" end="5766" title="Tim &amp;amp; Bob" label="Tim &amp;amp; Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353962" start="5772" end="5784" title="Mario Winans" label="Mario Winans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="6135" end="6160" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002586" start="6244" end="6255" title="Imagination (Tamia song)" label="Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260298" start="6272" end="6283" title="So Into You (Tamia song)" label="So Into You"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="6335" end="6345" title="Juno Awards" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314050" start="6362" end="6382" title="Juno Award for Breakthrough Artist of the Year" label="Best New Solo Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314091" start="6387" end="6421" title="Juno Award for R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year" label="R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q739041" start="6532" end="6542" title="Eric Benét" label="Eric Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576271" start="6563" end="6585" title="Spend My Life with You" label="Spend My Life with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659596" start="6740" end="6778" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song" label="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414893" start="6794" end="6799" title="Qwest Records" label="Qwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="6845" end="6860" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658670" start="6916" end="6924" title="A Nu Day" label="A Nu Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="6939" end="6952" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903949" start="6975" end="6979" title="Bink (record producer)" label="Bink"/>
<link wikidata="Q951373" start="6981" end="6994" title="Dallas Austin" label="Dallas Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387256" start="7000" end="7013" title="Shep Crawford" label="Shep Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="7491" end="7517" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975825" start="7744" end="7764" title="Stranger in My House (Tamia song)" label="Stranger in My House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314166" start="7874" end="7892" title="Juno Awards of 2001" label="annual Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503638" start="7958" end="7966" title="Into You (Fabolous song)" label="Into You"/>
<link wikidata="Q349420" start="8002" end="8010" title="Fabolous" label="Fabolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354025" start="8046" end="8059" title="Street Dreams (Fabolous album)" label="Street Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079614" start="8197" end="8219" title="Officially Missing You" label="Officially Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="8395" end="8413" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588988" start="8625" end="8629" title="More (Tamia album)" label="More"/>
<link wikidata="Q604771" start="9025" end="9050" title="Verizon Ladies First Tour" label="Verizon Ladies First Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="9068" end="9075" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="9077" end="9088" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="9504" end="9520" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="9547" end="9558" title="Independent record label" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="9819" end="9835" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q727151" start="9874" end="9910" title="Rodney Jerkins" label="Rodney &amp;quot;Darkchild&amp;quot; Jerkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899083" start="10063" end="10078" title="Between Friends (Tamia album)" label="Between Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642564" start="10343" end="10361" title="Independent Albums" label="Independent Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028883" start="10392" end="10413" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Get Enough (Tamia song)" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Get Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802944" start="10430" end="10432" title="Me (Tamia song)" label="Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="10552" end="10569" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="10677" end="10687" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248393" start="10718" end="10729" title="Kelly Price" label="Kelly Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q457622" start="10734" end="10745" title="Deborah Cox" label="Deborah Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877818" start="10916" end="10934" title="Beautiful Surprise" label="Beautiful Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="10970" end="10979" title="EMI" label="EMI Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115502" start="11051" end="11064" title="Chuck Harmony" label="Chuck Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446154" start="11066" end="11077" title="The Runners (production duo)" label="the Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047570" start="11083" end="11100" title="Carvin &amp;amp; Ivan" label="Carvin &amp;amp; Ivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877819" start="11303" end="11321" title="Beautiful Surprise (song)" label="Beautiful Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278679" start="11343" end="11355" title="Claude Kelly" label="Claude Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702027" start="11360" end="11371" title="Salaam Remi" label="Salaam Remi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459443" start="11492" end="11509" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Song" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542163" start="11514" end="11532" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Album" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q630124" start="11551" end="11576" title="55th Annual Grammy Awards" label="55th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q959013" start="11602" end="11624" title="Soul Train Music Awards" label="Soul Train Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953657" start="11643" end="11671" title="2012 Soul Train Music Awards" label="2012 Soul Train Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q273055" start="11732" end="11740" title="R. Kelly" label="R. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="11920" end="11938" title="Def Jam Recordings" label="Def Jam Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954581" start="12004" end="12013" title="Love Life (Tamia album)" label="Love Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q592119" start="12289" end="12301" title="Polow da Don" label="Polow da Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295367" start="12313" end="12323" title="Oak Felder" label="Oak Felder"/>
<link wikidata="Q33518908" start="12328" end="12338" title="Pop Wansel" label="Pop Wansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685164" start="12348" end="12361" title="Pop &amp;amp; Oak" label="Pop &amp;amp; Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026379" start="12396" end="12434" title="Tricky Stewart" label="Christopher &amp;quot;Tricky&amp;quot; Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q351055" start="12439" end="12448" title="The-Dream" label="The-Dream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12759" end="12777" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums#Top R&amp;amp;B Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954756" start="12953" end="12972" title="Sandwich and a Soda" label="Sandwich and a Soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647885" start="12994" end="13007" title="Stuck with Me (Tamia song)" label="Stuck with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087026" start="13073" end="13092" title="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs" label="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063425" start="13129" end="13146" title="Passion Like Fire" label="Passion Like Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="13225" end="13235" title="MNRK Music Group" label="eOne Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547386" start="13368" end="13384" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Ronnie" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Ronnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702027" start="13405" end="13416" title="Salaam Remi" label="Salaam Remi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138783" start="13675" end="13696" title="Leave It Smokin&amp;#x27;" label="Leave It Smokin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287516" start="14134" end="14149" title="Doctor of Music" label="Doctor of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913630" start="14162" end="14182" title="Morris Brown College" label="Morris Brown College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="14186" end="14202" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q255697" start="14230" end="14241" title="Anita Baker" label="Anita Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q311895" start="14289" end="14299" title="Grant Hill" label="Grant Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q884125" start="14310" end="14320" title="blind date" label="blind date"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="14324" end="14341" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="14449" end="14461" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="14653" end="14668" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="14686" end="14699" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312894" start="14886" end="14910" title="Duke University Hospital" label="Duke University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="14914" end="14936" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="14959" end="14977" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="14981" end="15002" title="demyelinating disease" label="demyelinating disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="15016" end="15033" title="Myelin" label="insulating covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="15037" end="15048" title="Neuron" label="nerve cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="15056" end="15061" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="15066" end="15077" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="15143" end="15150" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="15155" end="15163" title="Hypoesthesia" label="numbness"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="15324" end="15338" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="15436" end="15445" title="remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681214" start="15524" end="15529" title="Tamia (album)" label="Tamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658670" start="15551" end="15559" title="A Nu Day" label="A Nu Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588988" start="15581" end="15585" title="More (Tamia album)" label="More"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899083" start="15607" end="15622" title="Between Friends (Tamia album)" label="Between Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877818" start="15644" end="15662" title="Beautiful Surprise" label="Beautiful Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954581" start="15684" end="15693" title="Love Life (Tamia album)" label="Love Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063425" start="15715" end="15732" title="Passion Like Fire" label="Passion Like Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q604771" start="16091" end="16116" title="Verizon Ladies First Tour" label="Verizon Ladies First Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542308" start="16222" end="16226" title="39th Annual Grammy Awards" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q729245" start="16235" end="16246" title="Missing You (Brandy, Gladys Knight, Tamia, and Chaka Khan song)" label="Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q691203" start="16256" end="16290" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals" label="Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723675" start="16302" end="16328" title="You Put a Move on My Heart" label="You Put a Move on My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934625" start="16338" end="16375" title="Grammy Award for Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19978381" start="16387" end="16396" title="Slow Jams" label="Slow Jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113378" start="16406" end="16460" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542319" start="16466" end="16470" title="42nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576271" start="16479" end="16501" title="Spend My Life with You" label="Spend My Life with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q630124" start="16595" end="16599" title="55th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877819" start="16608" end="16626" title="Beautiful Surprise (song)" label="Beautiful Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459443" start="16635" end="16652" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Song" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542163" start="16691" end="16709" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Album" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="16715" end="16732" title="NAACP Image Award" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659596" start="16780" end="16796" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song" label="Outstanding Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="16802" end="16812" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314162" start="16839" end="16843" title="Juno Awards of 1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314050" start="16846" end="16877" title="Juno Award for Breakthrough Artist of the Year" label="Breakthrough Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314091" start="16903" end="16937" title="Juno Award for R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year" label="R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314166" start="16943" end="16947" title="Juno Awards of 2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314172" start="17013" end="17017" title="Juno Awards of 2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079614" start="17026" end="17048" title="Officially Missing You" label="Officially Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314174" start="17097" end="17101" title="Juno Awards of 2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q959013" start="17163" end="17186" title="Soul Train Music Awards" label="Soul Train Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953657" start="17189" end="17193" title="2012 Soul Train Music Awards" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140254" start="17546" end="17559" title="Source Awards" label="Source Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503638" start="17575" end="17583" title="Into You (Fabolous song)" label="Into You"/>
<link wikidata="Q105771390" start="17650" end="17707" title="List of Billboard number-one dance club songs" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; number-one dance club songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606235" start="17710" end="17783" title="List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348395" start="17786" end="17824" title="List of people with multiple sclerosis" label="List of people with multiple sclerosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758440" wikidata="Q980966" url="?curid=758440" title="Nordic Optical Telescope">
<text>The Nordic Optical Telescope (NOT) is an astronomical telescope located at Roque de los Muchachos Observatory, La Palma in the Canary Islands. The telescope saw first light in 1988, and was officially inaugurated during September 1989. Regular observing started in 1990. It is funded by Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and (since 1997) Iceland. Access is provided directly to astronomers of the funding countries, and of all nationalities through international time allocation committees.

The main mirror has a diameter of . The optical forming was done at the optical laboratory at the Tuorla Observatory, on mirror blanks made of Zerodur at Schott Glaswerke in Mainz, Germany.

While the NOT was designed as a passive telescope, with the mirror sufficiently thick to keep its shape even without an active feedback loop, its mirror was designed to be suspended on a pneumatic support system. The designers had planned that this and the flexibility of the mirror would allow for the implementation of a so-called active optics system, a feature that was then under development for ESO&#x27;s New Technology Telescope. In 1992, such an active optics system was installed at the NOT.

== Instrumentation ==
The NOT operates three instruments that can be mounted -only one at a time- under the Cassegrain focus:
* ALFOSC: a CCD camera and spectrograph. This is a versatile instrument that gets most time in the focus. It includes a polarimetry module that allows it to be used for polarimetry and spectropolarimetry.
* NOTCam: a near infrared camera and spectrograph.
* MOSCA: a 4-CCD mosaic camera, of high efficiency in the blue end of the spectra.

There are two more instruments, permanently mounted on a folded-Cassegrain configuration. Retractable folding mirrors allow to switch in short time from the main instrument to either of them.
* FIES: a cross-dispersed high-resolution echelle spectrograph, isolated from thermal and mechanical instability. This is the latest addition to the telescope.
* StanCam: a 1 Megapixel CCD camera. Less sensitive than ALFOSC, and with a smaller field of view, it works as a companion for NOTCam (providing optical photometry), or to react to &quot;target of opportunity&quot; programs when neither ALFOSC nor MOSCA are mounted.

=== Visitor Instruments ===

The NOT has been host to a number of instruments on a &quot;visitor&quot; status.
* TURPOL: UBVRI Photopolarimeter. TURPOL has been at the NOT since the very beginning, but it is not available as part of the general instrument set.
* PolCor: a combined &quot;Lucky&quot; imager, polarimeter, and coronagraph
* LuckyCam: High frame rate, low noise CCD camera for lucky imaging
* SOFIN: High resolution CCD spectrograph. This instrument was first used in 1991, spent many years usefully at the NOT, and was finally decommissioned during 2014.

=== Future ===

A new instrument for the NOT is currently under development, under the working name of NOT Transient Explorer (NTE). This new instrument is intended to be mounted permanently at the Cassegrain focus, providing imaging and spectroscopic capabilities both in the full optical and near-infrared range.

==See also==
List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century

==References==
==External links==

* not.iac.es - official site.
* Video - Video about and at the telescope.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980966" start="4" end="28" title="Nordic Optical Telescope" label="Nordic Optical Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q980966" start="30" end="33" title="Nordic Optical Telescope" label="NOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="54" end="63" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068376" start="75" end="109" title="Roque de los Muchachos Observatory" label="Roque de los Muchachos Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q201689" start="111" end="119" title="La Palma" label="La Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="127" end="141" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="287" end="294" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="296" end="302" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="304" end="310" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="312" end="319" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="338" end="345" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q776020" start="590" end="608" title="Tuorla Observatory" label="Tuorla Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q565558" start="646" end="652" title="Schott AG" label="Schott"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="1084" end="1087" title="ESO" label="ESO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982969" start="1095" end="1119" title="New Technology Telescope" label="New Technology Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="1324" end="1334" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1339" end="1351" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q899381" start="1481" end="1492" title="polarimetry" label="polarimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="1529" end="1549" title="infrared camera" label="near infrared camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q910407" start="1886" end="1906" title="Echelle grating" label="echelle spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2029" end="2039" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="2597" end="2608" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2648" end="2658" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515016" start="2663" end="2676" title="lucky imaging" label="lucky imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625026" start="3172" end="3226" title="List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century" label="List of largest optical telescopes in the 20th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758441" wikidata="Q5031722" url="?curid=758441" title="Candida (song)">
<text>&quot;Candida&quot; was the first single released by the American pop music group Dawn, with vocals by Tony Orlando, in July 1970. The song, written by Irwin Levine and Toni Wine, was produced by Dave Appell and Hank Medress for Bell Records. Appell and Medress originally recorded another singer on the track, but decided that a different vocal approach would be preferable. Medress then approached Orlando to do the vocals. Orlando had been a professional singer in the early 1960s, but now worked as a music publishing manager for Columbia Records. Although initially worried about losing his job at Columbia, Orlando eventually agreed to lend his voice to the track.

&quot;Candida&quot; became a worldwide hit, reaching number one in five countries, and the top ten in many others, including number 3 in the USA. It was included on Dawn&#x27;s debut LP in 1970 and later appeared on several compilation albums. Andy Williams, Jesse Winchester, Ray Conniff, and Bernd Spier are among the artists who have covered the song.

==Background and recording==
In 1970 Hank Medress of the Tokens and Dave Appell were producing a song called &quot;Candida&quot; for Bell Records. The composition was written by Toni Wine and Irwin Levine. For the first recording of the song, the lead vocal was done by blues singer Frankie Paris, in a style reminiscent of the Drifters. Paris&#x27;s performance was deemed unsatisfactory, and a new singer was sought for the track. Medress believed that &quot;an ethnic feel&quot; would suit the song well. He asked his friend Tony Orlando, whose heritage is Puerto Rican and Greek, to perform its lead vocal.

Orlando, a former professional singer, had had two top-40 hits in the US in 1961, but later moved into the music publishing business; in 1967 Columbia Records chose him to manage their publishing division, April-Blackwood Music. When Medress approached Orlando, he was reluctant to perform on a Bell Records single, as he did not want to jeopardize his job at Columbia. Medress reassured him by saying they would use a band name for the release, and that nobody would know who the singer was. Orlando finally agreed, partly because he believed the song would be unsuccessful and would not attract any attention. He went into a studio with Appell and Medress, and sang his lead vocal over previously recorded tracks. Background vocals had been done by Wine and the Tokens&#x27; Jay Siegel; Orlando was not present when these were recorded. By different accounts, additional background singers may have included Ellie Greenwich, Robin Grean, Leslie Miller, and Linda November. Tokens drummer Phil Margo and Siegel played instruments on at least one of the versions of the song. The music of Orlando&#x27;s version has been described as having &quot;a lilting, sing-along groove&quot;.

==Release==
&quot;Candida&quot; was released as a single in July 1970 under the moniker Dawn, named after the daughter of either Jay Siegel or Bell Records executive Steve Wax. The single reached number one in Brazil, Malaysia, Singapore, Spain, and Sweden, and the top ten in Austria, Canada, Denmark, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the UK, and the USA. It also reached the top twenty in Australia, Belgium, and Germany. &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked the record as the No. 18 song of 1970.

Jay Warner, author of &quot;American Singing Groups: A History from 1940 to Today&quot;, notes that the group the Corporation released a different version of &quot;Candida&quot; around the same time as Dawn&#x27;s. The Corporation&#x27;s recording was produced by Bill and Steve James, and released on Musicor Records. Warner believes that this version was based on an early, slower piano-and-vocals demo by Toni Wine. A July 1970 capsule review in &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine of both Dawn&#x27;s and the Corporation&#x27;s versions categorized the latter&#x27;s recording as possessing &quot;a strong blues and Tex-Mex flavor&quot;, and stated that both singles had &quot;equal sales and chart potential&quot;. However, although for a short while it seemed there might be competition between the two, the Corporation&#x27;s single did not sell well.

Dawn&#x27;s version was released on their debut album, &quot;Candida&quot;, in 1970, and later on the Dawn compilations &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, &quot;The World of Tony Orlando &amp; Dawn&quot;, &quot;The Definitive Collection&quot;, and &quot;The Big Hits&quot;. It has also appeared on various-artists compilations including &quot;Today&#x27;s Super Hits&quot;, &quot;AM Gold: 1970&quot;, and &quot;Real 70&#x27;s: the Polyester Hits, Disc One&quot;.

==Covers==

Numerous musicians have covered &quot;Candida&quot;, among them Andy Williams, Jesse Winchester, Jimmy Velvet, Ray Conniff, and reggae artists Owen Gray and the Pioneers. Foreign-language versions have included recordings in Portuguese by the Fevers, in Spanish by La Tropa Loca, and in German by Bata Illic and Bernd Spier.

==Chart performance==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5031722" start="6" end="13" title="Candida (song)" label="Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="66" end="75" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178760" start="82" end="86" title="Tony Orlando and Dawn" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="103" end="115" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075084" start="152" end="164" title="Irwin Levine" label="Irwin Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821357" start="169" end="178" title="Toni Wine" label="Toni Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228243" start="196" end="207" title="Dave Appell" label="Dave Appell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132347" start="212" end="224" title="Hank Medress" label="Hank Medress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883239" start="229" end="241" title="Bell Records" label="Bell Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="534" end="550" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q214548" start="916" end="929" title="Andy Williams" label="Andy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688204" start="931" end="947" title="Jesse Winchester" label="Jesse Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q206304" start="949" end="960" title="Ray Conniff" label="Ray Conniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q73907" start="966" end="977" title="Bernd Spier" label="Bernd Spier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231" start="1081" end="1091" title="the Tokens" label="the Tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060576" start="1352" end="1364" title="the Drifters" label="the Drifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="1556" end="1568" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218786" start="1846" end="1867" title="April-Blackwood Music" label="April-Blackwood Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q299679" start="2550" end="2565" title="Ellie Greenwich" label="Ellie Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551862" start="2599" end="2613" title="Linda November" label="Linda November"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184030" start="2630" end="2640" title="Phil Margo" label="Phil Margo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942630" start="3629" end="3644" title="Musicor Records" label="Musicor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="3727" end="3731" title="Demo recording" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3782" end="3791" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="3942" end="3949" title="Tejano music" label="Tex-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031719" start="4243" end="4250" title="Candida (album)" label="Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q214548" start="4714" end="4727" title="Andy Williams" label="Andy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688204" start="4729" end="4745" title="Jesse Winchester" label="Jesse Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201465" start="4747" end="4759" title="Jimmy Velvet" label="Jimmy Velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206304" start="4761" end="4772" title="Ray Conniff" label="Ray Conniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358997" start="4793" end="4802" title="Owen Gray" label="Owen Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754873" start="4807" end="4819" title="The Pioneers (band)" label="the Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733705" start="4889" end="4899" title="the Fevers" label="the Fevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q73907" start="4962" end="4973" title="Bernd Spier" label="Bernd Spier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758442" wikidata="Q29149" url="?curid=758442" title="French Bulldog">
<text>The French Bulldog () is a French breed of companion dog or toy dog. It appeared in Paris in the mid-nineteenth century, apparently the result of cross-breeding of Toy Bulldogs imported from England and local Parisian ratters. It is commonly kept as a pet and is among the most frequently registered dogs in a number of countries including Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The breed is susceptible to various health problems as a consequence of being bred for a distinctive appearance, sporting a brachycephalic face and skin wrinkles.

== History ==

From the beginning of the nineteenth century, bulldogs were bred in the United Kingdom for purposes other than traditional blood sports such as bull-baiting, which were banned in 1835. By the middle of the century there were miniature bulldogs, most weighing around .

At the same time, lace workers from Nottingham who were displaced by the Industrial Revolution began to settle in Normandy, France. They brought a variety of dogs with them, including Toy Bulldogs. The dogs became popular in France and a trade in imported small Bulldogs was created, with breeders in England sending over Bulldogs that they considered to be too small, or with faults such as ears that stood up. By 1860, there were few Toy Bulldogs left in England, such was their popularity in France.

The small Bulldog type gradually became thought of as a breed, and received a name, the Bouledogue Francais. This French version of the English name is also a contraction of the words (&#x27;ball&#x27;) and (&#x27;mastiff&#x27;). The dogs were highly fashionable and were sought after by society ladies and Parisian prostitutes alike, as well as creators such as artists, writers, and fashion designers. The artists Edgar Degas and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec are thought to have French Bulldogs in their paintings. However, records were not kept of the breed&#x27;s development as it diverged further away from its original Bulldog roots. As it changed, terrier stock had been brought in to develop traits such as the breed&#x27;s long straight ears.

===Depictions in nineteenth-century paintings===
=== Breed clubs and modern recognition ===
Americans had been importing French Bulldogs for a while, but it was not until 1885 that they were brought over in order to set up an American-based breeding program. They were mostly owned by society ladies, who first displayed them at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1896. In the following year, the judge at the dog show, George Raper, only chose winners with &quot;rose ears&quot;—ears that folded at the tip, as with the standard for Bulldogs. The ladies formed the French Bull Dog Club of America and created a breed standard which preferred the &quot;erect bat ear&quot; type.In the early 20th century, the breed remained in vogue for high society, with dogs changing hands for up to $3,000 and being owned by members of influential families such as the Rockefellers and the J. P. Morgans. The American Kennel Club recognized the breed quickly after the breed club was formed, and by 1906 the French Bulldog was the fifth most popular dog breed in America. 

This new Bulldog breed arrived for the first time in England in 1893, with English Bulldog breeders in an uproar as the French imports did not meet the new breed standards in place by this time, and they wanted to prevent the English stock from crossbreeding with the French. The Kennel Club initially recognized them as a subset of the existing Bulldog breed rather than an entirely new breed. Some English breeders in this period bred the French Bulldogs in order to resurrect the Toy Bulldog. On 10 July 1902, at the house of Frederick W. Cousens, a meeting was held to set up a breed club in order to seek individual recognition for the French breed. The adopted breed standard was the same one which was already in use in America, France, Germany and Austria. Despite opposition from Miniature Bulldog (the new breed name for the Toy Bulldog) and Bulldog breeders, in 1905, the Kennel Club changed its policy on the breed and recognized them separate from the English variety, initially as the Bouledogue Francais, then in 1912 as the French Bulldog.

Today the French Bulldog is commonly kept as a pet: in 2020, it was the second-most registered dog in the United Kingdom, and the fourth-most in the United States. They were rated the third-most popular dog in Australia in 2017. In 2019, in the United Kingdom, the French Bulldog had a total of 33,661 registered dogs. By comparison, the Labrador Retriever had over 36,700 dogs and the Cocker Spaniel fewer than 22,000. In 2013, the American Kennel Club (AKC) ranked the French Bulldog as the 10th most popular breed in the United States, enjoying a sharp rise in popularity from 54th place a decade before, in 2003. In 2023, the French Bulldog overtook the Labrador as the most popular breed of dog as ranked by the AKC. Before 2023, Labradors had held the top spot for 31 years.

====Historic photographs====
== Description ==
The American Kennel Club standard for the French Bulldog states that it should be muscular, with a soft and loose coat forming wrinkles. 

The AKC Standard weight for a French Bulldog is at maximum . The head of a French bulldog should be square shaped and large, with ears that resemble bat ears. French bulldogs are a flat-faced breed. Eyes that are AKC Standard approved for French Bulldogs are dark, almost to the point of being black; blue eyed French bulldogs are not AKC approved. The coat of a French bulldog should be short haired and fine and silky. Acceptable colors under the breed standard are the various shades of brindle, fawn, cream or white with brindle patches (known as &quot;pied&quot;). The fawn colors can be any light through red. The most common colors are brindle, then fawn, with pieds being less common than the other colors. The breed clubs do not recognize any other colors or patterns.

== Health ==
A study in the UK comparing French Bulldogs to the general canine population found that of 43 common conditions, the French Bulldog had significantly higher prevalence for almost half (20/43) and a significantly lower prevalence for a quarter (11/43). Stenotic nares had an occurrence rate of 42 times the general population, brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome was 30 times more prevalent, aural discharge was 14 times more prevalent, skin fold dermatitis was 11 times more prevalent, and dystocia was 9 times more prevalent.

In 2013, a UK Medical Study reviewed the health of 2228 French Bulldogs under veterinary care in the UK. The study found that 1612 (72.4%) of these French Bulldog had at least one recorded health issue: The most common disorders recorded were ear infections (14.0%), diarrhea (7.5%) and conjunctivitis (3.2%). Skin problems were the most commonly reported group of disorders (17.9%).

Despite these challenges, the popularity of French Bulldogs continues to rise, emphasizing the importance of addressing their health issues.

===Brachycephaly===
The shortened snout and pushed in face of the French Bulldog is known as brachycephaly. Brachycephaly results in deformation of the upper airway tract and leads to obstruction of breathing. Effects of brachycephaly are stridor, stertorous breathing, emesis, skin fold dermatitis, brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome, exophthalmos, pharyngeal gag reflex, cyanosis, and laryngeal collapse. Other issues arising from brachycephaly are risk of complications whilst under anaesthesia, and hyperthermia — with the latter caused due to an inability to effectively reduce body temperature via panting.
French Bulldogs are banned by several commercial airlines due to the numbers that have died while in the air.

===Life expectancy===

A study of the deaths of 30,563 dogs of different breeds in the United Kingdom in 2016–2020 found the French Bulldog to have a life expectancy at birth of , the lowest by a large margin of all breeds in the study, which found an average for all dogs of . This same study indicates that the low life expectancy for French Bulldogs is possibly influenced by the increasing number of French Bulldogs present in the UK, increasing from 2,771 KC registered individuals in 2011 to 39,266 individuals in 2020, skewing the general population to be very young on average and biasing the data. A Japanese study of pet cemetery data found the French Bulldog to have a life expectancy of 10.2 years, the lowest of all breeds in the study. A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 9.8 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.

=== Birth and reproduction ===
French Bulldogs frequently require Caesarean section to give birth, with over 80% of litters delivered this way.

A UK study identified French Bulldog bitches to be 15.9 times more likely to experience dystocia.

===Orthopaedics===
French Bulldogs are prone to having congenital hemivertebrae (also called &quot;butterfly vertebrae&quot;). 

A review of more than 200,000 patients in the UK found that French Bulldogs had a noticeably higher occurrence of patellar luxation with the French Bulldog having an odds ratio of 5.4.

=== Other conditions ===
A French study found that 45% of French Bulldogs presenting with a neurological condition had Hansen type I intervertebral disk herniation, with the study concluding that the French Bulldog is prone to the condition.

A UK study found the French Bulldog to be more likely to suffer from thoracic vertebral malformations than other breeds.

A British study found demodicosis to be more prevalent in the French Bulldog than other breeds. The overall prevalence in French Bulldogs was 1.3% compared to the overall rate of 0.17%. The prevalence in dogs under the age of 2 years was 1.9% compared to 0.48%.

The French Bulldog is one of the most commonly affected breeds for hereditary cataracts.

The French Bulldog is also prone to skin allergies (in addition to the demodicosis called out above) that often result in excessive licking of the paws, watery eyes, ear infections, sneezing, or vomiting.

== Notes ==


== References ==

== Other sources ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29149" start="4" end="18" title="French Bulldog" label="French Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="34" end="39" title="Dog breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q38499" start="43" end="56" title="companion dog" label="companion dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991480" start="60" end="67" title="toy dog" label="toy dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390467" start="146" end="160" title="cross-breeding" label="cross-breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q39145" start="164" end="175" title="Toy Bulldog" label="Toy Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132945" start="218" end="225" title="Ratter (dog)" label="ratters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953365" start="518" end="532" title="Brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome" label="brachycephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="619" end="626" title="bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929372" start="696" end="708" title="blood sports" label="blood sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="860" end="864" title="lace" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="878" end="888" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="915" end="936" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="956" end="964" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="1762" end="1773" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="1778" end="1803" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361488" start="2430" end="2462" title="Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show" label="Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q579565" start="2714" end="2728" title="Breed standard (dogs)" label="breed standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="2958" end="2970" title="Rockefeller family" label="Rockefellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="2979" end="2991" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="2998" end="3018" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q39431" start="3439" end="3454" title="The Kennel Club" label="The Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="4558" end="4576" title="Labrador Retriever" label="Labrador Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227301" start="4606" end="4620" title="Cocker Spaniel" label="Cocker Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42649" start="5369" end="5385" title="brachycephalic" label="flat-faced breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969557" start="5678" end="5685" title="brindle" label="brindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607913" start="6232" end="6246" title="Stenotic nares" label="Stenotic nares"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="6378" end="6393" title="Otitis media" label="aural discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q796150" start="6423" end="6443" title="Intertrigo" label="skin fold dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811189" start="6477" end="6485" title="dystocia" label="dystocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42649" start="7135" end="7148" title="brachycephaly" label="brachycephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525170" start="7281" end="7288" title="stridor" label="stridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="7312" end="7318" title="emesis" label="emesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953365" start="7342" end="7384" title="brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome" label="brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="7386" end="7398" title="exophthalmos" label="exophthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142879" start="7400" end="7421" title="Pharyngeal reflex" label="pharyngeal gag reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="7423" end="7431" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="7553" end="7565" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38945" start="8648" end="8659" title="Mongrel" label="crossbreeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="8728" end="8745" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q332343" start="8972" end="8985" title="Congenital vertebral anomaly" label="hemivertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q332343" start="9005" end="9024" title="butterfly vertebrae" label="butterfly vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q381444" start="9149" end="9166" title="patellar luxation" label="patellar luxation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9340" end="9384" title="spinal disk herniation" label="Hansen type I intervertebral disk herniation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9533" end="9565" title="thoracic vertebral malformations" label="thoracic vertebral malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030785" start="9608" end="9619" title="demodicosis" label="demodicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912295" start="9916" end="9936" title="Cataracts (canine)" label="hereditary cataracts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758445" wikidata="Q1552846" url="?curid=758445" title="Baler">
<text>A baler or hay baler is a piece of farm machinery used to compress a cut and raked crop (such as hay, cotton, flax straw, salt marsh hay, or silage) into compact bales that are easy to handle, transport, and store. Often, bales are configured to dry and preserve some intrinsic (e.g. the nutritional) value of the plants bundled. Different types of balers are commonly used, each producing a different type of balerectangular or cylindrical, of various sizes, bound with twine, strapping, netting, or wire.

Industrial balers are also used in material recycling facilities, primarily for baling metal, plastic, or paper for transport.

==History==
Before the 19th century, hay was cut by hand and most typically stored in haystacks using hay forks to rake and gather the scythed grasses into optimally sized heapsneither too large, promoting conditions favorable for spontaneous combustion, nor too small, which would mean much of the pile is susceptible to rotting. These haystacks lifted most of the plant fibers up off the ground, letting air in and water drain out, so the grasses could dry and cure, to retain nutrition for livestock feed at a later time.

In the 1860s, mechanical cutting devices were developed; from these came modern devices including mechanical mowers and balers. In 1872, a reaper that used a knotter device to bundle and bind hay was invented by Charles Withington; this was commercialized in 1874 by Cyrus McCormick. In 1936, Innes invented an automatic baler that tied bales with twine using Appleby-type knotters from a John Deere grain binder; in 1938, Edwin Nolt filed a patent for an improved version that was more reliable.

The first round baler was probably invented in the late 19th century and one was shown in Paris by Pilter (as illustrated by Michael Williams in Steam Power in Agriculture: Blandford, 1977). This was a portable machine designed for use with threshing machines.

==Round baler==

The most common type of baler in industrialized countries today is the round baler. It produces cylinder-shaped &quot;round&quot; or &quot;rolled&quot; bales. The design has a &quot;thatched roof&quot; effect that withstands weather. Grass is rolled up inside the baler using rubberized belts, fixed rollers, or a combination of the two. When the bale reaches a predetermined size, either netting or twine is wrapped around it to hold its shape. The back of the baler swings open, and the bale is discharged. The bales are complete at this stage, but they may also be wrapped in plastic sheeting by a bale wrapper, either to keep hay dry when stored outside or convert damp grass into silage. Variable-chamber large round balers typically produce bales from in diameter and up to in width. The bales can weigh anywhere from , depending upon size, material, and moisture content. Common modern small round balers (also called &quot;mini round balers&quot;) produce bales in diameter and in width, generally weighing from .

Originally conceived by Ummo Luebben circa 1910, the first round baler did not see production until 1947 when Allis-Chalmers introduced the Roto-Baler. Marketed for the water-shedding and light weight properties of its hay bales, AC had sold nearly 70,000 units by the end of production in 1960.

The next major innovation began in 1965 when a graduate student at Iowa State University, Virgil Haverdink, sought out Wesley F. Buchele, a professor of Agricultural Engineering, seeking a research topic for a master thesis. Over the next year, Buchele and Haverdink developed a new design for a large round baler, completed and tested in 1966, and thereafter dubbed the Buchele–Haverdink large round baler. The large round bales were about in diameter, long, and they weighed about after they driedabout 80 kg/m3 (5 lb/ft3). The design was promoted as a &quot;Whale of a Bale&quot; and Iowa State University now explains the innovative design as follows:
In the summer of 1969, the Australian Econ Fodder Roller baler came out, a design that made a ground-rolled bale. In September of that same year, The Hawkbilt Company of Vinton, Iowa, contacted Dr. Buchele about his design, then fabricated a large ground-rolling round baler which baled hay that had been laid out in a windrow, and began manufacturing large round balers in 1970.

In 1972, Gary Vermeer of Pella, Iowa, designed and fabricated a round baler after the design of the A-C Roto-Baler, and the Vermeer Company began selling its model 605the first modern round baler. The Vermeer design used belts to compact hay into a cylindrical shape as is seen today.

In the early 1980s, collaboration between Walterscheid and Vermeer produced the first effective uses of CV joints in balers, and later in other farm machinery. Due to the heavy torque required for such equipment, double Cardan joints are primarily used. Former Walterscheid engineer Martin Brown is credited with &quot;inventing&quot; this use for universal joints.

By 1975, fifteen American and Canadian companies were manufacturing large round balers.

===Transport, handling, and feeding===

==== Short-haul transport and on-field handling ====

Due to the ability for round bales to roll away on a slope, they require specific treatment for safe transport and handling. Small round bales can typically be moved by hand or with lower-powered equipment. Due to their size and their weight, which can be a ton or more, large round bales require special transport and moving equipment.

The most important tool for large round bale handling is the bale spear or spike, which is usually mounted on the back of a tractor or the front of a skid-steer. It is inserted into the approximate center of the round bale, then lifted and the bale is hauled away. Once at the destination, the bale is set down, and the spear pulled out. Careful placement of the spear in the center is needed or the bale can spin around and touch the ground while in transport, causing a loss of control. When used for wrapped bales that are to be stored further, the spear makes a hole in the wrapping that must be sealed with plastic tape to maintain a hermetic seal.

Alternatively, a grapple fork may be used to lift and transport large round bales. The grapple fork is a hydraulically driven implement attached to the end of a tractor&#x27;s bucket loader. When the hydraulic cylinder is extended, the fork clamps downward toward the bucket, much like a closing hand. To move a large round bale, the tractor approaches the bale from the side and places the bucket underneath the bale. The fork is then clamped down across the top of the bale, and the bucket is lifted with the bale in tow. Grab hooks installed on the bucket of a tractor are another tool used to handle round bales, and can be done by a farmer with welding skills by welding two hooks and a heavy chain to the outside top of a tractor front loader bucket.

==== Long-haul transport ====
The rounded surface of round bales poses a challenge for long-haul, flat-bed transport, as they could roll off of the flat surface if not properly supported. This is particularly the case with large round bales; their size makes them difficult to flip, so it may not be feasible to flip many of them onto the flat surface for transport and then re-position them on the round surface at the destination. One option that works with both large and small round bales is to equip the flat-bed trailer with guard rails at either end, which prevent bales from rolling either forward or backward. Another solution is the saddle wagon, which has closely spaced rounded saddles or support posts in which round bales sit. The tall sides of each saddle prevent the bales from rolling around while on the wagon, as the bale settles down in between posts. On 3 September 2010, on the A381 in Halwell near Totnes, Devon, England, an early member of British rock group ELO Mike Edwards was killed when his van was crushed by a large round bale. The cellist, 62, died instantly when the bale fell from a tractor on nearby farmland before rolling onto the road and crushing his van.

==== Feeding ====
A large round bale can be directly used for feeding animals by placing it in a feeding area, tipping it over, removing the bale wrap, and placing a protective ring (a &quot;ring feeder&quot;) around the outside so that animals will not walk on hay that has been peeled off the outer perimeter of the bale. The round baler&#x27;s rotational forming and compaction process also enables both large and small round bales to be fed out by unrolling the bale, leaving a continuous flat strip in the field or behind a feeding barrier.

===Silage or haylage===

Silage, a fermented animal feed, was introduced in the late 1800s, and can also be stored in a silage or haylage bale, which is a high-moisture bale wrapped in plastic film. These are baled much wetter than hay bales, and are usually smaller than hay bales because the greater moisture content makes them heavier and harder to handle. These bales begin to ferment almost immediately, and the metal bale spear stabbed into the core becomes very warm to the touch from the fermentation process.

Silage or haylage bales may be wrapped by placing them on a rotating bale spear mounted on the rear of a tractor. As the bale spins, a layer of plastic cling film is applied to the exterior of the bale. This roll of plastic is mounted in a sliding shuttle on a steel arm and can move parallel to the bale axis, so the operator does not need to hold up the heavy roll of plastic. The plastic layer extends over the ends of the bale to form a ring of plastic approximately wide on the ends, with hay exposed in the center.

To stretch the cling-wrap plastic tightly over the bale, the tension is actively adjusted with a knob on the end of the roll, which squeezes the ends of the roll in the shuttle. In the example wrapping video, the operator is attempting to use high tension to get a flat, smooth seal on the right end. However, the tension increases too much and the plastic tears off. The operator recovers by quickly loosening the tension and allows the plastic to feed out halfway around the bale before reapplying the tension to the sheeting.

These bales are placed in a long continuous row, with each wrapped bale pressed firmly against all the other bales in the row before being set down onto the ground. The plastic wrap on the ends of each bale sticks together to seal out air and moisture, protecting the silage from the elements. The end-bales are hand-sealed with strips of cling plastic across the opening.

The airtight seal between each bale permits the row of round bales to ferment as if they were in a silo bag, but they are easier to handle than a silo bag, as they are more robust and compact. The plastic usage is relatively high, and there is no way to reuse the silage-contaminated plastic sheeting, although it can be recycled or used as a fuel source via incineration. The wrapping cost is approximately US$5 per bale.

An alternative form of wrapping uses the same type of bale placed on a bale wrapper, consisting of pair of rollers on a turntable mounted on the three-point linkage of a tractor. It is then spun about two axes while being wrapped in several layers of cling-wrap plastic film. This covers the ends and sides of the bale in one operation, thus sealing it separately from other bales. The bales are then moved or stacked using a special pincer attachment on the front loader of a tractor, which does not damage the film seal. They can also be moved using a standard bale spike, but this punctures the airtight seal, and the hole in the film must be repaired after each move.

Plastic-wrapped bales must be unwrapped before being fed to livestock to prevent accidental ingestion of the plastic. Like round hay bales, silage bales are usually fed using a &quot;ring feeder&quot;.

==Large square baler==

In 1978, Hesston introduced the first &quot;large square baler&quot;, capable of compacting hay into more easily transported large square bales that could be stacked and tarped in the field (to protect them from rain) or loaded on trucks or containers for trucking or export. Depending upon the baler, these bales can weigh from for a or bale (versus for a round bale). As the pickup revolves just above the ground surface, the tines pick up and feed the hay into the flake forming chamber, where a &quot;flake&quot; of hay is formed before being pushed up into the path of the plunger, which then compresses it with great force (, depending on model) against the existing bale in the chamber. Once the desired length is achieved, the knotter arm is mechanically tripped to begin the knotting cycle in which several knotters (4–6 is common) tie the 4–6 strings that maintain the bale&#x27;s shape.

In the prairies of Canada, the large rectangular balers are also called &quot;prairie raptors&quot;.

===Large square bale handling and transport===
Square bales are easier to transport than round bales, since there is little risk of the bale rolling off the back of a flatbed trailer. The rectangular shape also saves space and allows a complete solid slab of hay to be stacked for transport and storage. Most balers allow adjustment of length and it is common to produce bales of twice the width, allowing stacks with brick-like alternating groups overlapping the row below at right angles, creating a strong structure.

They are well-suited for large-scale livestock feedlot or dairy operations, where many tons of feed are rationed every hour. Most often, they are baled small enough that one person can carry or toss them where needed.

Due to the huge rectangular shape, large spear forks, or squeeze grips, are mounted to heavy lifting machinery, such as large forklifts, tractors equipped with front-end loaders, telehandlers, hay squeezes or wheel loaders to lift these bales.
==Small square baler==
The original type of baler produces small square bales. These bales are rectangular-shaped &quot;square&quot; bales. This was once the most prevalent form of baler but is less common today. It is primarily used on small acreages where large equipment is impractical and hay production for small operations, particularly horse owners who may not have access to the specialized feeding machinery used for larger bales. Each bale is about . The bales are usually wrapped with two, sometimes three, or more strands of knotted twine. The bales are light enough for one person to handle, about , depending upon the crop and pressure applied (can be 100 lbs for a 16&quot;x18&quot; 2-string bale and even more for a 3-string bale). Many balers have adjustable bale chamber pressure and bale length, so shorter, less-dense bales can be produced for easy handling.

To form the bale, the material to be baled (which is often hay or straw) in the windrow is lifted by tines in the baler&#x27;s &quot;reel&quot;. This material is then &quot;packed&quot; into the bale chamber, which runs the length of one side of the baler (usually the left-hand side when viewed from the rear) in offset balers. Balers like Hesston models use an in-line system where the hay goes straight through from the pickup to the flake chamber to the plunger and bale-forming chamber. A combination plunger and knife move back and forth in the front of this chamber, with the knife closing the door into the bale chamber as it moves backward. The plunger and knife are attached to a heavy asymmetrical flywheel to provide extra force as they pack the bales. A measuring device, typically a spiked wheel that is turned by the emerging balesmeasures the amount of material that is being compressed and, at the appropriate length, it triggers the &quot;knotters&quot; that wrap the twine around the bale and tie it off. As the next bale is formed, the tied one is driven out of the rear of the baling chamber, where it can either drop to the ground or be sent to a wagon or accumulator towed behind the baler. 

When a wagon is used, the bale may be lifted by hand from the chamber by a worker on the wagon who stacks the bales on the wagon, or the bale may be propelled into the wagon by a mechanism on the baler, commonly either a &quot;thrower&quot; (parallel high-speed drive belts which throw the bale into the wagon) or a &quot;kicker&quot; (mechanical arm which throws the bale into the wagon). In the case of a thrower or kicker, the wagon has high walls on the left, right, and back sides and a short wall on the front side to contain the randomly piled bales. This process continues as long as the material is in the bale chamber and there is twine to tie the bales.

This form of bale is not used much in large-scale commercial agriculture because the efficiency and speed of large bales are higher. However, it has some popularity in small-scale, low-mechanization agriculture and horse-keeping. Besides using simpler machinery and being easy to handle, these small bales can also be used for insulation and building materials in straw-bale construction. Convenience is also a significant factor in farmers deciding to continue putting up square bales, as they make feeding and bedding in confined areas (stables, barns, etc.) much more manageable and thus command a higher market value per ton.

The automatic baler for small square bales took on most of its present form in 1938, with the first baler sold as Arthur S. Young&#x27;s Automaton Baler. It was manufactured in small numbers until New Holland Ag acquired it.

In Europe, as early as 1939, both Claas of Germany and Rousseau SA of France had automatic twine-tying pick-up balers. Most of these produced low-density bales, however. The first successful pick-up balers were made by the Ann Arbor Company in 1929. Ann Arbor was acquired by the Oliver Farm Equipment Company in 1943. Despite their head start on the rest of the field, no Ann Arbor balers carried automatic knotters or twisters and Oliver did not produce its own automatic tying baler until 1949.

===Small square bale handling and transport===
In the 1940s most farmers would bale hay in the field with a small tractor with 20 or less horsepower, and the tied bales would be dropped onto the ground as the baler moved through the field. Another team of workers with horses and a flatbed wagon would come by and use a sharp metal hook to grab the bale and throw it up onto the wagon while an assistant stacked the bales, for transport to the barn.

A later time-saving innovation was to tow the flatbed wagon directly behind the baler. The bale would be pushed up a ramp to a waiting attendant on the wagon. The attendant would hook the bale off the ramp and stack it on the wagon while waiting for the next bale to be produced.

Eventually, as balers evolved, the bale thrower was developed, eliminating needing someone to stand on the wagon and pick up the finished bales. The first thrower mechanism used two fast-moving friction belts to grab finished bales and throw them at an angle up in the air onto the bale wagon. The bale wagon was modified from a flatbed into a three-sided skeleton frame open at the front to act as a catcher&#x27;s net for the thrown bales.

As tractor horsepower increased, the thrower-baler&#x27;s next innovation was the hydraulic tossing baler. This employs a flat pan behind the bale knotter. As bales advance out the back of the baler, they are pushed onto the pan one at a time. When the bale has moved entirely onto the pan, the pan suddenly pops up, pushed by a large hydraulic cylinder, and tosses the bale up into the wagon like a catapult.

The pan-thrower method puts much less stress on the bales than the belt-thrower. The friction belts of the belt-thrower stress the twine and knots as they grip the bale and occasionally cause bales to break apart in the thrower or when the bales land in the wagon.

===Mechanical small square bale handling===
There are several ways to handle small bales automatically and eliminate hand labor almost completely. Bale stackers, bale bundlers, bale accumulators, and bale sledges are the different categories of these machines.
Bale Stackers: Bales may be picked up from the field and stacked using a self-powered machine called a &quot;bale stacker&quot;, &quot;bale wagon&quot; or &quot;harobed&quot;. There are several designs and sizes made by New Holland. One type picks up square bales, which are dropped by the baler with the strings facing sideways. The stacker will drive up to each bale, pick it up, and set it on a three-bale-wide table (the strings are now facing upwards). Once three bales are on the table, the table lifts up and back, causing the three bales to face strings to the side again; this happens three more times until there are 16 bales on the main table. This table will lift like the smaller one, and the bales will be up against a vertical table. The machine will hold 160 bales (ten tiers); usually, there will be cross-tiers near the center to keep the stack from swaying or collapsing if any weight is applied to the top of the stack. The full load will be transported to a barn; the whole rear of the stacker will tilt upwards until it is vertical. There will be two pushers that will extend through the machine and hold the bottom of the stack from being pulled out from the stacker while it is driven out of the barn.

Bale Bundlers: Bales may be picked up from the field or collected directly from the small square baler. Each bale is ingested into a compression chamber and indexed until either two or three are ready for compression. After 7 compression cycles are completed, making a cube of 14 or 21 bales they are tied with twine or banded into a bundle and ejected onto the ground. These bundles are then handled with spears, grabs, or pallet forks. They are of ideal dimensions for filling van trailers.
Bale Accumulators: Typically these are attached directly to the baler and arrange the small square bales into groups to be retrieved with a &quot;bale grabber&quot; or &quot;bale grab&quot; mounted on a loader. There are a number of different methods employed by these machines to arrange the bales into groups. One method is to allow up to three bales to be pushed in line onto a tray that is then emptied sideways by a hydraulically driven push bar onto a platform. After four or five such pushes, a group is made of 8, 10 12, or 15 bales and the platform is emptied onto the ground. 

Another, more efficient method that doesn&#x27;t use hydraulics, is to use a system of levers and gates to guide bales into channels. These can have four, five, or six channels and accommodate two or three bales per channel. This method can make groups of 4, 8, 10, 12, 15 or 18 bales. In this method, the last bale of the group triggers a rear gate open, and the bales are deposited on the ground.

These groups can be bound with twine for stack stability or not and be stacked on wagons or trailers for transport to storage. These groups are ideal for storage in buildings accessible to equipment. This is also the ideal way to automate bales and also allow them to cure properly.
Bale Sledge: In Britain (if small square bales are still to be used), they are usually collected as they fall out of the baler in a &quot;bale sledge&quot; dragged behind the baler. This has four channels, controlled by automatic mechanical balances, catches, and springs, which sort each bale into its place in a square &quot;eight&quot;. When the sledge is full, a catch is tripped automatically, and a door at the rear opens to leave the eight lying neatly together on the ground. These may be picked up individually and loaded by hand, or they may be picked up all eight together by a &quot;bale grab&quot; on a tractor, a special front loader consisting of many hydraulically powered downward-pointing curved spikes. The square eight will then be stacked, either on a trailer for transport or in a roughly cubic field stack eight or ten layers high. This cube may then be transported by a large machine attached to the three-point hitch behind a tractor, which clamps the sides of the cube and lifts it bodily.

==Square/wire bale history==
===Hay presses, wire balers===

Prior to 1937, the hay press was the common name of the stationary baling implement, powered with a tractor or stationary engine using a belt on a belt pulley, with the hay being brought to the baler and fed in by hand. Later, balers were made mobile, with a &#x27;pickup&#x27; to gather up the hay and feed it into the chamber. These often used air-cooled gasoline engines mounted on the baler for power. The biggest change to this type of baler since 1940 is being powered by the tractor through its power take-off (PTO), instead of by a built-in internal combustion engine.

In present-day production, small square balers can be ordered with twine knotters or wire tie knotters.

Not all stationary wire-tying balers used two wires. It was not uncommon for the larger bale sizeusually machines to use &#x27;boards&#x27; that had three slots for wires and hence tied three wires per bale. Most North American manufacturers produced these machines as either regular models or as size options. &#x27;Small square&#x27; three wire tying pick-up balers were available from the early 1930s, principally from J. I. Case &amp; Co. and Ann Arbor. These machines were hand-tying and hand-threading machines.

===Storage methods===
Before electrification occurred in rural parts of the United States in the 1940s, some small dairy farms would have tractors but not electric power. Often just one neighbor who could afford a tractor would do all the baling for surrounding farmers still using horses.

To get the bales up into the hayloft, a pulley system ran on a track along the peak of the barn&#x27;s hayloft. This track also stuck a few feet out the end of the loft, with a large access door under the track. On the bottom of the pulley system was a bale spear, which was pointed on the end and had retractable retention spikes.

A flatbed wagon would pull up next to the barn underneath the end of the track, the spear lowered down to the wagon and speared into a single bale. The pulley rope would be used to manually lift the bale up until it could enter the mow through the door, then moved along the track into the barn and finally released for manual stacking in tight rows across the floor of the loft. As the stack filled the loft, the bales would be lifted higher and higher with the pulleys until the hay was stacked all the way up to the peak.

When electricity arrived, the bale spear, pulley, and track system were replaced by long motorized bale conveyors known as hay elevators. A typical elevator is an open skeletal frame, with a chain that has dull spikes every few feet along the chain to grab bales and drag them along. One elevator replaced the spear track and ran the entire length of the peak of the barn. A second elevator was either installed at a 30-degree slope on the side of the barn to lift bales up to the peak elevator or used dual front-back chains surrounding the bale to lift bales straight up the side of the barn to the peak elevator.

A bale wagon pulled up next to the lifting elevator, and a farm worker placed bales one at a time onto the angled track. Once bales arrived at the peak elevator, adjustable tipping gates along the length of the peak elevator were opened by pulling a cable from the floor of the hayloft, so that bales tipped off the elevator and dropped down to the floor in different areas of the loft. This permitted a single elevator to transport hay to one part of a loft and straw to another part.

This complete hay elevator lifting, transport, and dropping system reduced bale storage labor to a single person, who simply pulls up with a wagon, turns on the elevators, and starts placing bales on it, occasionally checking to make sure that bales are falling in the right locations in the loft.

The neat stacking of bales in the loft is often sacrificed for the speed of just letting them fall and roll down the growing pile in the loft, and changing the elevator gates to fill in open areas around the loose pile. But if desired, the loose bale pile dropped by the elevator could be rearranged into orderly rows between wagon loads.

===Usage once in the barn===
The process of retrieving bales from a hayloft has stayed relatively unchanged from the beginning of baling. Typically workers were sent up into the loft, to climb up onto the bale stack, pull bales off the stack, and throw or roll them down the stack to the open floor of the loft. Once the bale is down on the floor, workers climb down the stack, open a cover over a bale chute in the floor of the loft, and push the bales down the chute to the livestock area of the barn.

Most barns were equipped with several chutes along the sides and in the center of the loft floor. This permitted bales to be dropped into the area where they were to be used. Hay bales would be dropped through side chutes, to be broken up and fed to the cattle. Straw bales would be dropped down the center chute, to be distributed as bedding in the livestock standing/resting areas.

Traditionally multiple bales were dropped down to the livestock floor and the twine was removed by hand. After drying and being stored under tons of pressure in the haystack, most bales are tightly compacted and need to be torn apart and fluffed up for use.

One recent method of speeding up all this manual bale handling is the bale shredder, which is a large vertical drum with rotary cutting/ripping teeth at the base of the drum. The shredder is placed under the chute and several bales are dropped in. A worker then pushes the shredder along the barn aisle as it rips up a bale and spews it out in a continuous fluffy stream of material.

==Industrial balers==
Industrial balers are typically used to compact similar types of waste, such as office paper, cardboard, plastic, foil, and cans, for sale to recycling companies. These balers are made of steel with a hydraulic ram to compress the material loaded. Some balers are simple and labor-intensive but are suitable for smaller volumes. Other balers are very complex and automated and are used where large quantities of waste are handled.

Used in recycling facilities, balers are a packaging step that allows for the aforementioned commodities to be broken down into dense cubes of one type of material at a time. There are different balers used depending on the material type. After a specific material is crushed down into a dense cube, it is tied to a bale by a thick wire and then pushed out of the machine. This process allows for easy transport of all materials involved.

&quot;Two-ram baler:&quot; A two-ram baler is a baling machine that contains two cylinders and is able to bundle and package most commodities except for cardboard and clear film. This baler is known for its durability and is able to take in more bulky material.

&quot;Single-ram baler:&quot; A single-ram baler is a baling machine that contains one cylinder. Because this baler is relatively smaller than the two-ram baler, it is best for small and medium commodities.

&quot;Closed door baler:&quot; This baler bales clear plastic film.

&quot;American baler:&quot; This baler bales corrugated materials.

==See also==
* Aluminium recycling
* Beaverslide
* Compactor
* Farm wagon
* Glass recycling
* Hay
* Hay rake
* List of farm implements
* Paper recycling
* Paper shredder
* Plastic recycling
* Straw bale
* Tedder
* Trolley
* Windrow
==References==
==External links==

* Hay Harvesting in the 1940s, instructional films, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="2" end="7" title="Baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="11" end="20" title="Baler" label="hay baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="35" end="49" title="farm machinery" label="farm machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="97" end="100" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="102" end="108" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="110" end="114" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="115" end="120" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="141" end="147" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q762984" start="471" end="476" title="twine" label="twine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569204" start="478" end="487" title="strapping" label="strapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151380" start="489" end="496" title="netting" label="netting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581084" start="501" end="505" title="baling wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5573447" start="552" end="572" title="Materials recovery facility" label="recycling facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="867" end="889" title="spontaneous combustion" label="spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q719357" start="1429" end="1444" title="Cyrus McCormick" label="Cyrus McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q762984" start="2339" end="2344" title="twine" label="twine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805203" start="2540" end="2552" title="bale wrapper" label="bale wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="2624" end="2630" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q373499" start="2800" end="2816" title="moisture content" label="moisture content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806882" start="3072" end="3086" title="Allis-Chalmers" label="Allis-Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="4234" end="4241" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921520" start="4420" end="4435" title="Vermeer Company" label="Vermeer Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872" start="4624" end="4636" title="Eaton Corporation" label="Walterscheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q284526" start="4686" end="4694" title="CV joint" label="CV joint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5531" end="5541" title="bale spear" label="bale spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470547" start="5620" end="5630" title="skid-steer" label="skid-steer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6142" end="6154" title="grapple fork" label="grapple fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="7392" end="7408" title="Flatbed trailer" label="flat-bed trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095365" start="7414" end="7424" title="guard rail" label="guard rail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7526" end="7538" title="saddle wagon" label="saddle wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007106" start="7804" end="7810" title="Totnes" label="Totnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="7812" end="7817" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="7866" end="7869" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="8651" end="8657" title="Silage" label="Silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="10670" end="10678" title="silo bag" label="silo bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="10892" end="10900" title="recycling" label="recycled"/>
<link wikidata="Q622772" start="10930" end="10942" title="incineration" label="incineration"/>
<link wikidata="Q805203" start="11066" end="11078" title="bale wrapper" label="bale wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400937" start="13464" end="13471" title="feedlot" label="feedlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="13475" end="13480" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="13796" end="13812" title="front-end loader" label="front-end loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943369" start="13815" end="13826" title="telehandler" label="telehandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="14223" end="14228" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="14840" end="14847" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="17006" end="17029" title="straw-bale construction" label="straw-bale construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423217" start="17470" end="17484" title="New Holland Ag" label="New Holland Ag"/>
<link wikidata="Q704756" start="17533" end="17538" title="Claas" label="Claas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17554" end="17565" title="Rousseau SA" label="Rousseau SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087526" start="17779" end="17808" title="Oliver Farm Equipment Company" label="Oliver Farm Equipment Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318337" start="19508" end="19526" title="hydraulic cylinder" label="hydraulic cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="19573" end="19581" title="catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="22034" end="22040" title="Loader (equipment)" label="loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="23737" end="23749" title="Loader (equipment)" label="front loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258035" start="24026" end="24043" title="three-point hitch" label="three-point hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="24327" end="24338" title="flat-belt pulley" label="belt pulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="24662" end="24669" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="24682" end="24696" title="power take-off" label="power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468611" start="25285" end="25305" title="Case Corporation" label="J. I. Case &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4766211" start="25310" end="25319" title="Ann Arbor (automobile)" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587607" start="25411" end="25426" title="rural electrification" label="electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="29911" end="29923" title="office paper" label="office paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q389782" start="29925" end="29934" title="cardboard" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="29936" end="29943" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="30019" end="30024" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661" start="30032" end="30045" title="hydraulic ram" label="hydraulic ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q447772" start="31326" end="31345" title="Aluminium recycling" label="Aluminium recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878259" start="31348" end="31359" title="Beaverslide" label="Beaverslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131760" start="31362" end="31371" title="Compactor" label="Compactor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31374" end="31384" title="Wagon#Farm wagon" label="Farm wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416361" start="31387" end="31402" title="Glass recycling" label="Glass recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="31405" end="31408" title="Hay" label="Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937285" start="31411" end="31419" title="Hay rake" label="Hay rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211548" start="31422" end="31445" title="List of farm implements" label="List of farm implements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145647" start="31448" end="31463" title="Paper recycling" label="Paper recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q421922" start="31466" end="31480" title="Paper shredder" label="Paper shredder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194111" start="31483" end="31500" title="Plastic recycling" label="Plastic recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="31503" end="31513" title="Straw bale" label="Straw bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q967186" start="31516" end="31522" title="Tedder (machine)" label="Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26950793" start="31525" end="31532" title="Trolley (horse-drawn)" label="Trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="31535" end="31542" title="Windrow" label="Windrow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758446" wikidata="Q3023184" url="?curid=758446" title="Dennis Martínez">
<text>José Dennis Martínez Ortiz (born May 14, 1955), nicknamed &quot;El Presidente&quot; (), is a Nicaraguan former professional baseball pitcher. Martínez played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Baltimore Orioles, Montreal Expos, Cleveland Indians, Seattle Mariners, and Atlanta Braves from 1976 to 1998. He threw a perfect game in 1991, and was a four-time MLB All-Star. He was the first Nicaraguan to play in the majors.

==Early life==
Martínez was born in Granada, Nicaragua, the last of seven children to Edmundo and Emilia Martínez. The family was poor, but he helped his parents on the farm that raised food for the family. He was scouted by Ray Poitevint of the Baltimore Orioles on December 10, 1973 for $3,000. He spent three years in the minor leagues with three separate teams. He went 15-6 with the Miami Orioles in 1974 with a 2.06 ERA. The following year, he spent time with Miami, Asheville, and the Rochester Red Wings, going 12-4 with the former and 4-1 with the middle while having no wins and losses with the latter. He went 14-8 with the Red Wings for 1976 with a 2.50 ERA before being called up by the team late in the season.

==Playing career==
===Baltimore Orioles (1976–1986)===
Martínez made his debut on September 14, 1976, against the Detroit Tigers at Memorial Stadium. He replaced Dave Pagan in the top of the fourth inning with the Orioles trailing 7–5. He pitched innings while allowing no runs on four hits, one walk and five strikeouts as the Orioles rallied in the seventh to win 9–7 and give Martínez his first career win. In four games pitched with the team, he went 1–2 with a 2.60 ERA in innings. He had 18 strikeouts and eight walks.

The following year, Martínez went 14–7 with a 4.10 ERA in 42 games (of which he started 13) in innings, with four saves and five complete games. He had 107 strikeouts and 64 walks.

For 1978, Martínez went 16–11 with a 3.52 ERA while appearing in 40 games, having 15 complete games in innings of work. He had 142 strikeouts and 93 walks (a career high). He faced 1,140 batters, the first of three times in his career that he would do so. He finished in the top ten for numerous categories in the AL, such as innings pitched (6th), strikeouts (9th), walks (6th), and hits (9th with 257).
The following year, he was at his peak of usage, appearing in 40 games with 39 starts while having 18 complete games and innings of work (the latter three being career highs). He went 15–16 with a 3.66 ERA while having 132 strikeouts and 78 walks. He faced a career and league high 1,206 batters. Martínez made his postseason debut in Game 3 of the ALCS against the California Angels, pitching innings while allowing three runs on eight hits while striking out four, although he did not receive a decision in the 4–3 loss.

For the 1980 season, Martínez went 6–4 with a 3.97 ERA in 25 games. He had two complete games and one save in a total of innings. He had 42 strikeouts and 44 walks. He was put into the lineup as a designated hitter on September 29, 1980, although he was pinch hit for by Terry Crowley prior to batting. On the field, he had five putouts, 16 assists and one double play for a 1.000 fielding percentage.

The following year, Martínez improved. He went 14–5 with a 3.32 ERA in 25 games, having nine complete games with two shutouts in 179 innings of work. He had 88 strikeouts and 62 walks. He had 20 putouts, 44 assists, two errors, and four double plays for a .970 fielding percentage. He received votes for the Cy Young Award and the Most Valuable Player award, finishing 5th and 23rd, respectively.

For the 1982 season, Martínez was selected to pitch the Opening Day game against the Kansas City Royals at Memorial Stadium on April 5, 1982. In four innings of work, he allowed four runs on six hits with two strikeouts and three walks while allowing a home run, although the Orioles rallied in the seventh to win 13–5. That year, he went 16–12 with a 4.21 ERA in 40 games. He had ten complete games in 252 innings of work, while having 111 strikeouts and 87 walks. He faced 1,093 batters, the third and last time he faced a thousand batters in a season.

The following year, he was selected for the Opening Day start once again. Facing the Royals on April 4, he allowed four runs on six hits and six innings of work, with six strikeouts and two walks as the Royals trounced the Orioles 7–2. That year, he went 7–16 with a 5.53 ERA. In 32 games and 153 innings of work, he had four complete games while having 71 strikeouts and 45 walks.

Martínez was plagued by alcoholism in the beginning of his career; he had been introduced to drinking when he was 17, with his drinking problem developing further by the time he made the majors. With the clubhouse always having beer, he drank only on road trips and not in the presence of his family. It was this problem that led him to not be included in the 1983 postseason roster by Joe Altobelli, although he did receive a championship ring. One night after the Series was over, Martínez and a friend of his went drinking. On the ride home, he was cited for intoxication by a state trooper. The humiliation from the arrest, which his kids had heard about, led him to enter rehab.

Despite quitting drinking, he struggled in the seasons afterwards, going 6–9 in 1984 with a 5.02 ERA in 34 games and innings with 77 strikeouts and 37 walks. Martínez stated that it was dedication to sobriety that affected his focus on the field, saying &quot;When I tried to play, it wasn’t the same. I wasn’t the same pitcher, not the same before I stopped drinking. And it’s true, you can’t concentrate on the game and on sobriety at the same time. You have to concentrate on one or the other.&quot; He had slight improvements in 1985, going 13–11 with a 5.15 ERA in 33 games and 180 innings of work. He allowed more hits and runs than the season before while having 68 strikeouts and 63 walks. On June 5, Martínez recorded his 100th win. Pitching against the California Angels at Memorial Stadium, he threw a complete game while allowing no runs on one hit while striking out three and having one walk and one hit batsman. In 1986, Martinez&#x27;s struggles proved to be the end of his tenure in Baltimore. He had a 6.75 ERA in his four games with the Orioles, pitching a total of innings while having two walks and strikeouts. On June 16, he was traded by the Orioles along with an additional player to be named later (which the Orioles did by sending John Stefero later in the year) to the Montreal Expos for a player to be named later (which the Expos did by sending Rene Gonzales). In his 11 seasons, Martínez went 108–93 while having a 4.16 ERA in 1,775 innings with 858 strikeouts and 583 walks. He still ranks in the top ten of numerous categories for the Orioles, such as wins (10th), innings (9th), strikeouts (10th), walks (8th), losses (8th), and earned runs (6th). Gonzales would bat .221 in four seasons of 267 total games with the Orioles while Martínez won 100 games with the Expos.

===Trade and Montreal Expos (1986–1993)===
Martínez pitched in relief for his first three games before being put in as a starter in July. He lost three of his first four starts (with one no decision). Although his sluggish start did not improve with the Expos, he went 3–6 with a 4.59 ERA in 19 appearances, with a complete game and a save in 98 innings of work. He had 63 strikeouts and 28 walks.

After the season, Martínez had a contract dispute with the Expos, who offered him half ($250,000) of what he had been earning with the Orioles. He entered free agency, but no one took an offer on him, and so he re–signed with the Expos, although he couldn&#x27;t sign until May 1, which he would do for the minimum. He pitched in the minor leagues to start his comeback to the team, pitching with the Miami Marlins, a Class A independent team. He later went to the Indianapolis Indians, a AAA affiliate for the Expos, going 3–2 with a 4.46 ERA, but he was called back up to the Expos in June. Martínez went 11–4 with a 3.30 ERA in 22 games, pitching innings while having 84 strikeouts and 40 walks.

Martínez made the Opening Day start for the team in 1988, which was the first one in Montreal at Olympic Stadium. Facing the New York Mets on April 4, he faced off against Dwight Gooden. He pitched six innings while allowing seven runs on nine hits (three being home runs), with four walks and seven strikeouts while the Expos lost 10–6. That year, Martínez went 15–13 with a 2.72 ERA in 34 games and innings of work while having nine complete games, the last two being the most for him since 1982. He had 120 strikeouts and 55 walks. He made 19 putouts, 39 assists, six errors (a league high) and three double plays for a .906 fielding percentage. He finished in the top ten of numerous categories, such as ERA (9th), innings (9th), complete games (6th), home runs (5th with 21), hits (9th with 215) along with batters faced (10th with 968), and adjusted ERA+ (8th with 133).

The following year, Martínez was the Opening Day starter for the Expos once again. Pitching against the Pittsburgh Pirates at Olympic Stadium, he threw seven innings while allowing three runs on eight hits while having three strikeouts, with the Expos rallying to win in the ninth 6–5. That season, he went 16–7 with a 3.18 ERA in 34 games and 232 innings. He had 142 strikeouts and 49 walks, the former being tied for the most in his career with his 1978 season. He made 11 putouts, 50 assists, two errors with six double plays for a .968 fielding percentage. He finished in the top ten in numerous categories of the National League, such as wins (6th), win–loss % (4th), walks per nine innings (3rd with 1.901), innings pitched (8th), games started (7th), home runs (6th with 21), hits (3rd with 227), and batters faced (8th with 950). During Martínez&#x27; time with the Expos, a variation of the Montreal hot dog topped with cheese and bacon called the &quot;Denny Dog&quot; was sold at Olympic Stadium.

1990 was a mixed bag in certain ways for Martínez. He started the year off as the Opening Day pitcher against the St. Louis Cardinals at Busch Stadium. He went five innings while allowing three runs on seven hits with five strikeouts and four walks while the Expos lost 6–5 in 11 innings. He went 10–11 with a 2.95 ERA in 32 games and 226 innings, having seven complete games. He had a career high 156 strikeouts with 49 walks. Despite this, he was named to the All-Star Game at Wrigley Field. He had a 6–7 record at the time of his selection with a 2.84 ERA. It was his first career All–Star selection. He pitched the fourth inning for the National League. Facing the 4–5–6 order of Cal Ripken Jr., Ken Griffey Jr. and Mark McGwire, Martínez had one strikeout while allowing no hits.

For 1991, Martínez improved. For the fourth year in a row, he was the Opening Day starter, pitching against the Pittsburgh Pirates at Three Rivers Stadium. He threw seven innings of work while allowing one hit and no runs with five strikeouts and two walks as the Expos won 7–0. It was his first and only Opening Day win with the Expos. He went 14–11 with a 2.39 ERA (a career low) in 31 games and 222 innings of work. He had nine complete games while having five shutouts, the latter being a career high. July proved to be a highlight for Martínez. He had 123 strikeouts with 62 walks while being named to the All-Star Game at SkyDome in Toronto on July 9. Martínez pitched the third and fourth inning for the NL, allowing three runs on four hits, including a home run from Cal Ripken Jr. He received the loss as the American League held on to win 4–2. Nineteen days later, on July 28, Martínez pitched the 13th perfect game in Major League Baseball history, pitching against the Los Angeles Dodgers. He was the first Latin American–born pitcher to pitch a perfect game. Martínez struck out five batters and threw 96 pitches, 66 for strikes. He finished the month of July with a 2–1 record in five games started while named NL Pitcher of the Month. He finished with the lowest ERA in the league, beating out José Rijo, who finished with a 2.51 ERA. He was the first Expo since Steve Rogers in 1982 to win the ERA title.

The following year, Martínez went 16–11 with a 2.47 ERA in 32 games and innings of work. He had 147 strikeouts and 60 walks while being selected for a third straight All-Star Game, this time in San Diego. Martínez entered in the top of the seventh inning. He had a strikeout and a walk while allowing no hits in his one inning of work. In August, he was named the Pitcher of the Month for the NL. In his five starts for the month, he went 4–0 while pitching at least seven innings in each of the start, allowing more than one earned run in just one game. He finished in the top for numerous categories in the league once again, such as ERA (5th), wins (3rd), walks &amp; hits per inning (4th), and innings pitched (10th).

1993 was his final season with the Expos. He went 15–9 with a 3.85 ERA in 35 games, having two complete games along one save in innings. He struck out 138 batters while walking 64 batters. On the field, he made 17 putouts, 46 assists, one error and one double play for a .984 fielding percentage. On June 18, Martínez received his 200th win. Pitching in Montreal against the Atlanta Braves, he threw eight innings while allowing one run of four hits with three walks and seven strikeouts as the Expos won 2–1. On September 28, Martínez won his 100th game for the Expos, doing so against the Florida Marlins at Joe Robbie Stadium. Martínez threw innings while allowing two runs on four hits with six strikeouts and one walk on 105 pitches, but the Expos held on to win with John Wetteland throwing a 1.1 inning save to preserve the 3–2 win for the Expos. In August, the Expos put him on waivers. Three teams put a claim on him, the Atlanta Braves, the San Francisco Giants, and the Philadelphia Phillies, with the Braves doing so in order to try and stop him going to the Giants. The Expos were only willing to let him go to the Braves if they included a player that the team wanted in order to give up Martínez. However, he used his 10–and–5 rights privilege to veto a trade. The team finished 94–68 that year, the best record during Martínez&#x27;s tenure with the club, although they finished three games back of the Philadelphia Phillies. With the win, he became the seventh pitcher with at least 100 wins in both the American and National leagues, joining Jim Bunning, Ferguson Jenkins, Al Orth, Gaylord Perry, Nolan Ryan and Cy Young; since Martínez, Kevin Brown and Randy Johnson have joined him on the list. Martínez finished his career in the top ten of numerous categories for the franchise, such as wins (2nd behind Steve Rogers), ERA (5th being Tim Burke), innings pitched (2nd behind Rogers), and strikeouts (6th behind Rogers).

===Cleveland Indians (1994–1996)===
Martínez entered free agency after the 1993 season ended, and he signed with the Cleveland Indians in the winter. Martínez was named the starting pitcher for the Opening Day game against the Seattle Mariners on April 4, which happened to be the first regular season game held at Jacobs Field in Cleveland. He pitched seven innings while allowing two runs on three hits with four strikeouts and walks each, with the Indians rallying to win 4–3 in ten innings. For the season, he went 11–6 with a 3.52 ERA in 24 games pitched and innings. He had three shutouts, the first time he pitched a shutout in a season since 1991. He had 92 strikeouts and 44 walks. He made 11 putouts, 33 assists, two double plays and no errors for a 1.000 fielding percentage, the first time that Martínez compiled the percentage since 1980. He finished in the top ten in numerous categories, such as WAR (6th with 4.6), wins (10th), walks &amp; hits per inning (6th with 1.189), walks per nine innings (7th with 2.242), innings pitched (4th), complete games (2nd), and home runs per nine innings (6th with 0.713). Although the season was cancelled midway through August, the Indians had won 60 games and were on track for a playoff spot.

For 1995, he kept consistent form. He started the Opening Day game for the team once again, this time allowing two runs off four hits while striking out three in six innings of work, although the Indians prevailed over the Texas Rangers 11–6. He went 12–5 with a 3.08 ERA in 28 games and 187 innings pitched. He had 99 strikeouts with 46 walks. He made 15 putouts, three double plays, 46 assists and four errors, the latter being league highs while having a .938 fielding percentage. He finished in the top ten of numerous categories, such as WAR (5th, 5.7), ERA (3rd), walks &amp; hits per inning (3rd, 1.176), and home runs per nine innings (9th, 0.818).

On September 28, 1995, a wild pitch by Martínez broke the jaw of Hall of Famer Kirby Puckett. This would be Puckett&#x27;s last official game of his career, as he retired in 1996 due to glaucoma in his right eye. Martínez pitched in five games for the Indians during their run to the American League pennant, his first postseason action since 1979 with the Orioles. He went 1–2 with two no decisions. He started Game 1 of both the ALDS and the ALCS. He earned his first postseason win in Game 6 of the ALCS, pitching seven innings while allowing four hits and no runs with three strikeouts and one walk on 90 pitches as the Indians clinched the pennant 4–0 over the Seattle Mariners. He started Game 2 and 6 of the World Series, receiving the loss in the former while having a no decision in the latter, although the Braves prevailed to win the Series in six games.

The following year, in which he turned 41 (oldest active pitcher in the American League at the time), he had a year plagued by inconsistency. Martínez started the Opening Day game for the team for the third straight year, the first Indians pitcher to have three consecutive Opening Day starts since Gaylord Perry in 1974. He pitched seven innings while allowing two runs on five hits, with five strikeouts and two walks, although the Indians lost 7–1. He went 9–6 with a 4.50 ERA in 20 games and 122 innings. He had 48 strikeouts (his lowest since 1980) and 37 walks. He didn&#x27;t make any appearances for the Indians after August 27, in which he pitched just innings while allowing two runs.

===Later career (1997–1998)===
Martínez signed with the Seattle Mariners as a free agent on February 20, 1997. He appeared in nine games while going 1–5 with a 7.71 ERA in 49 innings. He struck–out 17 batters and walked 29 batters before requesting his release on May 24, three days after allowing 7 runs on 7 hits with two walks in innings against the Anaheim Angels in an 18–3 loss.

Martínez spent his final season in 1998 with the Atlanta Braves. He went 4–6 with a 4.45 ERA, appearing in 53 games while making five starts and having two saves within 91 innings. He had 62 strikeouts and 19 walks. He made four appearances in the postseason for the Braves, all in the NLCS against the San Diego Padres. He received the win for Game 4, getting the final out of the 6th inning in relief of Denny Neagle by having Chris Gomez ground–out before the Braves scored in the next inning. His final appearance was in Game 6 on October 14, replacing John Rocker in the top of the 6th inning. He retired all four batters he faced, although the Braves lost the game 5–0 along with the series.

After the season, Martínez retired, stating that there was nothing more to do with his career. He retired having the most wins by a Latin American pitcher, holding that record until Bartolo Colón surpassed him in 2018.

During a 23–year baseball career, Martínez compiled 245 wins, 2,149 strikeouts, and a 3.70 earned run average. He is one of the top Latin American pitchers of all–time. Martínez is one of only 17 pitchers in MLB history to start on Opening Day more than 10 times, having done it 11 times. Martínez has the most career victories of any pitcher who has never won 20 games in a single season. Mark Buehrle, Milt Pappas, Jerry Reuss, Frank Tanana, Charlie Hough, Chuck Finley, Kenny Rogers, and Tim Wakefield are the only other pitchers with at least 200 career victories who have done so. Four of these pitchers (Buehrle, Pappas, Reuss and Rogers) had pitched no–hitters, with Buehrle also pitching a perfect game, and Rogers&#x27; also being a perfect game, three years to the day of Martínez&#x27;s.

==Post-playing career==
In 2002, he was inducted into the Baltimore Orioles Hall of Fame. Martínez has worked as a spring training instructor for the Baltimore Orioles in and , and pitching coach for the Palm Beach Cardinals in the Florida State League.

On November 5, 2012, the Houston Astros finalized their coaching staff for the 2013 season, naming Martínez as their new bullpen coach. He was fired on October 1, 2013.

Martínez was the manager of the Nicaragua national baseball team at the 2013 World Baseball Classic Qualifying Tournament. Nicaragua lost both of its games to Colombia and Panama.

The national baseball park in Managua (Nicaragua&#x27;s capital city), Dennis Martínez National Stadium, was named in his honor in 1998. However, Martínez&#x27;s criticism of the dictatorship of Daniel Ortega saw the government change the stadium&#x27;s name in 2022.

Martínez runs his own organization, the Dennis Martínez Foundation, to help poor children around the world.

In 2016, Martínez was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame. Martínez was selected as the manager of the National League Futures Team as part of the 2019 All-Star Game.

== Highlights ==
* 4-time All-Star (1990–1992, 1995)
* Twice Top 10 Cy Young Award (1981, 1991)
* Led league in wins (1981)
* Led league in ERA (1991)
* Led league in shutouts (1991)
* 6-time Top 10 in shutouts (1979, 1981, 1990, 1994–1996)
* Led league in games started, innings pitched and batters faced (1979)
* 9-time pitched 220 or more innings in a season (1978–1979, 1982, 1988–1993)
* 3-time oldest player in the majors (1996–1998)
* 60th on the strikeouts all-time list
* Set record for most wins by a Latin American pitcher (244 – August 9, 1998)
* Pitched the 13th perfect game in baseball history (July 28, 1991) with the Montreal Expos.

== See also ==

* Pitchers who have thrown a perfect game
* List of players from Nicaragua in Major League Baseball
* List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders
* List of Montreal Expos Opening Day starting pitchers
* List of Major League Baseball career hit batsmen leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3023184" start="0" end="26" title="Dennis Martínez" label="José Dennis Martínez Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023184" start="64" end="77" title="Dennis Martínez" label="El Presidente"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="124" end="132" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="133" end="140" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="161" end="182" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="197" end="214" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="216" end="230" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="232" end="249" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="251" end="267" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="273" end="287" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="318" end="330" title="perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="360" end="372" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="MLB All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614071" start="385" end="401" title="List of countries with their first Major League Baseball player" label="first Nicaraguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205648" start="462" end="480" title="Granada, Nicaragua" label="Granada, Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="1266" end="1280" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229514" start="1314" end="1324" title="Dave Pagan" label="Dave Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511181" start="2614" end="2618" title="1979 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="2631" end="2648" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115056" start="3060" end="3073" title="Terry Crowley" label="Terry Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="3675" end="3693" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208336" start="4915" end="4928" title="Joe Altobelli" label="Joe Altobelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="5977" end="5994" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258971" start="6471" end="6483" title="John Stefero" label="John Stefero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312896" start="6588" end="6601" title="Rene Gonzales" label="Rene Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7588" end="7615" title="Major League Baseball collusion#1985–1987" label="no one took an offer on him"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471728" start="7817" end="7830" title="Fort Myers Miracle" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180539" start="7881" end="7901" title="Indianapolis Indians" label="Indianapolis Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="8213" end="8228" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="8241" end="8254" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076161" start="8288" end="8301" title="Dwight Gooden" label="Dwight Gooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="9098" end="9116" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="9612" end="9627" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906362" start="9894" end="9910" title="Montreal hot dog" label="Montreal hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="9985" end="10000" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="10117" end="10136" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q253546" start="10140" end="10153" title="Busch Stadium" label="Busch Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298316" start="10465" end="10478" title="1990 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="10482" end="10495" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="10687" end="10701" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q536900" start="10703" end="10718" title="Ken Griffey Jr." label="Ken Griffey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="10723" end="10735" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="10901" end="10919" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189339" start="10923" end="10943" title="Three Rivers Stadium" label="Three Rivers Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298317" start="11400" end="11413" title="1991 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q76318" start="11417" end="11424" title="Rogers Centre" label="SkyDome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="11428" end="11435" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="11564" end="11578" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="11607" end="11622" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720529" start="11685" end="11692" title="Dennis Martínez&amp;#x27;s perfect game" label="pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="11702" end="11714" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586934" start="11770" end="11789" title="1991 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111680" start="12098" end="12107" title="José Rijo" label="José Rijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499089" start="12167" end="12179" title="Steve Rogers (baseball)" label="Steve Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298318" start="12377" end="12390" title="1992 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="12405" end="12414" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="13309" end="13323" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="13525" end="13540" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="13544" end="13562" title="Joe Robbie Stadium" label="Joe Robbie Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182721" start="13707" end="13721" title="John Wetteland" label="John Wetteland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="13865" end="13879" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="13885" end="13905" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="13915" end="13936" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="14353" end="14374" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="14455" end="14463" title="American League" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="14468" end="14476" title="National League (baseball)" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q918265" start="14494" end="14505" title="Jim Bunning" label="Jim Bunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q284428" start="14507" end="14523" title="Ferguson Jenkins" label="Ferguson Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704574" start="14525" end="14532" title="Al Orth" label="Al Orth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496596" start="14534" end="14547" title="Gaylord Perry" label="Gaylord Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="14549" end="14559" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="14564" end="14572" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q867833" start="14590" end="14601" title="Kevin Brown (right-handed pitcher)" label="Kevin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="14606" end="14619" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528604" start="14790" end="14799" title="Tim Burke (baseball)" label="Tim Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154053" start="15191" end="15203" title="Progressive Field" label="Jacobs Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="15207" end="15216" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223516" start="16130" end="16134" title="1995 Cleveland Indians season" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="16349" end="16362" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="16849" end="16862" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q955278" start="16863" end="16876" title="Kirby Puckett" label="Kirby Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="17068" end="17083" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002723" start="17215" end="17219" title="1995 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511203" start="17228" end="17232" title="1995 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="17450" end="17466" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q636375" start="17499" end="17511" title="1995 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="17723" end="17738" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496596" start="17950" end="17963" title="Gaylord Perry" label="Gaylord Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="18403" end="18419" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="18700" end="18714" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Anaheim Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002720" start="19019" end="19023" title="1998 National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="19036" end="19052" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259220" start="19139" end="19151" title="Denny Neagle" label="Denny Neagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106683" start="19162" end="19173" title="Chris Gomez" label="Chris Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283152" start="19290" end="19301" title="John Rocker" label="John Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886078" start="19614" end="19627" title="Bartolo Colón" label="Bartolo Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="19708" end="19712" title="Win (baseball)" label="wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="19720" end="19729" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="19743" end="19761" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="19784" end="19798" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399708" start="20042" end="20054" title="Mark Buehrle" label="Mark Buehrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860833" start="20056" end="20067" title="Milt Pappas" label="Milt Pappas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184310" start="20069" end="20080" title="Jerry Reuss" label="Jerry Reuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489892" start="20082" end="20094" title="Frank Tanana" label="Frank Tanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960863" start="20096" end="20109" title="Charlie Hough" label="Charlie Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355492" start="20111" end="20123" title="Chuck Finley" label="Chuck Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q562878" start="20125" end="20137" title="Kenny Rogers (baseball)" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108240" start="20143" end="20156" title="Tim Wakefield" label="Tim Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720546" start="20392" end="20406" title="Kenny Rogers&amp;#x27; perfect game" label="a perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971260" start="20510" end="20540" title="Baltimore Orioles Hall of Fame" label="Baltimore Orioles Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="20567" end="20582" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="20602" end="20619" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127977" start="20656" end="20676" title="Palm Beach Cardinals" label="Palm Beach Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="20732" end="20746" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185780" start="20909" end="20941" title="Nicaragua national baseball team" label="Nicaragua national baseball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363969" start="20949" end="20976" title="2013 World Baseball Classic" label="2013 World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q903052" start="20977" end="20998" title="2013 World Baseball Classic – Qualifier 3" label="Qualifying Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091425" start="21036" end="21044" title="Colombia national baseball team" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q527292" start="21049" end="21055" title="Panama national baseball team" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="21088" end="21095" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="21097" end="21106" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q537349" start="21129" end="21161" title="Dennis Martínez National Stadium" label="Dennis Martínez National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="21253" end="21266" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517652" start="21476" end="21506" title="Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054498" start="21568" end="21580" title="All-Star Futures Game" label="Futures Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508426" start="21596" end="21614" title="2019 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="2019 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="21643" end="21651" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="21685" end="21699" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="21729" end="21733" title="Win (baseball)" label="wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520127" start="21874" end="21887" title="games started" label="games started"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="21909" end="21922" title="At bat" label="batters faced"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="22128" end="22142" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="22193" end="22205" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="22251" end="22265" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577624" start="22286" end="22325" title="Pitchers who have thrown a perfect game" label="Pitchers who have thrown a perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588998" start="22328" end="22383" title="List of players from Nicaragua in Major League Baseball" label="List of players from Nicaragua in Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577627" start="22386" end="22435" title="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577599" start="22438" end="22486" title="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590670" start="22489" end="22541" title="List of Montreal Expos Opening Day starting pitchers" label="List of Montreal Expos Opening Day starting pitchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643421" start="22544" end="22600" title="List of Major League Baseball career hit batsmen leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career hit batsmen leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643426" start="22603" end="22657" title="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758448" wikidata="Q39145" url="?curid=758448" title="Toy Bulldog">
<text>The toy bulldog is an extinct unrecognised breed of small bulldog that existed in England during the 18th and early 19th centuries.

The same name is used for unrelated, but similar-appearing dogs, that are mostly modern crosses between bulldogs and pugs, which are also not a recognised dog breed.

==Original attempts==
Early dog breeders worked in two different directions, to decrease the weight to a desirable 20 pounds or so and create a new toy bulldog breed:
# One method was to downsize the bulldog by selecting smaller individuals for breeding. This was not very successful, due to medical complications with breeding below normal-sized dogs. Natural dwarf bulldog puppies are occasionally borne by normal-sized parents, but they were neither the healthiest, nor the most fertile dogs, and their own puppies were often regular-sized dogs. Thus, this version of the breed was never established. 
# An alternate attempt at creating a toy bulldog was via crossbreeding French bulldogs with standard bulldogs or with the crossed offspring. Several dogs were presented as breed candidates by &quot;The French Toy Bulldog Club of England&quot; to the Kennel Club. English breeders and Kennel Club representatives refused to call a mixed-breed dog a &quot;bulldog&quot;, and this variety of dog has also not developed to the point of a recognized breed.

The breeding programs were dropped, and the line of dogs bred from these early attempts died out.

==Modern dogs==
Nowadays, the term &quot;toy bulldog&quot; is occasionally used to describe a small variety of another cross also called a &quot;miniature bulldog&quot;. They are not an established breed, but rather a hybrid produced by crossbreeding bulldogs with pugs or the crossed offspring.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39145" start="4" end="15" title="Toy Bulldog" label="toy bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="22" end="29" title="Extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="43" end="48" title="dog breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="58" end="65" title="bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="82" end="89" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="288" end="297" title="dog breed" label="dog breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="500" end="507" title="bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="661" end="666" title="Dwarfism" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991480" start="942" end="945" title="toy dog" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29149" start="976" end="991" title="French Bulldog" label="French bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210008" start="1155" end="1166" title="Kennel Club" label="Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368409" start="1176" end="1183" title="breeder" label="breeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1675" end="1681" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q38698" start="1722" end="1725" title="pug" label="pug"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758452" wikidata="Q3837954" url="?curid=758452" title="Lubao (disambiguation)">
<text>Lubao is a 1st class municipality in the province of Pampanga, Philippines.

Lubao may also refer to:
* Lubao, Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Lubao, Foshan, a town in Sanshui county, Guangdong province, China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55705" start="0" end="5" title="Lubao" label="Lubao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264616" start="104" end="143" title="Lubao, Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Lubao, Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="146" end="159" title="Lubao, Foshan" label="Lubao, Foshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769621" start="171" end="178" title="Sanshui" label="Sanshui"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758453" wikidata="Q1464932" url="?curid=758453" title="Fusiform gyrus">
<text>The fusiform gyrus, also known as the &quot;lateral occipitotemporal gyrus&quot;,&quot; &quot;is part of the temporal lobe and occipital lobe in Brodmann area 37. The gyrus is located between the lingual gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus above, and the inferior temporal gyrus below. Though the functionality of the fusiform gyrus is not fully understood, it has been linked with various neural pathways related to recognition. Additionally, it has been linked to various neurological phenomena such as synesthesia, dyslexia, and prosopagnosia.

==Anatomy==
Anatomically, the fusiform gyrus is the largest macro-anatomical structure within the ventral temporal cortex, which mainly includes structures involved in high-level vision. 
The term fusiform gyrus (lit. &quot;spindle-shaped convolution&quot;) refers to the fact that the shape of the gyrus is wider at its centre than at its ends. This term is based on the description of the gyrus by Emil Huschke in 1854. (see also section on history). 
The fusiform gyrus is situated at the basal surface of the temporal and occipital lobes and is
delineated by the collateral sulcus (CoS) and occipitotemporal sulcus (OTS), respectively. The OTS separates the fusiform gyrus from the inferior temporal gyrus (located laterally in respect to the fusiform gyrus) and the CoS separates the fusiform gyrus from the parahippocampal gyrus (located medially in respect to the fusiform gyrus).

The fusiform gyrus can be further delineated into a lateral and medial portion, as it is separated in its middle by the relatively shallow mid-fusiform sulcus (MFS). Thus, the lateral fusiform gyrus is delineated by the OTS laterally and the MFS medially. Likewise, the medial fusiform gyrus is delineated by the MFS laterally and the CoS medially.

Importantly, the mid-fusiform sulcus serves as a macroanatomical landmark for the fusiform face area (FFA), a functional subregion of the fusiform gyrus assumed to play a key role in processing faces.

==History==
The fusiform gyrus has a contentious history that has recently been clarified. The term was first used in 1854 by Emil Huschke from Jena, Germany, who called the fusiform gyrus a &quot;Spindelwulst&quot; (lit. spindle bulge). He chose this term because of the similarity that the respective cerebral gyrus bears to the shape of a spindle, or fusil, due to its wider central section. 
At first, researchers located the fusiform gyrus in other mammals as well, without taking into account the variations in gross organizations of other species&#x27; brains. Today, the fusiform gyrus is considered to be specific to hominoids. This is supported by research showing only three temporal gyri and no fusiform gyrus in macaques.

The first accurate definition of the mid-fusiform sulcus was coined by Gustav Retzius in 1896. He was the first to describe the sulcus sagittalis gyri fusiformis (today: mid-fusiform sulcus), and correctly determined that a sulcus divides the fusiform gyrus into lateral and
medial partitions. W. Julius Mickle mentioned the mid-fusiform sulcus in 1897 and attempted to
clarify the relation between temporal sulci and the fusiform gyrus, calling it the
&quot;intra-gyral sulcus of the fusiform lobule&quot;.

==Function==
The exact functionality of the fusiform gyrus is still disputed, but there is relative consensus on its involvement in the following pathways:

===Processing of color information===

In 2003, V. S. Ramachandran collaborated with scientists from the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in order to identify the potential role of the fusiform gyrus within the color processing pathway in the brain. Examining the relationship within the pathway specifically in cases of synesthesia, Ramachandran found that synesthetes on average have a higher density of fibers surrounding the angular gyrus. The angular gyrus is involved in higher processing of colors. The fibers relay shape information from the fusiform gyrus to the angular gyrus in order to produce the association of colors and shapes in grapheme-color synesthesia. Cross-activation between the angular and fusiform gyri has been observed in the average brain, implying that the fusiform gyrus regularly communicates with the visual pathway.

===Face and body recognition===

Portions of the fusiform gyrus are critical for face and body recognition.

===Word recognition===

It is believed that portions of the left hemisphere fusiform gyrus are used in word recognition.

===Within-category identification===

Further research by MIT scientists showed that the left and right fusiform gyri played different roles, which subsequently interlinked. The left fusiform gyrus recognizes &quot;face-like&quot; features in objects that may or may not be actual faces, whereas the right fusiform gyrus determines if that recognized face-like feature is, in fact, a face.

== Related neural transmitter system ==
In a 2015 study, dopamine was proposed to play a key role in face recognition task and was considered to be related to neural activity in fusiform gyrus. By studying the correlation between the binding potential (BP) of dopamine D1 receptor by PET and blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) in fMRI scan during a face recognition task, higher availability of D1 receptor was shown to be associated with higher BOLD level. This study showed that this association with D1 BP is only significant for FFG, not other brain regions. The researchers also showed the possibility that higher availability of dopamine D1 receptor may underlie better performance in face recognition task. Dopamine is known to be related to the reward system. The dopaminergic system shows an active response to stimuli that predict possible rewards. As a social demand, a face recognition task could be a cognition process that involves dopamine, which can elicit a reinforcement feedback.

A 2007 study investigated how dopamine may regulate FFG activity during a face recognition task. It indicated that BOLD activity can be modulated by dopamine&#x27;s influence on postsynaptic D1 receptors. The regulation is achieved in a way that dopamine first influence post-synaptic potential, and then further cause BOLD activity increase in the local area. This link between post-synaptic BOLD activity increase and dopamine release can be explained by blockage of dopamine reuptake.

==Associated neurological phenomena==
The fusiform gyrus has been speculated to be associated with various neurological phenomena.

===Prosopagnosia===
Some researchers think that the fusiform gyrus may be related to the disorder known as prosopagnosia, or face blindness. Research has also shown that the fusiform face area, the area within the fusiform gyrus, is heavily involved in face perception but only to any generic within-category identification that is shown to be one of the functions of the fusiform gyrus. Abnormalities of the fusiform gyrus have also been linked to Williams syndrome. Fusiform gyrus has also been involved in the perception of emotions in facial stimuli. However, individuals with autism show little to no activation in the fusiform gyrus in response to seeing a human face.

===Synaesthesia===
Recent research has seen activation of the fusiform gyrus during subjective grapheme–color perception in people with synaesthesia. The effect of the fusiform gyrus in grapheme sense seems somewhat more clear as the fusiform gyrus seems to play a key role in word recognition. The connection to color may be due to cross wiring of (being directly connected to) areas of the fusiform gyrus and other areas of the visual cortex associated with experiencing color.

===Dyslexia===
For those with dyslexia, it has been seen that the fusiform gyrus is underactivated and has reduced gray matter density.

===Face hallucinations===
Increased neurophysiological activity in the fusiform face area may produce hallucinations of faces, whether realistic or cartoonesque, as seen in Charles Bonnet syndrome, hypnagogic hallucinations, peduncular hallucinations, or drug-induced hallucinations.

==Additional images==
==References==
==External links==

* – &quot;Cerebral Hemisphere, Inferior View&quot;
* Location at mattababy.org
* 
* NIF Search – Fusiform Gyrus via the Neuroscience Information Framework</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1464932" start="4" end="18" title="Fusiform gyrus" label="fusiform gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="109" end="122" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="127" end="141" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973086" start="145" end="161" title="Brodmann area 37" label="Brodmann area 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758383" start="167" end="172" title="gyrus" label="gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064632" start="196" end="209" title="lingual gyrus" label="lingual gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545429" start="214" end="235" title="parahippocampal gyrus" label="parahippocampal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063959" start="251" end="274" title="inferior temporal gyrus" label="inferior temporal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472302" start="386" end="401" title="neural pathways" label="neural pathways"/>
<link wikidata="Q13258" start="501" end="512" title="synesthesia" label="synesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="514" end="522" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="528" end="541" title="prosopagnosia" label="prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="642" end="665" title="Two-streams hypothesis#Ventral stream" label="ventral temporal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141226" start="712" end="729" title="Cognitive neuroscience of visual object recognition" label="high-level vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q89634" start="944" end="956" title="Emil Huschke" label="Emil Huschke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="987" end="994" title="Fusiform gyrus#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145989" start="1111" end="1128" title="collateral sulcus" label="collateral sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715105" start="1139" end="1162" title="occipitotemporal sulcus" label="occipitotemporal sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063959" start="1230" end="1253" title="inferior temporal gyrus" label="inferior temporal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545429" start="1357" end="1378" title="parahippocampal gyrus" label="parahippocampal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326586" start="1572" end="1591" title="mid-fusiform sulcus" label="mid-fusiform sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624677" start="1865" end="1883" title="fusiform face area" label="fusiform face area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1982" title="Fusiform gyrus#Face and body recognition" label="processing faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q89634" start="2111" end="2123" title="Emil Huschke" label="Emil Huschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="2129" end="2142" title="Jena" label="Jena, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="2611" end="2620" title="hominoids" label="hominoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q640991" start="2792" end="2806" title="Gustav Retzius" label="Gustav Retzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q380221" start="3435" end="3453" title="V. S. Ramachandran" label="V. S. Ramachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038781" start="3821" end="3834" title="angular gyrus" label="angular gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034367" start="4455" end="4471" title="word recognition" label="word recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4532" end="4535" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="4922" end="4930" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="4966" end="4982" title="facial recognition system" label="face recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="6594" end="6607" title="prosopagnosia" label="prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q529895" start="6740" end="6755" title="face perception" label="face perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q558077" start="6936" end="6953" title="Williams syndrome" label="Williams syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="7068" end="7074" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q287285" start="7258" end="7283" title="Grapheme–color synesthesia" label="grapheme–color perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q13258" start="7299" end="7311" title="synaesthesia" label="synaesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75785" start="7593" end="7606" title="visual cortex" label="visual cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q921907" start="7954" end="7977" title="Charles Bonnet syndrome" label="Charles Bonnet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641220" start="7979" end="8004" title="Hypnagogia" label="hypnagogic hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160097" start="8006" end="8031" title="Peduncular hallucinosis" label="peduncular hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695472" start="8243" end="8277" title="Neuroscience Information Framework" label="Neuroscience Information Framework"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758454" wikidata="Q841503" url="?curid=758454" title="Kenai Fjords National Park">
<text>Kenai Fjords National Park is a national park of the United States that comprises the Harding Icefield, its outflowing glaciers, and coastal fjords and islands. The park covers an area of on the Kenai Peninsula in south-central Alaska, west of the town of Seward.

The park contains the Harding Icefield, one of the largest ice fields in the United States, and is named for the numerous fjords carved by glaciers moving down the mountains from the ice field. The field is the source of at least 38 glaciers, the largest of which is Bear Glacier. The fjords are glacial valleys that have been submerged below sea level by a combination of rising sea levels and land subsidence. Exit Glacier is a popular destination at the end of the park&#x27;s only road. The remainder of the park is accessible by boat, airplane, and hiking.

Kenai Fjords National Monument was initially designated by President Jimmy Carter on December 1, 1978, using the Antiquities Act, pending final legislation to resolve the allotment of public lands in Alaska. Establishment as a national park followed the passage of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act in 1980. The park protects the icefield, a narrow fringe of forested land between the mountains and the sea, and the deeply indented coastline. The park is inhabited by a variety of terrestrial and marine mammals, including brown and black bears, moose, sea otters, harbor seals, humpback and killer whales.

==History==
Kenai Fjords National Park was established in 1980 by the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA). It is a relatively small and accessible park by Alaskan national park standards, about 88% as big as Yosemite National Park. It is the fifth most-visited park in Alaska, but the 11th of 13 Alaska parks in area, and is the closest national park to Anchorage. The park&#x27;s headquarters is in Seward. It is the only Alaska national park that did not originally allow subsistence use by Native Americans, but native village corporations continue to have interests in inholdings within the park, and have since established subsistence rights on those properties.

===Human habitation===
At the time of the park&#x27;s establishment, there were few permanent inhabitants. Archeological surveys have altered the early view that the area was subject to only transient occupation as evidence has accumulated of long-term use. It is believed that coastal subsidence and rising water levels have inundated many sites, as the shoreline was the place richest in resources for early peoples. A 1993 Park Service survey documented several village sites dated between 1200 AD and 1920. The survey also found evidence that an earthquake dating to about 1170 AD lowered the shoreline by at least , potentially inundating earlier sites. A 2003 follow-up survey indicated that one site was occupied between 950 AD and 1800. Another site was used from 1785 to 1820. A third site showed occupancy from 1850 to 1890.

Several gold mines from historical times have been documented in the park. Mining activity centered on Nuka Bay. Some sites had been active into the 1980s. Eleven mine sites have been documented and two of the mine sites have been determined to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.

===Proposals for a Kenai Fjords park===
Early studies of possible new Park Service units in Alaska took place in the 1930s and 1940s. The first study, entitled &quot;Alaska - Its Resources and Development&quot; was centered on the development of tourism, despite a dissent from co-author Bob Marshall, who advocated strict preservation. Another study, funded as part of the Alaska Highway in the 1940s drew similar conclusions to the first study&#x27;s majority opinion. In 1964 George B. Hartzog Jr., director of the National Park Service, initiated a new study entitled &quot;Operation Great Land&quot;, advocating the development and promotion of the existing Alaska parks. Follow-up action by Hartzog brought the Park Service into discussions over the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA). The Kenai Fjords area was not considered to be of the first priority for park designation under the ANCSA.

The earliest proposals for a national park at the Kenai Fjords was raised in the 1970s. In 1971 the Seward National Recreation Area was proposed for the area between the head of Resurrection Bay and Turnagain Arm, extending east to Whittier and west to Exit Glacier. This proposal allowed logging and mining in the area. Although the proposal had support in Congress and from the US Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management, it was overcome by difficulties with native land claims. Internal Park Service documents envisioned an park protecting the coast and the icefield, but this conflicted with the Seward National Recreation Area and a proposed expansion of the Kenai National Moose Range. Another proposal placed the Aialik Peninsula under US Fish and Wildlife Service jurisdiction. On March 15, 1972, four areas of the Kenai Peninsula were set aside under the ANCSA for federal protected areas. The same day the National Park Service formed an Alaska Task Force to study proposed park lands. The Kenai Fjords region was designated Study Area 11. Negotiations between the Park Service, Forest Service, Fish and Wildlife Service and the Chugach Alaska Corporation resulted in a decision by the Department of the Interior to make the Park Service the lead agency for the Kenai Fjords area. In 1973 the Nixon administration proposed the Harding Icefield–Kenai Fjords National Monument as part of the ANILCA legislation. The proposed monument totaled in three areas: the icefield and two island groups.

Legislation stalled in Congress during the Watergate scandal, and was not pursued again until the Carter administration. Secretary of the Interior Cecil D. Andrus proposed a Kenai Fjords National Park. Alaskan opposition to ANILCA prompted President Jimmy Carter to proclaim Kenai Fjords National Monument under the provisions of the Antiquities Act on December 1, 1978, pending final passage of an Alaskan lands bill. No visitor facilities or full-time local management structure resulted from the monument&#x27;s proclamation. A single ranger was assigned to Seward as a local liaison.

===National park===
On December 2, 1980, the ANILCA bill was signed into law by Jimmy Carter, converting Kenai Fjords to a national park. The first park improvements focused on improving access to Exit Glacier. In 1982, a general management plan for the park was finalized, designating Exit Glacier as &quot;front-country,&quot; the fjords as &quot;back-country,&quot; and the icefield as wilderness. The park was initially administered by a small cadre of permanent and seasonal rangers and technicians who put considerable emphasis on community liaison.

Under the provisions of ANILCA the park included of &quot;native selected lands,&quot; property that was taken out of federal ownership and conveyed to Alaskan native corporations. Most of the lands claimed were on the coastline. were repurchased by the Park Service in the 1990s, retaining subsistence rights on about . This altered the original intent of the park to include subsistence claims, previously unrecognized. A lodge was developed by the Port Graham community on Aialik Bay.

===Activities===
Seward is a departure point and destination for large cruise ships from Celebrity Cruises, Holland America Line, Royal Caribbean International and others. Passenger traffic through Seward is projected at 68,000 for 2013. Cruise tours originating from Seward provide access to the park via Resurrection Bay. Various companies offer tours, many guided by National Park Rangers. The tours provide views of land and marine wildlife, particularly Steller sea lions, puffins, Dall&#x27;s porpoises, American black bear, snowshoe hares, mountain goats, and humpback and orca whales, as well as natural sights such as the fjords and tidewater glaciers. Seward is a destination for cruise ships. Bus tours from Seward visit Exit Glacier and boat tours visit other parts of the park

The park maintains public-use cabins and shelters in coastal areas and at the edge of the Harding Icefield. Some of these are on native corporation lands, with a portion of the use fee going to the native community.

The park has established a cooperative relationship with the Alaska SeaLife Center, exchanging interpretive services.

==Geography==
The park lies on the southeastern side of the Kenai Peninsula, about south of Anchorage. The nearest large town is Seward, immediately to the east of the park on Resurrection Bay. The park includes the region&#x27;s deeply indented glaciated coastline and its interior icefields. The most significant fjords include Aialik Bay, Harris Bay, McCarty Fjord and Nuka Bay. Much of the interior is covered by the Harding Icefield. The park&#x27;s highest point is an unnamed peak of in the Kenai Mountains. The park is bordered on the west by Kenai National Wildlife Refuge and on the south by Kachemak Bay State Park.

The park can be reached from Seward, south of Anchorage at the southern terminus of the Seward Highway. It is only one of three national parks in Alaska that can be reached by road, via the Exit Glacier Nature Center. A network of trails from the Nature Center provide access to the glacier, and the Harding Icefield Trail.

===Geology===
The park&#x27;s landscape has been shaped by plate tectonics, with the Pacific Plate subducting beneath the North American Plate. The process has lowered the elevation of the Kenai Mountains, gradually pulling glacial features down into the sea, which is at the same time rising. The floors of the fjords can be from below the present sea level. The motion of the North Pacific Plate has accreted a variety of terranes against the shoreline, so that the coastal region is a mixture of rocks that originated elsewhere, together with local igneous rock. Predominant rock types include shale and graywacke, with greenstone, tuff and chert.

Kenai Fjords is extensively glaciated, with 51% of the park covered by ice. The Harding Icefield receives of snowfall per year. More than thirty glaciers originate in the icefield, which first formed about 23,000 years ago. Icefield coverage has declined, with a 3% reduction in coverage over a 16-year study period. The park&#x27;s largest glacier is Bear Glacier. The most accessible glacier, and the only portion of the park accessible by road, is Exit Glacier.

==Climate==
According to the Köppen climate classification system, Kenai Fjords National Park has a subarctic climate (&quot;Dfc&quot;) with cool summers and year-round precipitation. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at Exit Glacier Visitor Center at 463 ft (141 m) elevation is 4b with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -20.3 °F (-29.1 °C).

==Wildlife and ecology==

Kenai Fjords National Park is dominated by a glaciated landscape. The park&#x27;s glaciers have retreated through the twentieth century, exposing new lands to colonization by plant and animal life. The park also features a significant marine environment.

Large terrestrial mammal species in the park include timber wolf, porcupine, Canadian lynx, brown bear, black bears, moose and mountain goat. Smaller mammals include coyote, beaver and river otter. Marine mammals include sea otter, harbor seal and Steller sea lion. Cetaceans seen in park waters include orca, fin whale, humpback whale, minke whales, Dall&#x27;s porpoise and Pacific white-sided dolphin.

Birds that nest in this park include bald eagle, the Peale&#x27;s subspecies of peregrine falcon, black-billed magpie, and Steller&#x27;s jay. Marine birds include tufted and horned puffin, common and thick-billed murre, and marbled murrelets.

The plant communities at Kenai Fjords are shaped by glacial retreat. New lands exposed in former glacier beds are at first stony, lacking in soil. The first plants to appear in recently glaciated areas are lichens and mosses, with a few hardy plants such as dwarf fireweed and yellow dryas. These pioneers are followed by other plants as the moss and lichen break rock down into soil. In particular, Sitka alder is capable of fixing nitrogen, supporting itself and enriching the soil. Willows also appear at this stage. Willows and alders are followed by black cottonwoods, then Sitka spruce. The mature forest features Sitka spruce and mountain hemlocks, with an understory of devil&#x27;s club, Alaska blueberry, elderberry, baneberry, watermelon berry and lady fern in the coniferous forest understory. A similar succession pattern is seen at the park&#x27;s nunataks, exposed rock outcroppings in the Harding Icefield. Forested portions of the park are dominated by conifers, with deciduous forests confined to areas recently vacated by glaciers.

Harsh conditions at higher altitudes limit tree growth above the tree line, creating an alpine ecosystem. The tree line at Kenai Fjords is between above sea level. The alpine regions support shrubby grown to alders, devil&#x27;s club, elderberry, lady fern, cow parsnip and other plants. Herbaceous plants can grow in areas with better soils, supporting grasses, Nootka lupine, fireweed and other perennial plants. Higher alpine regions support a dwarf shrub community less than high, at a very slow rate of growth. Dwarf plants in this region include bog blueberry, partridgefoot, black crowberry and Aleutian mountainheath, all of which are vulnerable to damage from foot traffic.

===Fjord Estuary Ecosystem===
Kenai Fjords features an unusual estuary formed from the mix of glacial fresh water and seawater. The erosive power of the glaciers produces sediment as rock flour coloring the waters around the toes of glaciers and carrying minerals into the ecosystem that support phytoplankton, which in turn sustain larger animals.

===&quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill===
The grounding of the oil tanker &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; in Prince William Sound on March 24, 1989, produced extensive contamination of the Kenai Fjords coastline. By early April, Park Service personnel established oil containment boom lines across the mouths of salmon streams and conducted preliminary inventories of plants and animals that might be affected by the oil. The first oil arrived on April 10. In time, about of coastline was oiled, amounting to about 4% of the total coastline. Headlands were the most affected areas. The oil did not reach the fjords, repelled by heavy spring water flows from the land. Cleanup was difficult, as the oil became a tarry emulsion that could not be skimmed, and had to be dredged. The first season&#x27;s work stopped in September. Work resumed the next year and continued in 1991. That year Exxon settled with the federal and Alaskan governments, paying about $870 million into a restoration fund, some of which was earmarked for Kenai Fjords.

Archeological sites were also affected by the oil. A beach site near MacArthur Pass was discovered during cleanup operations. The site showed that contrary to earlier beliefs, portions of the park had been used over a long term by native peoples. The site proved to be particularly challenging to clean up without disturbing the area.

==See also==
* List of birds of Kenai Fjords National Park
* List of national parks of the United States

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Catton, Theodore (2010), &quot;A Fragile Beauty: An Administrative History of Kenai Fjords National Park&quot; (via the Internet Archive), National Park Service
* Cook, Linda; Norris, Frank (1998), &quot;A Stern and Rock-Bound Coast: Kenai Fjords National Park Historic Resource Study&quot; (via the Internet Archive), National Park Service

==External links==

* of the National Park Service
* Park maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q841503" start="0" end="26" title="Kenai Fjords National Park" label="Kenai Fjords National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="32" end="66" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441249" start="86" end="102" title="Harding Icefield" label="Harding Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="119" end="127" title="glaciers" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="141" end="147" title="fjords" label="fjords"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="195" end="210" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="228" end="234" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79919" start="256" end="262" title="Seward, Alaska" label="Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132248" start="324" end="333" title="ice field" label="ice field"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="387" end="392" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="638" end="655" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="665" end="675" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383867" start="677" end="689" title="Exit Glacier" label="Exit Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="897" end="909" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="941" end="956" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="1097" end="1144" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704938" start="1369" end="1374" title="Alaska Peninsula brown bear" label="brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="1379" end="1390" title="American black bear" label="black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="1392" end="1397" title="Alaska moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="1399" end="1408" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="1411" end="1422" title="harbor seal" label="harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="1425" end="1433" title="humpback whale" label="humpback"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="1438" end="1450" title="killer whale" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="1524" end="1571" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="1683" end="1705" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847618" start="2048" end="2057" title="inholding" label="inholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3245" end="3281" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907745" start="3572" end="3584" title="Bob Marshall (wilderness activist)" label="Bob Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q628076" start="3658" end="3672" title="Alaska Highway" label="Alaska Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536552" start="3763" end="3784" title="George B. Hartzog Jr." label="George B. Hartzog Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="4040" end="4075" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132998" start="4300" end="4324" title="National Recreation Area" label="National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79716" start="4425" end="4433" title="Whittier, Alaska" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="4573" end="4590" title="US Forest Service" label="US Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="4599" end="4624" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="4945" end="4973" title="US Fish and Wildlife Service" label="US Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115951" start="5341" end="5367" title="Chugach Alaska Corporation" label="Chugach Alaska Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="5748" end="5765" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q372022" start="5852" end="5867" title="Cecil D. Andrus" label="Cecil D. Andrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="5955" end="5967" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="6039" end="6054" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052823" start="7429" end="7446" title="Celebrity Cruises" label="Celebrity Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624735" start="7448" end="7468" title="Holland America Line" label="Holland America Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="7470" end="7499" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718269" start="7646" end="7662" title="Resurrection Bay" label="Resurrection Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974746" start="7710" end="7730" title="National Park Ranger" label="National Park Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q431981" start="7799" end="7815" title="Steller sea lion" label="Steller sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q311761" start="7818" end="7825" title="puffins" label="puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q738564" start="7827" end="7847" title="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise" label="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="7850" end="7869" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="7871" end="7884" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="7887" end="7900" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="7907" end="7915" title="humpback whales" label="humpback"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="7920" end="7930" title="orca whale" label="orca whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800892" start="7982" end="7999" title="tidewater glacier" label="tidewater glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708604" start="8409" end="8430" title="Alaska SeaLife Center" label="Alaska SeaLife Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="8527" end="8542" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q79919" start="8596" end="8602" title="Seward, Alaska" label="Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718269" start="8643" end="8659" title="Resurrection Bay" label="Resurrection Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="8782" end="8787" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q49372084" start="8797" end="8807" title="Aialik Bay" label="Aialik Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8809" end="8819" title="Harris Bay" label="Harris Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8821" end="8834" title="McCarty Fjord" label="McCarty Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8839" end="8847" title="Nuka Bay" label="Nuka Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441249" start="8888" end="8904" title="Harding Icefield" label="Harding Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514701" start="8965" end="8980" title="Kenai Mountains" label="Kenai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q829102" start="9018" end="9048" title="Kenai National Wildlife Refuge" label="Kenai National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344647" start="9069" end="9092" title="Kachemak Bay State Park" label="Kachemak Bay State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="9141" end="9150" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q802456" start="9183" end="9197" title="Seward Highway" label="Seward Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383867" start="9285" end="9297" title="Exit Glacier" label="Exit Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="9479" end="9494" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="9505" end="9518" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="9519" end="9529" title="subduction" label="subducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="9542" end="9562" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="9844" end="9851" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="9972" end="9984" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="10027" end="10036" title="graywacke" label="graywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="10043" end="10053" title="Greenschist" label="greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="10055" end="10059" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="10064" end="10069" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383867" start="10523" end="10535" title="Exit Glacier" label="Exit Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10567" end="10596" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="10638" end="10655" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="10739" end="10778" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="10790" end="10804" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="11281" end="11292" title="Northwestern wolf" label="timber wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="11294" end="11303" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="11305" end="11318" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="11320" end="11330" title="Grizzly bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="11332" end="11342" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="11345" end="11350" title="Alaska moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="11355" end="11368" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="11394" end="11400" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="11402" end="11408" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="11413" end="11424" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="11449" end="11458" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="11460" end="11471" title="harbor seal" label="harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q431981" start="11476" end="11492" title="Steller sea lion" label="Steller sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="11494" end="11501" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="11532" end="11536" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="11538" end="11547" title="fin whale" label="fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="11549" end="11563" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="11565" end="11576" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q738564" start="11579" end="11599" title="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise" label="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q300946" start="11604" end="11631" title="Pacific white-sided dolphin" label="Pacific white-sided dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="11671" end="11681" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849574" start="11687" end="11710" title="Peale&amp;#x27;s falcon" label="Peale&amp;#x27;s subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="11714" end="11730" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q254057" start="11732" end="11751" title="black-billed magpie" label="black-billed magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q838749" start="11757" end="11775" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s jay" label="Steller&amp;#x27;s jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q838607" start="11798" end="11804" title="tufted puffin" label="tufted"/>
<link wikidata="Q855367" start="11809" end="11822" title="horned puffin" label="horned puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062" start="11824" end="11830" title="common murre" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q728682" start="11835" end="11853" title="thick-billed murre" label="thick-billed murre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267620" start="11859" end="11875" title="marbled murrelet" label="marbled murrelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160104" start="12137" end="12151" title="Chamerion angustifolium" label="dwarf fireweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17247554" start="12156" end="12168" title="Dryas drummondii" label="yellow dryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720096" start="12279" end="12290" title="Alnus crispa" label="Sitka alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="12305" end="12320" title="nitrogen fixation" label="fixing nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q149382" start="12434" end="12451" title="Populus trichocarpa" label="black cottonwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q147426" start="12458" end="12470" title="Picea sitchensis" label="Sitka spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q593894" start="12516" end="12533" title="Tsuga mertensiana" label="mountain hemlocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618457" start="12557" end="12574" title="devil&amp;#x27;s club" label="devil&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12576" end="12592" title="Vacciium ovalifolium" label="Alaska blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157276" start="12594" end="12604" title="Sambucus racemosa" label="elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823800" start="12606" end="12615" title="Actaea rubra" label="baneberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12617" end="12633" title="Streptopus amplexfolius" label="watermelon berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345500" start="12638" end="12647" title="Athyrium filix-femina" label="lady fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q194408" start="12741" end="12748" title="nunatak" label="nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="12996" end="13005" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="13041" end="13050" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q327106" start="13189" end="13200" title="cow parsnip" label="cow parsnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640398" start="13294" end="13307" title="Lupinus nootkatensis" label="Nootka lupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160104" start="13309" end="13317" title="fireweed" label="fireweed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13483" end="13496" title="Vaccinium uliginosium" label="bog blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623998" start="13498" end="13511" title="Luetkea pectinata" label="partridgefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q202305" start="13513" end="13528" title="Empetrum nigrum" label="black crowberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13533" end="13555" title="Phyllodoce aleutica" label="Aleutian mountainheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="13678" end="13685" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q869697" start="13798" end="13808" title="rock flour" label="rock flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="13911" end="13924" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q335541" start="14044" end="14056" title="Exxon Valdez" label="Exxon Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q631282" start="14066" end="14086" title="Prince William Sound" label="Prince William Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196587" start="14115" end="14138" title="Exxon Valdez oil spill" label="extensive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617576" start="15349" end="15392" title="List of birds of Kenai Fjords National Park" label="List of birds of Kenai Fjords National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="15395" end="15438" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="15594" end="15610" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="15613" end="15634" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758455" wikidata="Q5087600" url="?curid=758455" title="Chatfield High School (Colorado)">
<text>Chatfield High School is a high school located in Ken Caryl, an unincorporated area of Jefferson County near Littleton, Colorado, United States. It is part of the Jefferson County Public Schools system.

==History==
Chatfield Senior High School opened in the fall of 1985; there was no senior class its first year. The school&#x27;s first graduating class was the Class of 1987. During reconstruction of Columbine High School, and also after the Columbine High School massacre, Columbine students attended classes at Chatfield.

==Attendance zone==
Areas within the school&#x27;s attendance zone include: Ken Caryl CDP

==Extracurricular activities ==

=== Athletics ===
Chatfield has produced well-known athletes such as twin brothers Taylor Rogers and Tyler Rogers, LenDale White, Katie Hnida, and Zac Robinson. In 2001 Chatfield&#x27;s football team went undefeated, winning the JeffCo and State Championships and ending the season ranked 11th in the nation.

Chatfield&#x27;s athletic rival is Columbine High School.

=== Performing arts and other activities ===
Chatfield has been &quot;nationally recognized as an outstanding theatre school&quot;, known for putting on ambitious productions such as Mary Zimmerman&#x27;s Metamorphoses (play), in which students constructed and used a swimming pool onstage. Chatfield&#x27;s Troupe #4126 has made consistent appearances at the JeffCo Theatre Festival and the Colorado Thespian Conference.

Chatfield&#x27;s choir program has participated in JeffCo All County Honor Choir and the Colorado All State Choir.

== Awards and recognition ==
Chatfield&#x27;s pom squad won 1st in league for the 2006–2007 year as well as 3rd at the NDA nationals in Florida.

In 2009, the Lady Chargers varsity soccer team took state.

Chatfield&#x27;s improv troupe won the Critic&#x27;s Choice and performed on the main stage at the 54th Thespian Conference on December 8, 2018.

==Notable alumni==

* Dian Bachar – actor
* Katie Hnida – football player
* Zac Robinson – football player
* Tyler Sturdevant – baseball player
* LenDale White – football player, USC and Denver Broncos
* Taylor Rogers – MLB pitcher for the Minnesota Twins
* Tyler Rogers – MLB pitcher for the San Francisco Giants
*Dalton Keene - football player for the Philadelphia Eagles
*Brittany Pettersen - U.S. House of Representatives

==References==

* http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/sports/preps/football/01super25.htm

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5087600" start="0" end="21" title="Chatfield High School (Colorado)" label="Chatfield High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="27" end="38" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680702" start="50" end="59" title="Ken Caryl, Colorado" label="Ken Caryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="64" end="83" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q127978" start="87" end="103" title="Jefferson County, Colorado" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q953583" start="109" end="128" title="Littleton, Colorado" label="Littleton, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175439" start="163" end="194" title="Jefferson County Public Schools (Colorado)" label="Jefferson County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112675" start="404" end="425" title="Columbine High School" label="Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="446" end="476" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680702" start="605" end="618" title="Ken Caryl, Colorado" label="Ken Caryl CDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q23872618" start="736" end="749" title="Taylor Rogers" label="Taylor Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q61787614" start="754" end="766" title="Tyler Rogers" label="Tyler Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q388613" start="768" end="781" title="LenDale White" label="LenDale White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377461" start="783" end="794" title="Katie Hnida" label="Katie Hnida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063722" start="800" end="812" title="Zac Robinson" label="Zac Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112675" start="998" end="1019" title="Columbine High School" label="Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823032" start="1227" end="1247" title="Metamorphoses (play)" label="Metamorphoses (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215303" start="1607" end="1616" title="pom squad" label="pom squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q937298" start="1935" end="1946" title="Dian Bachar" label="Dian Bachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377461" start="1957" end="1968" title="Katie Hnida" label="Katie Hnida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063722" start="1989" end="2001" title="Zac Robinson" label="Zac Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248322" start="2022" end="2038" title="Tyler Sturdevant" label="Tyler Sturdevant"/>
<link wikidata="Q388613" start="2059" end="2072" title="LenDale White" label="LenDale White"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="2100" end="2114" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23872618" start="2117" end="2130" title="Taylor Rogers" label="Taylor Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2133" end="2136" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="2153" end="2168" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q61787614" start="2171" end="2183" title="Tyler Rogers (baseball)" label="Tyler Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2186" end="2189" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="2206" end="2226" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q91466873" start="2228" end="2240" title="Dalton Keene" label="Dalton Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="2267" end="2286" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734469" start="2288" end="2306" title="Brittany Pettersen" label="Brittany Pettersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2309" end="2338" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758456" wikidata="Q1982969" url="?curid=758456" title="New Technology Telescope">
<text>The New Technology Telescope or NTT is a 3.58-metre Ritchey–Chrétien telescope operated by the European Southern Observatory. It began operations in 1989. It is located in Chile at the La Silla Observatory and was an early pioneer in the use of active optics. The telescope and its enclosure were built to a revolutionary design for optimal image quality.

== Characteristics ==

The main mirror of NTT is flexible and its shape is actively adjusted during observations by actuators to preserve the optimal image quality. The secondary mirror position is also actively controlled in three directions. This technology, developed by ESO, known as active optics, is now applied to all major modern telescopes, such as the Very Large Telescope at Cerro Paranal and the future European Extremely Large Telescope. The design of the octagonal enclosure housing the NTT is another technological breakthrough. The telescope dome is relatively small, and is ventilated by a system of flaps that makes air flow smoothly across the mirror, reducing turbulence and leading to sharper images.

The NTT was the first telescope using what is now known as active optics: a feedback loop that actively keeps the (comparatively thin) monolithic mirror in shape, using numerous actuators on which the mirror is mounted.

Its design as well as the design of its enclosure (the building protecting it) included many revolutionary features, from whence it was named. In particular, great care was taken to ensure a good ventilation of the telescope, and to avoid heat sources in around the telescope. Since its construction, the NTT has undergone several upgrades which continued to improve its quality. It was used as a real-life test bench for the engineering concepts and software used for the Very Large Telescope.

The New Technology Telescope initially had the same problem as the Hubble Space Telescope - the mirror was ground to the wrong shape due to a mis-calibrated null corrector. However, the active optics system of the NTT was able to correct that error without refiguring the mirror.

== Instruments ==

Currently, the NTT is equipped with 2 instruments:
*SofI (&quot;Son of ISAAC&quot;, a VLT instrument), a near infrared camera and low-resolution spectrograph, with polarimetric and high-time resolution modes
*EFOSC2 (ESO Faint Object Spectrograph and Camera, v.2), a visible light camera and low-resolution spectrograph, with multi-object spectroscopy, polarimetry and coronography modes

== Science with the NTT ==

The NTT and its instrument have contributed for important discoveries since the telescope started working at La Silla. These include unravelling the mysterious Galactic centre, contributing to the observations of the first solar-like oscillations in another star, and breaking many distance records by finding new galaxies in the far-away Universe. Most recently, the NTT helped detect a disc around a massive young star, solving the mystery of star formation in massive stars, and its observations were crucial to determine how asteroids are modified by solar wind.

NTT observations of stars orbiting the centre of our Milky Way helped determine the mass and the radius of its supermassive black hole, effectively helping to confirm the existence of such a massive and compact object.

==See also==
* List of largest optical reflecting telescopes

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1982969" start="4" end="28" title="New Technology Telescope" label="New Technology Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982969" start="32" end="35" title="New Technology Telescope" label="NTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062138" start="52" end="78" title="Ritchey–Chrétien telescope" label="Ritchey–Chrétien telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="95" end="124" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="172" end="177" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q459352" start="185" end="205" title="La Silla Observatory" label="La Silla Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054449" start="245" end="258" title="active optics" label="active optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="719" end="739" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q635105" start="781" end="806" title="Extremely Large Telescope" label="Extremely Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="1774" end="1794" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="1864" end="1886" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662632" start="1954" end="1968" title="null corrector" label="null corrector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="2207" end="2215" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457898" start="2227" end="2241" title="spectral resolution" label="low-resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="2242" end="2254" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q899381" start="2261" end="2273" title="polarimetric" label="polarimetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="2364" end="2377" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q121494405" start="2423" end="2448" title="Multi-Object Spectrometer" label="multi-object spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="2466" end="2477" title="coronograph" label="coronograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638347" start="3317" end="3362" title="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes" label="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758458" wikidata="Q246248" url="?curid=758458" title="Colony (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[colony]] is a territory governed by people from another country.

Colony may also refer to:
==Biology==
*Colony (biology), group of individual organisms of the same species living closely together

==Places in the United States==
*Colony, Alabama
*Colony, Kansas
*Colony, Missouri
*Colony, Oklahoma
*Colony, Lexington, a neighborhood in southwestern Lexington, Kentucky
*The Colony, Texas
*Colony Township, Adams County, Iowa
*Colony Township, Delaware County, Iowa
*Colony Township, Greeley County, Kansas
*Colony Township, Knox County, Missouri

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Film===
*&quot;Colony&quot; (film), a 2010 documentary about beekeepers and colony collapse disorder
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (1995 film), an American made-for-television thriller starring John Ritter
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (1996 film), an American made-for-television thriller starring Michael Paré
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (2007 film), a Canadian short film by Jeff Barnaby
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (2013 film), a Canadian science fiction horror film starring Laurence Fishburne
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (2015 film) or &quot;Colonia&quot;, a drama starring Emma Watson and Daniel Brühl
*&quot;A Colony&quot;, a 2018 Canadian French-language film starring Émilie Bierre
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (also known as &quot;Tides&quot;, a 2021 German-Swiss science fiction thriller film

===Literature===
*&quot;Colony&quot; (Buffy novel), based on the &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; television series
*&quot;Colony&quot; (Grant novel), by Rob Grant
*&quot;Colony&quot; (short story), by Philip K. Dick
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (novel), novel by Audrey Magee

===Music===
*&quot;Colony&quot; (In Flames album), 1999
*&quot;Colony&quot;, a song by Joy Division on the album &quot;Closer&quot;
*&quot;Colony&quot;, a song by Susumu Hirasawa on the 1995 album &quot;Sim City&quot;

===Television===
*&quot;Colony&quot; (TV series), a 2016 American television series on USA Network
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (2005 TV series), 2005 reality television series set in historical Australia
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (American TV series), 2009 Discovery Channel reality television series set in a post-apocalyptic US
*&quot;Colony&quot; (&quot;The X-Files&quot;), episode from the television series &quot;The X-Files&quot;
*&quot;The Colony&quot;, an episode from the television series &quot;Voltron: Legendary Defender&quot;

===Video games===
*&quot;Colony&quot; (video game), 1987 computer game by Mastertronic
*&quot;The Colony&quot; (video game), 1988 computer game by Mindscape

==Brands and enterprises==
*Colony (restaurant), London, England
*Colony Brands, an American mail-order and electronic retail company
*The Colony (restaurant), New York City (1923–1971)
*The Colony Room Club, a club in London (1948-2008)

==Other uses==
*a body of people who have gathered to live near each other, e.g. an artists&#x27; colony
*Colony (fraternity or sorority), a probationary chapter of a national fraternity or sorority
*Colony (Poland), a type of settlement in Poland
*Colony (Russian Empire), a type of settlement in the Russian Empire with an invited foreign population
*Colony Club, a social club in New York City, New York, USA
*Colony Framework, an open source plugin framework specification
*Colony High School, Ontario, California
*Colony houses, model housing developments in Edinburgh
*Colony-class frigate, a class of frigates built in the United States for the British Royal Navy during World War II
*The Colony (Bennachie), a former squatters&#x27; community near Aberdeen, Scotland
*The Colony (professional wrestling), professional wrestling stable in Chikara
*Jim Colony, sports news announcer

==See also==
*
*Colony House (disambiguation)
*Colonia (disambiguation)
*Colonie (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246248" start="2" end="12" title="Colony (disambiguation)" label="[[colony]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q246248" start="70" end="76" title="Colony (disambiguation)" label="Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="109" end="125" title="Colony (biology)" label="Colony (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66106" start="235" end="250" title="Colony, Alabama" label="Colony, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073681" start="252" end="266" title="Colony, Kansas" label="Colony, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477952" start="268" end="284" title="Colony, Missouri" label="Colony, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287223" start="286" end="302" title="Colony, Oklahoma" label="Colony, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148479" start="304" end="321" title="Colony, Lexington" label="Colony, Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q975816" start="375" end="392" title="The Colony, Texas" label="The Colony, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220252" start="394" end="429" title="Colony Township, Adams County, Iowa" label="Colony Township, Adams County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892252" start="431" end="469" title="Colony Township, Delaware County, Iowa" label="Colony Township, Delaware County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148512" start="471" end="510" title="Colony Township, Greeley County, Kansas" label="Colony Township, Greeley County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9037835" start="512" end="550" title="Colony Township, Knox County, Missouri" label="Colony Township, Knox County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148485" start="599" end="624" title="Colony (film)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881276" start="692" end="726" title="The Colony (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726823" start="791" end="825" title="The Colony (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (1996 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61816700" start="891" end="925" title="The Colony (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520333" start="966" end="1000" title="The Colony (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18561606" start="1070" end="1104" title="The Colony (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62630744" start="1182" end="1190" title="A Colony" label="A Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q105451891" start="1297" end="1314" title="Tides (film)" label="&amp;quot;Tides&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441104" start="1385" end="1417" title="Colony (Buffy novel)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (Buffy novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148482" start="1488" end="1520" title="Colony (Grant novel)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (Grant novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115939" start="1536" end="1568" title="Colony (short story)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1589" end="1619" title="The Colony (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24049151" start="1630" end="1642" title="Audrey Magee" label="Audrey Magee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111122" start="1657" end="1693" title="Colony (In Flames album)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (In Flames album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q756930" start="1763" end="1769" title="Closer (Joy Division album)" label="Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517257" start="1847" end="1855" title="Sim City (album)" label="Sim City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593682" start="1881" end="1911" title="Colony (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726817" start="1963" end="2002" title="The Colony (2005 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (2005 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726819" start="2064" end="2107" title="The Colony (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567052" start="2188" end="2232" title="Colony (The X-Files)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The X-Files&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2321" end="2395" title="List of Voltron: Legendary Defender episodes" label="episode from the television series &amp;quot;Voltron: Legendary Defender&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148488" start="2416" end="2447" title="Colony (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Colony&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410730" start="2485" end="2520" title="The Colony (video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Colony&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148487" start="2583" end="2602" title="Colony (restaurant)" label="Colony (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148492" start="2621" end="2634" title="Colony Brands" label="Colony Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901506" start="2690" end="2713" title="The Colony (restaurant)" label="The Colony (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726826" start="2742" end="2762" title="The Colony Room Club" label="The Colony Room Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="2878" end="2898" title="artists&amp;#x27; colony" label="artists&amp;#x27; colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148486" start="2900" end="2931" title="Colony (fraternity or sorority)" label="Colony (fraternity or sorority)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12015918" start="2994" end="3009" title="Colony (Poland)" label="Colony (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373615" start="3043" end="3066" title="Colony (Russian Empire)" label="Colony (Russian Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q964460" start="3147" end="3158" title="Colony Club" label="Colony Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148494" start="3207" end="3223" title="Colony Framework" label="Colony Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148496" start="3272" end="3290" title="Colony High School" label="Colony High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148516" start="3313" end="3326" title="Colony houses" label="Colony houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793581" start="3369" end="3389" title="Colony-class frigate" label="Colony-class frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726818" start="3486" end="3508" title="The Colony (Bennachie)" label="The Colony (Bennachie)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726824" start="3570" end="3605" title="The Colony (professional wrestling)" label="The Colony (professional wrestling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194285" start="3649" end="3659" title="Jim Colony" label="Jim Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111045" start="3700" end="3729" title="Colony House (disambiguation)" label="Colony House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577376" start="3731" end="3755" title="Colonia (disambiguation)" label="Colonia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180883" start="3757" end="3781" title="Colonie (disambiguation)" label="Colonie (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758460" wikidata="Q48979" url="?curid=758460" title="Richard Laurence Millington Synge">
<text>Richard Laurence Millington Synge (28 October 1914 – 18 August 1994) was a British biochemist, and shared the 1952 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the invention of partition chromatography with Archer Martin.

==Life==
Richard Laurence Millington Synge was born in West Kirby on 28 October 1914, the son of Lawrence Millington Synge, a Liverpool stock-broker, and his wife, Katherine C. Swan.

Synge was educated at the Old Hall in Wellington, Shropshire and at Winchester College. He then studied Chemistry at Trinity College, Cambridge.

He spent his entire career in research, at the Wool Industries Research Association, Leeds (1941–1943), Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine, London (1943–1948), Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen (1948–1967), and Food Research Institute, Norwich (1967–1976).

It was during his time in Leeds that he worked with Archer Martin, developing partition chromatography, a technique used in the separation mixtures of similar chemicals, that revolutionised analytical chemistry. Between 1942 and 1948 he studied peptides of the protein group gramicidin, work later used by Frederick Sanger in determining the structure of insulin. In March 1950 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society for which his candidature citation read:
In 1963 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. His proposers were Magnus Pyke, Andrew Phillipson, Sir David Cuthbertson and John Andrew Crichton.

He was for several years the treasurer of the Chemical Information Group of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and was an honorary Professor in Biological Sciences at the University of East Anglia from 1968 to 1984. He was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science (ScD) from the University of East Anglia in 1977, and an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Mathematics and Science at Uppsala University, Sweden in 1980.

==Personal life==
In 1943 Synge married Ann Davies Stephen (1916–1997). Ann Stephen was the daughter of psychologist Karin Stephen and psychoanalyst Adrian Stephen. Ann&#x27;s sister Judith (1918-1972) was married to documentary artist and photographer Nigel Henderson.

==See also==
*Monolithic HPLC column

==References==
==External links==
* Synge&#x27;s Nobel Lecture Applications of Partition Chromatography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48979" start="0" end="33" title="Richard Laurence Millington Synge" label="Richard Laurence Millington Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="83" end="93" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="115" end="139" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="171" end="185" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977" start="191" end="204" title="Archer Martin" label="Archer Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q633627" start="262" end="272" title="West Kirby" label="West Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898698" start="429" end="451" title="Wellington, Shropshire" label="Wellington, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="459" end="477" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="508" end="534" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033753" start="584" end="620" title="Wool Industries Research Association" label="Wool Industries Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149028" start="641" end="681" title="Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine" label="Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041197" start="703" end="728" title="Rowett Research Institute" label="Rowett Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623133" start="756" end="779" title="Institute of Food Research" label="Food Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="829" end="834" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977" start="855" end="868" title="Archer John Porter Martin" label="Archer Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q907154" start="881" end="905" title="partition chromatography" label="partition chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="1048" end="1055" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418980" start="1078" end="1088" title="gramicidin" label="gramicidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="1109" end="1125" title="Frederick Sanger" label="Frederick Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="1158" end="1165" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1198" end="1225" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="1306" end="1332" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732177" start="1353" end="1364" title="Magnus Pyke" label="Magnus Pyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q46654113" start="1366" end="1383" title="A. T. Phillipson" label="Andrew Phillipson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232742" start="1389" end="1406" title="David Cuthbertson" label="David Cuthbertson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1411" end="1431" title="John Andrew Crichton" label="John Andrew Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="1514" end="1540" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045828" start="1602" end="1627" title="University of East Anglia" label="University of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045828" start="1707" end="1732" title="University of East Anglia" label="University of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="1815" end="1833" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370935" start="1969" end="1982" title="Karin Stephen" label="Karin Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318537" start="2001" end="2015" title="Adrian Stephen" label="Adrian Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032448" start="2105" end="2120" title="Nigel Henderson (artist)" label="Nigel Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901686" start="2137" end="2159" title="Monolithic HPLC column" label="Monolithic HPLC column"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758464" wikidata="Q525305" url="?curid=758464" title="Andy Bausch">
<text>Andy Bausch (born 12 April 1959 in Dudelange, Luxembourg) is a Luxembourgish film director. He studied painting and photography. Through interest in rock music he came into contact with cinema.

==Filmography as director==
* &quot;Gwyncilla: Legend of Dark Ages&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Troublemaker&quot; (1988)
* &quot; (1989)
* &quot; (1991, TV film)
* &quot;V comme vengeance&quot; (TV episode, 1992)
* &quot;Three Shake-A-Leg Steps To Heaven&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Die Männer vom K3&quot; (2 TV episodes, 1993–1994)
* &quot;Fünf Millionen und ein paar Zerquetschte&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Immer wenn sie Krimis liest&quot; (TV film, 1994)
* &quot;Doppelter Einsatz&quot; (5 TV episodes, 1995)
* &quot;Letters Unsent&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Back in Trouble&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Balko&quot; (3 TV episodes, 1999)
* &quot;HeliCops – Einsatz über Berlin&quot; (TV episode, 2000)
* &quot;Zwei Brüder&quot; (TV episode, 2001)
* &quot;The Unemployment Club&quot; (English title) (2001)
* &quot;L&#x27;Homme au cigare&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Dirty Sky&quot; (2003)
* &quot;La Revanche&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Visions of Europe&quot; (2004) (segment &quot;The Language School&quot;)
* &quot;Deepfrozen&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Inthierryview&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Schockela Knätschgummi a brong Puppelcher&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Net Cool&quot; (2013) 

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q525305" start="0" end="11" title="Andy Bausch" label="Andy Bausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014" start="35" end="44" title="Dudelange" label="Dudelange"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="46" end="56" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="103" end="111" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="116" end="127" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="149" end="159" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="186" end="192" title="film" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="283" end="295" title="Troublemaker (film)" label="Troublemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214962" start="464" end="481" title="Die Männer vom K3" label="Die Männer vom K3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243373" start="643" end="660" title="Doppelter Einsatz" label="Doppelter Einsatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13101644" start="733" end="748" title="Back in Trouble" label="Back in Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q462278" start="770" end="775" title="Balko" label="Balko"/>
<link wikidata="Q635909" start="812" end="842" title="HeliCops – Einsatz über Berlin" label="HeliCops – Einsatz über Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231977" start="876" end="887" title="Zwei Brüder" label="Zwei Brüder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250624" start="1169" end="1179" title="Deepfrozen" label="Deepfrozen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758465" wikidata="Q28310127" url="?curid=758465" title="Enrique Herrera">
<text>Enrique Herrera may refer to:

* Enrique Olaya Herrera (1880–1937), Colombian journalist, politician and President of Colombia 
* Enrique Herrera (actor) (1904–1991), Cuban film actor in Mexico
* Enrique Herrera (wrestler), Peruvian wrestler

== See also ==
*Enrique Herrero
*Enrique Herreros</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28310127" start="0" end="15" title="Enrique Herrera" label="Enrique Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054701" start="33" end="54" title="Enrique Olaya Herrera" label="Enrique Olaya Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892410" start="130" end="153" title="Enrique Herrera (actor)" label="Enrique Herrera (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939785" start="196" end="222" title="Enrique Herrera (wrestler)" label="Enrique Herrera (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125848215" start="259" end="274" title="Enrique Herrero (disambiguation)" label="Enrique Herrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969745" start="276" end="292" title="Enrique Herreros" label="Enrique Herreros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758466" wikidata="Q456141" url="?curid=758466" title="Elizabeth Odio Benito">
<text>Elizabeth Odio Benito (born 15 September 1939) is a lawyer and politician from Costa Rica. She served as President in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights from 2018 to 2020. She was a Vice-President of the International Criminal Court and of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. She was twice appointed Justice Minister in her home country of Costa Rica, later becoming Vice-President of the Republic. Her background is as an academic lawyer, specialising in the administration of justice and human rights, in particular the rights of women.

==Early life and education==
Although born in Puntarenas, the first child of Emiliano Odio Madrigal and Esperanza Benito Ibañez, most of her early life was spent in San José, where she attended the Colegio Superior de Señoritas. The law was something of a tradition on her father&#x27;s side of the family; Odio Benito was particularly encouraged by her lawyer uncle, Ulises Odio Santos, to study that subject. She graduated with a master&#x27;s degree from the University of Costa Rica in 1964, where she remained for much of her academic career, rising to a full professorship in 1986 and Vice-President for Academic Affairs in 1988. During this period, she began to work in the field of gender studies, with an emphasis on crimes committed against women. 

==Political career in Costa Rica==
From 1976 to 1978 she served as Secretary to the Colegio de Abogados, the bar association of Costa Rica, and in 1978 was appointed to the joint
offices of Minister of Justice and Attorney General, which she held until 1982 when the National Liberation Party took the presidency. In 1990 she returned for another four-year term as Minister of Justice, under President Rafael Ángel Calderón Fournier. The peak of her domestic political career came in 1998, with her election as Second Vice-President alongside President Miguel Ángel Rodríguez and First Vice-President Astrid Fischel Volio; during this time she was also Minister for the Environment and Energy.

== Career in International Law ==

===Judge of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, 1993–1998===
Odio Benito&#x27;s involvement in international justice began during her second ministerial term, with her 1993 appointment as a judge on the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. This was the first time she had sat as a judge, a fact for which she has been criticised by some of the tribunal participants. A major contribution during these proceedings was Odio Benito&#x27;s successful effort to have rape and other sexual assaults considered as torture. Her interpretation, based on a case of two Serbian women raped in the Čelebići detention camp, is now an accepted principle of international law.

In 1998 Odio Benito left ICTY as a consequence of becoming Vice-President, but she continued to play an active role in related areas of the law. Most notably, she was president of the United Nations working group that drew up the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. This additional treaty, open to any State that is party to the main UN Convention Against Torture anti-torture Convention, allows for international and independent national experts to visit any prison, detention camp, or similar facility, speak in private with people held there, and make recommendations to authorities aimed at preventing torture or other abuse from being practiced there. The Optional Protocol entered into force on 22 June 2006. As of 31 January 2007 it had 32 State Parties with a further 31 States have signed but not yet ratified the Protocol.

===Judge of the International Criminal Court, 2003–2012===
Odio Benito&#x27;s election to the International Criminal Court was not without controversy. Her candidacy had initially been sponsored by Costa Rica, but President Abel Pacheco withdrew support without explanation. Various women&#x27;s groups mobilised to campaign for her readmittance. She was eventually renominated by Panama, whose then president, Mireya Moscoso, is another noted activist for women&#x27;s rights. Odio Benito was thus the only candidate not to be sponsored by her own nation. Nevertheless, she was elected in the first out of thirty-three rounds of voting, indicating strong support from the States Parties.

The ICC officially opened on 11 March 2003, with Elizabeth Odio Benito as Second Vice-President.

When the International Criminal Court sentenced Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga to 14 years in prison in July 2012 for using child soldiers in his rebel army in 2002 and 2003 – the first sentence imposed by the court in its history –, Odio Benito disagreed with her two fellow judges and in a dissenting opinion said that 15 years would have been more appropriate given the harm done to the victims and their families, particularly due to harsh punishments and sexual violence against the UPC&#x27;s child soldiers.

=== Judge of the Interamerican Court of Human Rights ===
Odio Benito served as a judge of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights from 2016 to 2020. She served as President in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights from 2018 to 2020. She was the second woman to hold this position.

==Lectures==
&quot;Los crimenes de violencia sexual en el derecho internacional penal de los siglos XX y XXI (El nuevo orden jurídico internacional a partir de 1945 y su ausencia de perspectiva de genero)&quot; in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law

==Awards==
Odio was inducted into La Galería de las Mujeres de Costa Rica (The Costa Rican Gallery of Women) in 2002 for her contributions to human rights.

==References==
==External links==
* https://web.archive.org/web/20070606205304/http://www.icc-cpi.int/presidency/secondvice.html – ICC biography
* https://web.archive.org/web/20050118192140/http://www.icc-cpi.int/library/organs/presidency/curriculumvitae_odio_benito.pdf – Curriculum vitae supporting ICC candidacy
* http://www.abogados.or.cr/revista_elforo/foro3 – Issue of the Colegio de Abogados magazine with several articles on Odio Benito (Spanish)
* http://www.un.org/law/icc/elections/results/judges_results.htm – ICC election results</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q456141" start="0" end="21" title="Elizabeth Odio Benito" label="Elizabeth Odio Benito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547804" start="122" end="158" title="Inter-American Court of Human Rights" label="Inter-American Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="210" end="238" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="250" end="307" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="373" end="383" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208555" start="493" end="518" title="administration of justice" label="administration of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="523" end="535" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="555" end="570" title="rights of women" label="rights of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687" start="619" end="629" title="Puntarenas" label="Puntarenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="738" end="746" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305486" start="1035" end="1059" title="University of Costa Rica" label="University of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="1263" end="1277" title="gender studies" label="gender studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1417" end="1436" title="Colegio de Abogados" label="Colegio de Abogados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865205" start="1442" end="1457" title="bar association" label="bar association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="1547" end="1563" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q82591" start="1600" end="1625" title="National Liberation Party (Costa Rica)" label="National Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q887712" start="1735" end="1765" title="Rafael Ángel Calderón Fournier" label="Rafael Ángel Calderón Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q562577" start="1886" end="1908" title="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez" label="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709957" start="1934" end="1954" title="Astrid Fischel Volio" label="Astrid Fischel Volio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="2293" end="2350" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="2619" end="2626" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="2671" end="2678" title="Serbs" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301608" start="2698" end="2721" title="Čelebići prison camp" label="Čelebići detention camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2959" end="2973" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="2974" end="2987" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q740462" start="3005" end="3056" title="Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture" label="Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q851857" start="3129" end="3155" title="United Nations Convention Against Torture" label="Convention Against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217794" start="3850" end="3862" title="Abel Pacheco" label="Abel Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4007" end="4013" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q231946" start="4037" end="4051" title="Mireya Moscoso" label="Mireya Moscoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="4462" end="4471" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="4472" end="4479" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q471035" start="4480" end="4494" title="Thomas Lubanga" label="Thomas Lubanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q843926" start="4540" end="4553" title="child soldier" label="child soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092720" start="4708" end="4726" title="dissenting opinion" label="dissenting opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550188" start="4904" end="4907" title="Union of Congolese Patriots" label="UPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q843926" start="4915" end="4928" title="child soldier" label="child soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547804" start="5113" end="5149" title="Inter-American Court of Human Rights" label="Inter-American Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q26710110" start="5549" end="5588" title="La Galería de las Mujeres de Costa Rica" label="La Galería de las Mujeres de Costa Rica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758469" wikidata="Q836264" url="?curid=758469" title="Kobuk Valley National Park">
<text>Kobuk Valley National Park is a national park of the United States in the Arctic region of northwestern Alaska, located about north of the Arctic Circle. The park was designated in 1980 by the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act to preserve the high Great Kobuk Sand Dunes and the surrounding area which includes caribou migration routes. Park visitors must bring all their own gear for backcountry camping, hiking, backpacking, boating, and dog sledding. No designated trails or roads exist in the park, which at , is slightly larger than the state of Delaware. Kobuk Valley is one of eight national parks in Alaska, the state with the second most national parks, surpassed only by California which has nine. The park is managed by the National Park Service.

Since no roads lead into the park, visitors arrive via chartered air taxi from Nome, Bettles, or Kotzebue. Flights are available year-round, but are weather dependent. The park is one of the least-visited American national parks, along with others inaccessible by road, including the neighboring Gates of the Arctic, Isle Royale in the middle of Lake Superior, the Dry Tortugas at the end of the Florida Keys, as well as Katmai and Lake Clark in southern Alaska.

==Geography==
The park is the center of a vast ecosystem between Selawik National Wildlife Refuge and the Noatak National Preserve. It is over by river to the Chukchi Sea. The Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve lie to the east. The park includes about of lands owned by native corporations and the State of Alaska.

The park consists of the broad wetlands valley of the Kobuk River which runs along the southern edge of the western Brooks Range, which is known as the Baird Mountains. The boundary of the park runs along the height-of-land of the Baird Mountains in the north and the shorter Waring Mountains in the south that form a ring, defining and enclosing the Kobuk Valley. The middle two-thirds of the Kobuk River, from just above Kiana to just below Ambler, is included in the park, as are several of its major tributaries such as the Salmon River and the Hunt River. The valley floor is mainly covered by glacial drift. Much of the southern portion of the park, south of the Kobuk River, is managed as the Kobuk Valley Wilderness of . The Selawik Wilderness lies to the south, in the adjoining Selawik National Wildlife Refuge.
Three sets of sand dune fields are located on the south side of the Kobuk River. The Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, Little Kobuk Sand Dunes and the Hunt River Dunes are remnants of dune fields that covered as many as immediately after the retreat of Pleistocene glaciation. A combination of outwash deposits from the glaciers and strong winds created the field, which is now mostly covered by forest and tundra. In present times the active dune fields cover about . The Great Kobuk Sand Dunes comprise the largest active Arctic dune field in North America. NASA has funded their study as an analog for Martian polar dunes.

The park&#x27;s headquarters are at the Northwest Arctic Heritage Center in Kotzebue, about west of the park on the Bering Sea coast. Seasonal ranger stations are operated along the Kobuk River at Kallarichuk, at the west end of the park, and at Onion Portage at the east end of the park. Offices and visitor services for Cape Krusenstern National Monument and Noatak National Preserve are in the same facility. The units are managed together as the Western Arctic National Parklands, with a single Park Service superintendent in charge.

==Climate==

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Kobuk Valley National Park has a Subarctic climate (&quot;Dfc&quot;) with cool summers and year around precipitation. &quot;Dfc&quot; climates are defined by their coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F), 1–3 months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F), all months with average temperatures below 22 °C (71.6 °F), and no significant precipitation difference between seasons. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at Kallarichuck at 13 ft (4 m) elevation is 2a with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -47.1 °F (-43.9 °C).

Weather in the park is subject to extremes. Average low temperatures in January are , and can reach nighttime lows of . Summer temperatures average around , and can reach . Since the park is above the Arctic Circle, the sun does not set from June 3 to July 9, and the sun is visible for only hours on the winter solstice, with long periods of twilight on either side of sunrise and sunset. As is the case over all of northern Alaska, the aurora borealis is often visible on winter nights when solar activity is high. Snow can happen at any time of the year. Wind and rain are common in summer.

==Ecology==
The park lies in a transition zone between boreal forest and tundra.
The fish and wildlife in the park are typical of arctic and subarctic fauna. The major economic species are caribou, moose, and fish species such as salmon and sheefish. The most visible animals are the 400,000 caribou of the Western Arctic herd. The herd migrates annually between their winter breeding grounds, south of the Waring Mountains, and their summer calving grounds, north of the Baird Mountains. The herd&#x27;s annual crossing of the Kobuk River is central to the Inupiaq people&#x27;s subsistence hunting. Large mammals in the park include wolf packs, Arctic and red foxes, caribou, and moose. Black bears, brown bears, beavers, river otters, Canadian lynxes, and Dall sheep exist in the park as well. Smaller mammals include wolverines, martens, minks, porcupines, muskrats, snowshoe hares and a variety of voles. Fish species include chinook, chum, pink and sockeye salmon, with other salmonids including Dolly Varden, Arctic char, lake trout and Arctic grayling. Other species include burbot, Arctic lamprey, round, broad and humpback whitefish, and pond and rainbow smelt.

==History==

Human habitation in Kobuk Valley is believed to extend back at least 12,500 years. The present inhabitants of the valley are the Inupiat people, who subsist on hunting and fishing in the region. The Onion Portage Archeological District is a National Historic Landmark district at the east end of the Kobuk River&#x27;s course through the park. The site, strategically located at a major caribou river crossing, documents nine cultural complexes spanning from 8,000–6,000 BC to about 1000–1700 AD. The site is an inholding of the NANA Regional Corporation, an Alaskan native corporation with rights in the park.

The first human inhabitants of the Kobuk Valley were people of the Paleo-Arctic tradition, who hunted caribou at Onion Portage. The region was apparently deserted for about 2,000 years until people of the Archaic tradition appeared in the valley from the south and east. By about 4,000 years before the present, people of the Arctic Small Tool tradition arrived, but departed between 1,500 and 1,000 years ago, again leaving the valley unoccupied. New people arrived by about 1200 AD, as documented by the Ahteut site downriver from Onion Portage. People remained in the valley until the mid-19th century, when the caribou population declined and people moved closer to the coast. These people were the Akunirmiut and Kuuvaum Kangiamirnuit. One of their villages was located in the present park at the mouth of the Hunt River. Their descendants, now known as the Kuuvangmiit, have mostly moved out of park lands.

About 32 prospectors&#x27; camps were established during a short gold rush in 1899–1900. Surveys have not yet located them, although debris associated with the miners&#x27; boats has been found.

Kobuk Valley National Park was established as one of fifteen new National Park Service properties established by the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) of 1980. It was first declared a national monument by President Jimmy Carter on December 1, 1978 using his authority under the Antiquities Act when Congressional negotiations on the proposed ANILCA bill were stalled. ANILCA was finally passed in 1980, and signed by Carter on December 2, 1980. Unlike many Park Service units in Alaska, Kobuk Valley is entirely national park land, with only subsistence hunting by local residents permitted. No part of the park is designated as a national preserve, which would allow sport hunting.

==See also==
* List of national parks of the United States

== References ==
==External links==
* of the National Park Service
* Cultural Resources of Kobuk Valley National Park (archive) - National Park Service Alaska Regional Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q836264" start="0" end="26" title="Kobuk Valley National Park" label="Kobuk Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="32" end="66" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="74" end="80" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="104" end="110" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="139" end="152" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="193" end="240" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q130753746" start="325" end="332" title="Porcupine caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q28997" start="454" end="466" title="Sled dog" label="dog sledding"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="556" end="561" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="565" end="573" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="598" end="618" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="eight national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="695" end="705" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="749" end="770" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="852" end="856" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q79943" start="858" end="865" title="Bettles, Alaska" label="Bettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79810" start="870" end="878" title="Kotzebue, Alaska" label="Kotzebue"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1069" end="1088" title="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve" label="Gates of the Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163515" start="1090" end="1101" title="Isle Royale National Park" label="Isle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="1119" end="1132" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143655" start="1138" end="1150" title="Dry Tortugas National Park" label="Dry Tortugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q537749" start="1169" end="1181" title="Florida Keys" label="Florida Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1194" end="1200" title="Katmai National Park and Preserve" label="Katmai"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1205" end="1215" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267504" start="1302" end="1334" title="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge" label="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="1343" end="1367" title="Noatak National Preserve" label="Noatak National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="1396" end="1407" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1413" end="1459" title="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve" label="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778017" start="1619" end="1630" title="Kobuk River" label="Kobuk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q929910" start="1681" end="1693" title="Brooks Range" label="Brooks Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q803921" start="1717" end="1732" title="Baird Mountains" label="Baird Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1841" end="1857" title="Waring Mountains" label="Waring Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q79730" start="1988" end="1993" title="Kiana, Alaska" label="Kiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q602422" start="2008" end="2014" title="Ambler, Alaska" label="Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2093" end="2105" title="Salmon River (Kobuk)" label="Salmon River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2124" title="Hunt River (Alaska)" label="Hunt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279297" start="2164" end="2177" title="drift (geology)" label="glacial drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2937" end="2941" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79810" start="3080" end="3088" title="Kotzebue, Alaska" label="Kotzebue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937254" start="3326" end="3360" title="Cape Krusenstern National Monument" label="Cape Krusenstern National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="3365" end="3389" title="Noatak National Preserve" label="Noatak National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987458" start="3454" end="3487" title="Western Arctic National Parklands" label="Western Arctic National Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3573" end="3602" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="3644" end="3661" title="Subarctic climate" label="Subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="3999" end="4038" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="4050" end="4064" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="4626" end="4641" title="aurora borealis" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="4838" end="4851" title="boreal forest" label="boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="4856" end="4862" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130753746" start="4972" end="4979" title="Porcupine caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="4981" end="4986" title="Alaska moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="5013" end="5019" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089398" start="5024" end="5032" title="sheefish" label="sheefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="5341" end="5348" title="Inupiaq" label="Inupiaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q576039" start="5418" end="5422" title="Alaskan tundra wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="5430" end="5436" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="5441" end="5448" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="5472" end="5483" title="American black bear" label="Black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="5485" end="5495" title="Grizzly bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="5498" end="5504" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="5507" end="5518" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="5521" end="5534" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="5542" end="5552" title="Dall sheep" label="Dall sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="5604" end="5613" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="5616" end="5622" title="American marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="5625" end="5629" title="American mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="5632" end="5642" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupines"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="5644" end="5651" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="5654" end="5667" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="5686" end="5690" title="vole" label="vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="5714" end="5721" title="chinook salmon" label="chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q475211" start="5723" end="5727" title="chum salmon" label="chum"/>
<link wikidata="Q673380" start="5729" end="5733" title="pink salmon" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="5738" end="5752" title="sockeye salmon" label="sockeye salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327067" start="5785" end="5797" title="Dolly Varden trout" label="Dolly Varden"/>
<link wikidata="Q421047" start="5799" end="5810" title="Arctic char" label="Arctic char"/>
<link wikidata="Q469946" start="5812" end="5822" title="lake trout" label="lake trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q81014" start="5827" end="5842" title="Arctic grayling" label="Arctic grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q144700" start="5866" end="5872" title="burbot" label="burbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178729" start="5874" end="5888" title="Arctic lamprey" label="Arctic lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q326570" start="5890" end="5895" title="round whitefish" label="round"/>
<link wikidata="Q510354" start="5897" end="5902" title="broad whitefish" label="broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q945152" start="5907" end="5915" title="humpback whitefish" label="humpback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074919" start="5931" end="5935" title="pond smelt" label="pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641362" start="5940" end="5947" title="rainbow smelt" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="6098" end="6112" title="Inupiat people" label="Inupiat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093921" start="6168" end="6204" title="Onion Portage Archeological District" label="Onion Portage Archeological District"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="6210" end="6236" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847618" start="6481" end="6490" title="inholding" label="inholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952322" start="6498" end="6523" title="NANA Regional Corporation" label="NANA Regional Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931866" start="6648" end="6670" title="Paleo-Arctic tradition" label="Paleo-Arctic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="6786" end="6803" title="Archaic period in North America" label="Archaic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787593" start="6907" end="6934" title="Arctic Small Tool tradition" label="Arctic Small Tool tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="7756" end="7777" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="7808" end="7855" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="7898" end="7915" title="national monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="7929" end="7941" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="7992" end="8007" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="8345" end="8362" title="national preserve" label="national preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="8413" end="8456" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758470" wikidata="Q3363835" url="?curid=758470" title="Jarry Park">
<text>Jarry Park is an urban park in the Villeray–Saint-Michel–Parc-Extension borough of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Jarry Park has total area of 36 hectares. It is considered by the City of Montreal as one of its large parks.

From 1969 to 1976, the former Jarry Park Stadium (located in the southwest corner of the park, now IGA Stadium) was the home of the Montreal Expos, Canada&#x27;s first Major League Baseball team. In 1984 it also hosted a Mass by Pope John Paul II. There is now a hall dedicated to him in District Police Station 31 (Villeray).
Facilities include softball, hockey, beach volleyball, cricket and soccer fields, a skate park, table tennis, tennis and basketball courts, a public pool, bocce and pétanque lanes, and an artificial lake, used for ice skating during the winter. In addition, there is a monument called &quot;Paix des enfants&quot; (&quot;Children&#x27;s Peace&quot;), consisting of violent toys fused together.

The park is bordered by Rue Jarry to the north, Boulevard Saint-Laurent to the east, and the Canadian Pacific rail tracks to the west. On the south it is bordered by Gary-Carter Street (formerly Faillon Street), named in honour of the Baseball Hall of Fame Montreal Expos catcher.

The park was named in honour of Raoul Jarry (1885–1930), a member of Montreal&#x27;s City Council.

On 24 June 1965, Jarry Park hosted the show for Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, the French-Canadian annual celebration day. That year, Jarry Park was chosen to present the most important event of the celebrations. 40,000 people came to hear some of Québec&#x27;s most acclaimed singers, namely Pauline Julien, Clémence DesRochers, Jean-Pierre Ferland, Christine Charbonneau, Hervé Brousseau, Les Cailloux, Pierre Calvé, Renée Claude, and Pierre Létourneau.

==References==
==External links==

* Coalition des amis du parc Jarry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3363835" start="0" end="10" title="Jarry Park" label="Jarry Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="17" end="27" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324904" start="35" end="71" title="Villeray–Saint-Michel–Parc-Extension" label="Villeray–Saint-Michel–Parc-Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="83" end="91" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="93" end="99" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="101" end="107" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887992" start="206" end="217" title="List of parks in Montreal" label="large parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495641" start="250" end="268" title="Jarry Park Stadium" label="Jarry Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325940" start="319" end="330" title="IGA Stadium" label="IGA Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="352" end="366" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="388" end="409" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="449" end="466" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="584" end="600" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="602" end="609" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q33135384" start="702" end="707" title="bocce" label="bocce"/>
<link wikidata="Q189317" start="712" end="720" title="pétanque" label="pétanque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="966" end="975" title="Rue Jarry" label="Rue Jarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460215" start="990" end="1013" title="Boulevard Saint-Laurent" label="Boulevard Saint-Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="1035" end="1051" title="Canadian Pacific" label="Canadian Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="1052" end="1063" title="rail tracks" label="rail tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="1177" end="1198" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="1199" end="1221" title="Gary Carter" label="Montreal Expos catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419206" start="1256" end="1267" title="Raoul Jarry" label="Raoul Jarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="1372" end="1395" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372725" start="1611" end="1625" title="Pauline Julien" label="Pauline Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980528" start="1627" end="1646" title="Clémence DesRochers" label="Clémence DesRochers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169283" start="1648" end="1667" title="Jean-Pierre Ferland" label="Jean-Pierre Ferland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965901" start="1669" end="1690" title="Christine Charbonneau" label="Christine Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427126" start="1737" end="1749" title="Renée Claude" label="Renée Claude"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758472" wikidata="Q2373762" url="?curid=758472" title="Nikolai Rysakov">
<text>Nikolai Ivanovich Rysakov (; – 15 April 1881) was a Russian revolutionary and a member of Narodnaya Volya. He personally took part in the assassination of Tsar Alexander II of Russia. He threw a bomb that disabled the Tsar&#x27;s carriage. A second bomb by an accomplice, Ignacy Hryniewiecki, killed the Tsar. 

In his post-arrest confession, Rysakov revealed all that he knew of the organization, its personnel and its agenda. This resulted in numerous arrests, and seriously compromised the party&#x27;s strength. Despite his repentance, he was hanged along with other accomplices.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Nikolai Rysakov was born most likely in 1861 to Orthodox Christian parents Ivan Sergeevich Rysakov and Matrena Nikolaevna Rysakova at a sawmill plant in Belozersky district of Novgorod province. He had a brother Fedor and three sisters, Alexandra, Ljubica and Catherine. His family was originally from Tikhvin, and his father was the manager of the sawmill plant. Rysakov received his elementary education at Vytegorsk. Having studied at his own expense, in 1878, he graduated from the Cherepovets secondary school. From September 1879, he was a student at the Institute of Mining Engineering in St. Petersburg until December 1880. Rysakov was described by contemporary accounts as a thick-set youth with long reddish hair.

In early January of 1881, having fallen under the influence of Andrei Zhelyabov, whom he knew under the pseudonym &quot;Zakhar&quot;, he joined Narodnaya Volya. Rysakov then started living under the name &quot;Makar Egorov Glazov&quot;, and was known in the revolutionary circle by the pseudonym &quot;Belomor&quot;. He assisted the propaganda group whose staff included Hryniewiecki and Zhelyabov. In particular, he distributed 100 copies of the first issue of Rabochaya Gazeta to workers in various inns and taverns, as well as to cab drivers and to peasants living on the outskirts of town. He also distributed the second issue of the newspaper, all of which he passed out by the third day. Rysakov held two meetings in his own apartment, in which he read lectures to workers. However, the meetings were attended by as few as five or six workers.

===Assassination of Alexander II===

The invitation to take part in the attempt was made two weeks prior to the incident by Zhelyabov. Rysakov, Hryniewiecki, and Timofei Mikhailov volunteered. The day before the assassination, under the guidance of Nikolai Kibalchich, the three volunteers tested their missiles out of town in a deserted place. Two missiles were pitched and one of them exploded.

On the morning of 13 March [1 March, Old Style], at about 9 AM, Rysakov and other bomb-throwers gathered at the group&#x27;s safe house to collect their bombs and review the plan of the attack. Rysakov wore a dagger and a revolver for self-defense, and was carrying a bomb wrapped in a handkerchief or a newspaper. He was wearing a fur cap, a silk scarf, and a drape coat, and underneath a linen shirt having traditional Russian patterns at the ends of the sleeves and on the chest.

On 13 March 1881, at about 2:15 PM, the Imperial procession had gone about a hundred and fifty yards down the embankment of the Catherine Canal before it approached Rysakov. He moved closer to the roadway and threw his bomb which landed between the horse&#x27;s legs or under the rear wheels of the carriage. The ensuing explosion damaged the vehicle, killed one of the Cossack escorts, and severely wounded a butcher&#x27;s boy who had been on his way to deliver an order. Alexander II emerged dazed but unharmed (reportedly, he had only suffered a minor cut on one of his hands).

Rysakov started fleeing from the scene of the crime and was immediately chased by gendarmes. Witnessing this, a worker threw his crowbar at his feet, causing him to stumble and fall. Rysakov resisted capture but was eventually pinned against the iron railing along the edge of the quay, about thirty steps from the site of the explosion. The Tsar walked up to Rysakov and inquired about his identity. Rysakov introduced himself as the Vyatka tradesman Glazov. The Tsar, according to one eye-witness, wagged a threatening finger at Rysakov. The Tsar stopped to offer comfort to the victims and to survey the devastation wrought by Rysakov. The Tsar said: &quot;Thank God, I escaped injury&quot;, and according to one witness, Rysakov loudly pronounced something to the effect: &quot;We will see if you will still thank God.&quot; The delay amounted to 5–6 minutes. The Tsar was ready to leave when Hryniewiecki approached him and detonated a second bomb at his feet.

After the second bomb went off, Rysakov was roughed up by one of the soldiers holding him. As soon as the Tsar was rushed by sleigh to the Winter Palace, the police decided that Rysakov should be taken directly to the mayor. As he was being led to a cab, Rysakov was attacked by the mob, but with the intervention of the police, he was turned over to the authorities unharmed. Tsar Alexander II died roughly 45 minutes later.

===Trial===
While in custody, in an attempt to save his own life, Rysakov cooperated with the investigators by giving them valuable information about his accomplices. In particular, his post-arrest confession enabled the police to raid the group&#x27;s safe house on Telezhnaya street, where Gesya Helfman was arrested and Nikolai Sablin committed suicide after firing several shots at the police. Mikhailov, Sophia Perovskaya, and Kibalchich were also subsequently captured. Rysakov established the identity of all prisoners. Although he knew many of them only by their party pseudonyms, he was able to describe the role they each had played.

Rysakov was put on trial, together with Zhelyabov, Perovskaya, Kibalchich, Helfman, and Mikhailov. His counsel sought to palliate his crime on account of his extreme youth. On 29 March, all the defendants were found guilty and were sentenced to death by hanging. In a last desperate effort, Rysakov offered his services to the police, and composed a letter addressed to Alexander III alleging sincere repentance; his plea was ignored. Vladimir Solovyov proposed that Alexander III, &quot;as a Christian and ruler of a Christian nation, ought to forgive his father&#x27;s assassins.&quot; In a letter to Alexander III, a similar appeal was made by Leo Tolstoy, but to no avail.

===Execution===

In the evening before the execution the Church offered its ministrations. Rysakov eagerly received the priest, talked with him for a long time, confessed and received the Eucharist.

On the morning of 15 April [3 April, Old Style], the prisoners were transported to the parade grounds of the Semenovsky Regiment, where the execution was set to take place. They were all dressed in black prison uniforms, and on their chests hung a placard with the inscription: &quot;Regicide&quot;. Rysakov and Zhelyabov were placed on the first cart which was drawn through the city by a pair of horses, while Kibalchich, Perovskaya and Mikhailov were placed on a second cart. Along the route, Rysakov&#x27;s head was bent; he and Zhelyabov avoided eye contact.

The correspondent of the London Times estimated that the execution was attended by a hundred thousand spectators. It is reported that during the proceedings, Rysakov more than once showed signs of failing strength. According to eyewitnesses, at the foot of the gallows, Rysakov appeared ghastly pale. When priests ascended the gallows to give the last rites, the convicts almost simultaneously approached them and kissed the crucifix. Once the priests withdrew, Zhelyabov and Mikhailov approached Perovskaya and they kissed each other good-bye. Rysakov stood motionless looking at Zhelyabov the whole time. Perovskaya had turned away from Rysakov.

The executions commenced at 9:20 AM with Kibalchich. Rysakov was last to be hanged and therefore had to witness the execution of all his companions. He appeared to faint when the executioner placed the blindfold over his face. From the moment the suspension began, for several minutes Rysakov desperately tried to keep his feet to the stool. The executioner pulled the stool from under his legs, and gave his body a strong push forward. At 9:30 AM the execution was over; the executioner left the gallows and the drums stopped beating. The body of Rysakov and his accomplices were allowed to hang for twenty minutes. A military doctor then examined the corpses, and at 9:50 they were cut down from the gallows and placed in black wooden coffins. They were buried in a nameless common grave.

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
=== Bibliography ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2373762" start="0" end="25" title="Nikolai Rysakov" label="Nikolai Ivanovich Rysakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="52" end="59" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="60" end="73" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q787001" start="90" end="105" title="Narodnaya Volya (organization)" label="Narodnaya Volya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858948" start="134" end="151" title="Assassination of Alexander II of Russia" label="the assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="155" end="182" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415488" start="272" end="291" title="Ignacy Hryniewiecki" label="Ignacy Hryniewiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="664" end="682" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772048" start="769" end="788" title="Belozersky District, Vologda Oblast" label="Belozersky district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566158" start="792" end="809" title="Novgorod Governorate" label="Novgorod province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15336" start="918" end="925" title="Tikhvin" label="Tikhvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144" start="1102" end="1113" title="Cherepovets" label="Cherepovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q667471" start="1114" end="1130" title="Realschule" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1212" end="1226" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502130" start="1404" end="1420" title="Andrei Zhelyabov" label="Andrei Zhelyabov"/>
<link wikidata="Q86664605" start="1803" end="1819" title="Rabochaya Gazeta" label="Rabochaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372358" start="2354" end="2371" title="Timofei Mikhailov" label="Timofei Mikhailov"/>
<link wikidata="Q723519" start="2441" end="2459" title="Nikolai Kibalchich" label="Nikolai Kibalchich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="2627" end="2636" title="Old_Style_and_New_Style_dates" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137992" start="3202" end="3217" title="Catherine Canal" label="Catherine Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384" start="4092" end="4098" title="Kirov, Kirov Oblast" label="Vyatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="4763" end="4776" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621340" start="5343" end="5356" title="Hesya Helfman" label="Gesya Helfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q257170" start="5374" end="5388" title="Nikolai Sablin" label="Nikolai Sablin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823663" start="5460" end="5477" title="Sophia Perovskaya" label="Sophia Perovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="6066" end="6079" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q282280" start="6131" end="6148" title="Vladimir Solovyov (philosopher)" label="Vladimir Solovyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="6343" end="6354" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="6562" end="6571" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="6611" end="6620" title="Old_Style_and_New_Style_dates" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001351" start="6683" end="6702" title="Semenovsky Regiment" label="Semenovsky Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="7164" end="7176" title="The_Times" label="London Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q243778" start="7400" end="7407" title="gallows" label="gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="8556" end="8577" title="mass grave" label="nameless common grave"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758476" wikidata="Q15031122" url="?curid=758476" title="Maria Jolas">
<text>Maria Jolas (January 12, 1893 – March 4, 1987), born Maria McDonald, was an American pacifist, one of the founding members of &quot;transition&quot; in Paris with her husband Eugene Jolas.

==Life==
Jolas was born in Louisville, Kentucky, but became closely associated with European culture.

Jolas and her husband had two daughters, including the composer Betsy Jolas.

A well-known figure at peace conferences, Maria Jolas was active in Europe in opposing the U.S. war in Vietnam 1965–1975. Maria Jolas was the chair/president of the Paris American Committee to Stop-War (PACS, pronounced PACS) with several hundred members, formed in 1965 and banned by the French government in September 1968. She also translated many works, including Gaston Bachelard&#x27;s &quot;The Poetics of Space&quot;. She died, aged 94, in Paris, France.

&quot;Maria Jolas, Woman of Action - A Memoir and Other Writings&quot; was edited and introduced in 2004 by City University of New York professor Mary Ann Caws.

==References==
== External links ==

* . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
* . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15031122" start="0" end="11" title="Maria Jolas" label="Maria Jolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031122" start="53" end="67" title="Maria Jolas" label="Maria McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946633" start="126" end="148" title="Transition (literary journal)" label="&amp;quot;transition&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q748222" start="175" end="187" title="Eugene Jolas" label="Eugene Jolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q262420" start="357" end="368" title="Betsy Jolas" label="Betsy Jolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q270800" start="739" end="755" title="Gaston Bachelard" label="Gaston Bachelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562114" start="769" end="789" title="The Poetics of Space" label="The Poetics of Space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="841" end="899" title="Maria Jolas, Woman of Action - A Memoir and Other Writings" label="Maria Jolas, Woman of Action - A Memoir and Other Writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="943" end="970" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778862" start="981" end="994" title="Mary Ann Caws" label="Mary Ann Caws"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758480" wikidata="Q16269" url="?curid=758480" title="Galileo National Telescope">
<text>The Galileo National Telescope, (; TNG; code: Z19) is a 3.58-meter Italian telescope, located at the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands, Spain. The TNG is operated by the &quot;Fundación Galileo Galilei, Fundación Canaria&quot;, a non-profit institution, on behalf of the Italian National Institute of Astrophysics (INAF). The telescope saw first light in 1998 and is named after the Italian Renaissance astronomer Galileo Galilei.

Observations at the TNG can be proposed through the Italian Time Allocation Committee (TAC) which assigns, based on the scientific merit of the proposals, 75% of the available time. The rest of the time is at disposal of the Spanish and international astronomical communities. The TNG is open to new proposals two times a year, typically in March–April and September–October.

==Technical characteristics==
The TNG is an altazimuthal reflecting telescope with a Ritchey-Chretien optical configuration and a flat tertiary mirror feeding two opposite Nasmyth foci. It has a design derived from the New Technology Telescope (NTT), an ESO 4-meters class telescope located in La Silla (Chile). Therefore, the optical quality of the telescope is ensured by an active optics system performing real-time corrections of the optical components and compensating, in particular, for the deformations of the primary mirror, which is too thin to be completely rigid.

The interface between the telescope fork and the instruments at both Nasmyth foci is provided by two rotator/adapters. Their main function is to compensate for the field rotation by a mechanical counter rotation. The best quality of the TNG is that all the available instruments are permanently mounted at the telescope. This guarantees flexibility during an observing session, since it is possible to change instrument during the night with a loss of time limited to a few minutes.

The science based on observational data from the TNG is varied. Proposed observing programs go from the study of the planets and minor bodies of the Solar System up to researches of cosmological interest (e.g. large-scale structure of the Universe and systems of galaxies).

==Scientific instruments==
The TNG is equipped with five instruments:
* &quot;HARPS-N&quot; (&quot;High Accuracy Radial velocity Planet Searcher&quot;), echelle spectrograph dedicated to the discovery of extrasolar planets;
* &quot;DOLoRes&quot; (&quot;Device Optimized for the Low Resolution&quot;), CCD camera and low-resolution spectrograph for observations in the visible band;
* &quot;NICS&quot; (&quot;Near Infrared Camera and Spectrometer&quot;), camera and spectrograph for observations in the near-infrared;
* &quot;GIANO&quot;, high-resolution echelle spectrograph for observations in the near-infrared;
* &quot;SiFAP2&quot;, extremely fast optical photometer.

Decommissioned instruments:
* &quot;SARG&quot; (&quot;Spettrografo ad Alta Risoluzione del Galileo&quot;), high-resolution spectrograph for observations in the visible band;
* &quot;OIG&quot; (&quot;Optical Imager Galileo&quot;), CCD camera dedicated to optical images at high resolution;
* &quot;Speckle camera&quot;, dedicated to observations in the visible band at the diffraction limit of the telescope;
* &quot;AdOpt@TNG&quot;, adaptive optics system working in the near-infrared.

==See also==
* Reflecting telescope
* List of largest optical reflecting telescopes

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* TNG News Page (TNG News)
* Scientific publications based on data taken at the TNG
* Roque de los Muchachos Observatory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16269" start="4" end="30" title="Galileo National Telescope" label="Galileo National Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269" start="35" end="38" title="Galileo National Telescope" label="TNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q953917" start="40" end="44" title="List of observatory codes" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46" end="49" title="List of observatory codes#Z19" label="Z19"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="67" end="74" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="75" end="84" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068376" start="101" end="135" title="Roque de los Muchachos Observatory" label="Roque de los Muchachos Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q201689" start="153" end="161" title="La Palma" label="La Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="169" end="183" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q542656" start="320" end="362" title="Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica" label="Italian National Institute of Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306940" start="389" end="400" title="first light (astronomy)" label="first light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="440" end="451" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="463" end="478" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062138" start="943" end="959" title="Ritchey-Chretien" label="Ritchey-Chretien"/>
<link wikidata="Q899003" start="1030" end="1037" title="Nasmyth telescope" label="Nasmyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982969" start="1077" end="1101" title="New Technology Telescope" label="New Technology Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="1112" end="1115" title="European Southern Observatory" label="ESO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054449" start="1235" end="1248" title="active optics" label="active optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2068" end="2080" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="2129" end="2166" title="large scale structure of the cosmos" label="large-scale structure of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="2171" end="2190" title="groups and clusters of galaxies" label="systems of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780406" start="2272" end="2279" title="HARPS-N" label="HARPS-N"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="2398" end="2415" title="extrasolar planet" label="extrasolar planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2495" end="2505" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="2525" end="2537" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="2562" end="2574" title="Visible spectrum" label="visible band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="2701" end="2709" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="2798" end="2806" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="3238" end="3249" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="3368" end="3388" title="Reflecting telescope" label="Reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638347" start="3391" end="3436" title="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes" label="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758481" wikidata="Q523025" url="?curid=758481" title="Brierfield, Lancashire">
<text>Brierfield () is a town and civil parish in the Borough of Pendle, in Lancashire, England. It is north east of Burnley, south west of Nelson, and north east of Reedley. The parish had a population of 8,193, at the census of 2011.

The parish adjoins the Pendle parishes of Reedley Hallows, Old Laund Booth and Nelson, the Burnley parish of Briercliffe, and the unparished area of the town of Burnley.

==History==

The building of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, the Blackburn to Addingham turnpike road, and the railway from Preston to Colne, led to the town developing during the 19th century.

Before the new transport links were constructed, the town was just a scattering of farmhouses forming part of Marsden township known as Little Marsden, which also covered a large part of what was to become Nelson. The land here was considered part of the manor of Ightenhill. The village of Marsden was centred on St Paul&#x27;s Church just over the boundary with Nelson. Brierfield was likely one of Marsden&#x27;s town fields, along presumably with Limefield and Mansfield, located within Brierfield parish, and Scholefield and others in Nelson. The older roads in the area connected Marsden with Burnley (Walverden Road), and Haggate (Halifax Road). A branch from latter at Marsden Heights (King&#x27;s Causeway) descends the valley to cross Pendle Water into Pendle Forest. Chamber Hill next to the river here, was the site of an ancient property known as &#x27;Chamber in Pendle&#x27;, which belonged to the Radcliffe family of Winmarleigh and descended to Sir Gilbert Gerard in the late-16th century.

Considered part of the Burnley Coalfield, it is thought that coal was being mined in the vicinity in the early-17th century. Marsden Colliery, also known as Brierfield Pit, off Lob Lane (now Clitheroe Road) close to the canal, was begun around 1811 by the Executors of John Hargreaves company. It was the first colliery in the area to use endless chain haulage powered by a stationary steam engine which would be widely adopted during the 19th century. As Marsden was nearing the end of its reserves in 1872 an explosion in a disused section killed two men and caused an underground fire. Operations were wound down and the pit closed early in 1873.

The Ecroyd family of Edge End constructed Lomeshaye Mill as a water-powered worsted spinning mill on Pendle Water in 1780. And Jewel Mill over the river in Reedley Hallows is also thought to have been started, also for worsted production, at around the same time.

In 1838 the area&#x27;s first cotton mill was constructed for Henry Tunstill on the east bank of the canal, next to the coal mine, and powered by a steam engine. After Henry&#x27;s death in 1854, his sons formed Tunstill Brothers, and proceeded to erect a new six-story spinning mill at the site. Two further, adjoining four-storey buildings were added in 1868 and 1873 and the old mill demolished. Additional weaving shed space was added at the south end of the mill in 1876 and 1906. The last member of the family to run Brierfield Mills was Harry Tunstill who was involved in many other companies and was released as a director in 1928. The company was listed in a directory for 1948 and accredited with 79,284 mule spindles, 13,100 ring spindles, and 2800 looms, but failed in 1956. Smith &amp; Nephew took over the mill for the production of surgical bandages in 1957.

New mills were established along the banks of the canal and people flocked to the area to work in the cotton industry, many coming from the lead mining areas of the North Riding of Yorkshire as the lead seams were worked out. The cotton industry continued to be the main employer, until well into the 1960s, and in October 2006 that BSN (formerly Smith &amp; Nephew) ceased production of woven cloth, at Brierfield Mills. After years of disuse, Pendle Council purchased the mills in March 2012, intending to use it as the flagship regeneration project.

The town&#x27;s war memorial features a large roaring bronze lion. The town is known for its part in the movement of the Quaker. A meeting house is still in use on the south eastern boundary of the town, and the bridge over Pendle Water at the foot of the town is called Quaker Bridge.

The town&#x27;s small cinema, &quot;Unit Four&quot;, closed down on 3 July 1997. It was showing &quot;Batman &amp; Robin&quot;, &quot;The Fifth Element&quot;, &quot;Con Air&quot;, and &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head Do America&quot;. The last film shown was &quot;Con Air&quot;, that day at 8.20pm. One reason it closed down was due to the opening of the new cinema in Burnley, &quot;Hollywood Park&quot;, which opened one month prior. It was later replaced by the branch of Dixy Chicken, as well as &quot;Maria&#x27;s World Food Store&quot;.

==Governance==
Brierfield was once part of the area of Marsden township known as Little Marsden in the ancient parish of Whalley, which became a civil parish in 1866. The area around Brierfield was made an urban district in 1894.

In 1974, under the Local Government Act 1972, Brierfield became part of the Borough of Pendle. Initially Brierfield formed part of an unparished area, in 1992 a new civil parish was created covering a similar but smaller area than the old urban district.

After boundary changes in 2020 which reduced the number of wards in the borough to 12, two cover parts of Brierfield parish – Brierfield East &amp; Clover Hill and Brierfield West &amp; Reedley. The town is represented on Lancashire County Council in two divisions: Brierfield &amp; Nelson West and Pendle Hill.

Until 2024 the Member of Parliament for Pendle, the constituency into which the town falls, is Andrew Stephenson (Conservative), who was first elected in 2010. From 2024 Brierfield is in Burnley represented by Oliver Ryan

==Demography==
The United Kingdom Census 2011 showed a total resident population for Brierfield civil parish of 8,193. a marginal reduction from 8,199 in 2001. The town forms part of a wider urban area, which had a population of 149,796 in 2001, with 10,047 in a Brierfield subdivision . A similar but larger, Burnley Built-up area defined in the 2011 census had a population of 149,422.

The racial composition of the town in 2011 was 60.2% White (58.9% White British), 38.0% Asian, 0.4% Black, 0.2% Mixed and 1.2% Other. The largest religious groups were Christian (44.4%) and Muslim (36.2%). 59.5% of adults between the ages of 16 and 74 were classed as economically active and in work.

==Education==
There are three primary schools, and one secondary school in Brierfield. The primary schools are Reedley Primary School, Pendle Primary Academy (formerly known as Walter Street) and Holy Trinity. The secondary school is Marsden Heights Community College. There is also one Nursery School (Woodfield Nursery School)

==Facilities==
The town is served by Brierfield railway station.

Places of worship in the town include Jamia Mosque Sultania, built in 2013 with a capacity of 2,000 and the largest mosque in Lancashire, the 1861 grade II listed Brierfield Methodist Church and St Luke the Evangelist Church, the Anglican parish church.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC North West and ITV Granada. Television signals are received from the Winter Hill TV transmitter and the local relay TV transmitter located in the Forest of Pendle.

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Lancashire, Heart North West, Smooth North West, Central Radio North West, Greatest Hits Radio Lancashire, and Capital Manchester and Lancashire (formerly 2BR). Pendle Community Radio commenced broadcasting on 103.1FM in September 2005. Licensed by Ofcom as a distinct community radio service, it aims to target the borough&#x27;s Muslim population, a large number of which reside in Brierfield.

The town is served by the local newspapers, &quot;Burnley Express&quot; and &quot;Lancashire Telegraph&quot;.

== Notable people ==
*Saj Karim, European Parliament member
*Mohammed Afzal Khan, Lord Mayor of Manchester (2005–06)
*Several members of the celebrated pop group of the 1960s, The Hollies, came from Brierfield, including long time bass guitarist, Bernie Calvert.
*Alan Buck, drummer with The Four Pennies 
*Lee Ingleby, actor
*Jimmy Mitton (1890–1949), professional footballer

==See also==

*Listed buildings in Brierfield, Lancashire

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q523025" start="0" end="10" title="Brierfield, Lancashire" label="Brierfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="28" end="40" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693090" start="48" end="65" title="Borough of Pendle" label="Borough of Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="70" end="80" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="111" end="118" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="134" end="140" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525678" start="160" end="167" title="Reedley, Lancashire" label="Reedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="224" end="228" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525678" start="273" end="288" title="Reedley Hallows" label="Reedley Hallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q20885218" start="290" end="305" title="Old Laund Booth" label="Old Laund Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="310" end="316" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q894079" start="322" end="329" title="Borough of Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q576852" start="340" end="351" title="Briercliffe" label="Briercliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897276" start="361" end="376" title="unparished area" label="unparished area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="435" end="460" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="466" end="475" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q379316" start="479" end="488" title="Addingham" label="Addingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="489" end="497" title="Turnpike trust" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="525" end="532" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374484" start="536" end="541" title="Colne" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="714" end="722" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="802" end="808" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="851" end="856" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991724" start="860" end="870" title="Ightenhill" label="Ightenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="1195" end="1202" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638682" start="1225" end="1232" title="Haggate" label="Haggate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162447" start="1341" end="1353" title="Pendle Water" label="Pendle Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469181" start="1359" end="1372" title="Forest of Pendle" label="Pendle Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q600901" start="1529" end="1540" title="Winmarleigh" label="Winmarleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560924" start="1558" end="1576" title="Gilbert Gerard (judge)" label="Sir Gilbert Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q52063213" start="1627" end="1644" title="Burnley Coalfield" label="Burnley Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604348" start="1978" end="2001" title="stationary steam engine" label="stationary steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q572813" start="2331" end="2338" title="worsted" label="worsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q59172" start="2339" end="2347" title="Spinning (textiles)" label="spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="2550" end="2561" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604348" start="2668" end="2680" title="stationary steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072606" start="2930" end="2942" title="weaving shed" label="weaving shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q52390610" start="3064" end="3078" title="Harry Tunstill" label="Harry Tunstill"/>
<link wikidata="Q502509" start="3307" end="3325" title="Smith &amp;amp; Nephew" label="Smith &amp;amp; Nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="3560" end="3585" title="North Riding of Yorkshire" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="3965" end="3977" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="4070" end="4076" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504247" start="4080" end="4093" title="Friends meeting house" label="meeting house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162447" start="4173" end="4185" title="Pendle Water" label="Pendle Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="4258" end="4264" title="Movie theater" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q276523" start="4338" end="4356" title="Batman &amp;amp; Robin (film)" label="Batman &amp;amp; Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="4370" end="4387" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q607910" start="4401" end="4408" title="Con Air" label="Con Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q616842" start="4426" end="4457" title="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America" label="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="4600" end="4607" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285003" start="4706" end="4718" title="Dixy Chicken" label="Dixy Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="4838" end="4846" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="4920" end="4932" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="4981" end="4995" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="5025" end="5050" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693090" start="5082" end="5099" title="Borough of Pendle" label="Borough of Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897276" start="5140" end="5155" title="unparished area" label="unparished area"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="5321" end="5326" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386149" start="5484" end="5509" title="Lancashire County Council" label="Lancashire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="5517" end="5526" title="County constituency" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050733" start="5615" end="5621" title="Pendle (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q341570" start="5670" end="5687" title="Andrew Stephenson" label="Andrew Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5689" end="5701" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="5729" end="5733" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235145" start="5762" end="5769" title="Burnley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q96483398" start="5785" end="5796" title="Oliver Ryan (politician)" label="Oliver Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="5817" end="5843" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="United Kingdom Census 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="5989" end="5999" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972206" start="6108" end="6129" title="Burnley Built-up area" label="Burnley Built-up area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="6519" end="6534" title="primary schools" label="primary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="6544" end="6560" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773232" start="6723" end="6756" title="Marsden Heights Community College" label="Marsden Heights Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367050" start="6856" end="6882" title="Brierfield railway station" label="Brierfield railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q107206919" start="6923" end="6944" title="Jamia Mosque Sultania, Brierfield" label="Jamia Mosque Sultania"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="7041" end="7047" title="listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834879" start="7203" end="7217" title="BBC North West" label="BBC North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="7222" end="7233" title="ITV Granada" label="ITV Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026260" start="7276" end="7287" title="Winter Hill transmitting station" label="Winter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469181" start="7353" end="7369" title="Forest of Pendle" label="Forest of Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834919" start="7397" end="7417" title="BBC Radio Lancashire" label="BBC Radio Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421611" start="7419" end="7435" title="Heart North West" label="Heart North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487059" start="7437" end="7454" title="Smooth North West" label="Smooth North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546626" start="7456" end="7480" title="106.5 Central Radio" label="Central Radio North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730620" start="7482" end="7512" title="Greatest Hits Radio Lancashire" label="Greatest Hits Radio Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064096" start="7518" end="7551" title="Capital Manchester and Lancashire" label="Capital Manchester and Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823827" start="7562" end="7565" title="2BR" label="2BR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162424" start="7568" end="7590" title="Pendle Community Radio" label="Pendle Community Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="7656" end="7661" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="7676" end="7691" title="community radio" label="community radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="7738" end="7744" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000016" start="7854" end="7869" title="Burnley Express" label="Burnley Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483046" start="7886" end="7906" title="Lancashire Telegraph" label="Lancashire Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q741344" start="7937" end="7946" title="Saj Karim" label="Saj Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="7948" end="7967" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712373" start="7976" end="7995" title="M. Afzal Khan" label="Mohammed Afzal Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7997" end="8021" title="List of Lord Mayors of Manchester#21st century" label="Lord Mayor of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="8091" end="8102" title="The Hollies" label="The Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="8146" end="8157" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894345" start="8162" end="8176" title="Bernie Calvert" label="Bernie Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q386854" start="8190" end="8197" title="drummer" label="drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432471" start="8203" end="8219" title="The Four Pennies" label="The Four Pennies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811844" start="8222" end="8233" title="Lee Ingleby" label="Lee Ingleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200858" start="8242" end="8254" title="Jimmy Mitton" label="Jimmy Mitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20686116" start="8308" end="8350" title="Listed buildings in Brierfield, Lancashire" label="Listed buildings in Brierfield, Lancashire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758486" wikidata="Q712296" url="?curid=758486" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve">
<text>Lake Clark National Park and Preserve is a United States national park and preserve in southwest Alaska, about southwest of Anchorage. The park was first proclaimed a national monument in 1978, then established as a national park and preserve in 1980 by the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act. The park includes many streams and lakes vital to the Bristol Bay salmon fishery, including its namesake Lake Clark. A wide variety of recreational activities may be pursued in the park and preserve year-round. The park protects rainforests along the coastline of Cook Inlet, alpine tundra, glaciers, glacial lakes, major salmon-bearing rivers, and two volcanoes, Mount Redoubt and Mount Iliamna. Mount Redoubt is active, erupting in 1989 and 2009. The wide variety of ecosystems in the park mean that virtually all major Alaskan animals, terrestrial and marine, may be seen in and around the park. Salmon, particularly sockeye salmon, play a major role in the ecosystem and the local economy. Large populations of brown bears are attracted to feed on the spawning salmon in the Kijik River and at Silver Salmon Creek. Bear watching is a common activity in the park.

No roads lead to the park, which can only be reached by boat or small aircraft, typically floatplanes. The major settled area in the park and preserve is Port Alsworth on Lake Clark. Five other settlements are near the park, populated mainly by Dena&#x27;ina natives. Prior to the park&#x27;s establishment, isolated cabins were scattered around the region, the most well-known belonging to Richard Proenneke, whose films documenting his solitary life at Twin Lakes were made into &quot;Alone in the Wilderness&quot; in 2003.

Lake Clark was proclaimed a national monument by President Jimmy Carter using the Antiquities Act on December 1, 1978. Lake Clark&#x27;s status was changed to national park and preserve in 1980 by Congress, and about two-thirds was designated wilderness. While both sport and subsistence hunting are permitted in the national preserve lands, only subsistence hunting by local residents is permitted within the national park.

==Geography==

Lake Clark National Park and Preserve covers at the base of the Alaska Peninsula in southcentral Alaska, about southwest of Anchorage. Of the total area, about lie in the park and in the preserve. The park and associated national preserve extend from the Cook Inlet across the Chigmit Mountains and the Neacola Mountains, on the northern end of the Aleutian Range, and on into the Alaska interior. Lake Clark is the largest lake in the park, on the southwest corner of the park. The national preserve lands adjoin park lands on the west, offering both subsistence and sport hunting, in contrast to parklands, where only subsistence hunting by local residents is allowed. The extreme southwest section of the preserve includes Alaskan Native corporation lands, which are not open to the public. Most of the park section is designated as wilderness. The eastern part of the park near the Cook Inlet includes two active volcanoes, Mount Redoubt and Mount Iliamna. A third, Mount Spurr, is just outside the park to the east. The chief river in the park is the Kvichak River. Another large river, the Tlikakila River, runs across the park from its source at Summit Lake to Lake Clark, emerging from the lake and the park as the Newhalen River.

The park is not accessible by roads. Access is solely by air taxi or by boat along the Cook Inlet coast and Lake Clark. Since much of the movement in the area is by air, the mountains present a significant barrier to air traffic. Lake Clark Pass, at provides a way through the mountains by air at low elevation, and is the main route between Anchorage and western Alaska.

The main inhabited place in the park is Port Alsworth on Lake Clark, with a Park Service visitor center and a number of privately operated lodges. Air taxis make regular trips between Port Alsworth and outside communities. Other private lodges are scattered around the park.

==Geology==

The park has four main physiographic regions. The upthrust granite Chigmit Mountains connect the Alaska Range to the Aleutian Range. Superimposed on these mountains and little to the east of the main range are the two stratovolcanoes, Redoubt high, and Iliamna at . Glaciers have altered the mountains, carving cirques and U-shaped valleys into the range, which end abruptly on the east at the steep coast in deep bays or in outwash flats. On the west the glaciers have cut deeply enough to create lakes, dammed by terminal moraines at their downstream ends. Lake Clark, the largest, is the sixth largest lake in Alaska, deep and long.

The park includes a variety of unrelated rocks. The core of the Chigmit Mountains is a granite pluton forced upwards by the collision of the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate. Rocks in coastal areas are sedimentary in origin, and contain abundant fossils. Volcanic rocks intrude through these native rocks.

===Volcanoes===

Redoubt is the park&#x27;s active volcano. high, about in diameter and with a volume of about 30 to 35 cubic kilometers, the stratovolcano rises through the Chigmit batholith. It has a wide summit crater. The Drift Glacier originates there and flows through a gap in the rim. Redoubt&#x27;s most recent active phase began on December 14, 1989, with ash eruptions. The ash clouds affected air traffic, causing all four engines to fail on KLM Flight 867 when it passed overhead at . The 747 was able to safely return to Anchorage. Four other airplanes were damaged in the same event, which brought greater awareness of the hazards associated with high-altitude volcanic ash. Redoubt was quiet after 1990 until March and April 2009 when it erupted with pyroclastic flows that melted ice, creating lahars on the Drift River, endangering the Drift River Terminal Facility to the east of the park.
Iliamna has not been recently active. Like Redoubt, it stands on Jurassic granite basement rock, but has been significantly altered by glacial activity that has cut away the slopes on the southern and eastern sides. The mountain has experienced seismic activity from time to time that has raised alert levels while the earthquake flurries have persisted. The peak has active fumaroles that occasionally produce visible vapor plumes.

==Climate==

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Lake Clark National Park and Preserve has a Subarctic climate (&quot;Dfc&quot;) with cool summers and year around precipitation. &quot;Dfc&quot; climates are defined by their coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F), 1–3 months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F), all months with average temperatures below 22 °C (71.6 °F), and no significant precipitation difference between seasons. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at Dick Proenneke&#x27;s Cabin on Twin Lakes at 1988 ft (606 m) elevation is 2b with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -43.0 °F (-41.7 °C).

==Activities==
The park and preserve offer a variety of possible activities, including kayaking, rafting, fishing, bird-watching, hiking and camping. Most of the large Alaskan animals, and in particular brown bears, are present and viewable in the park. Fishing is allowed in both the park and preserve, while sport hunting is permitted in the preserve. Ice fishing is also available in the winter.

==Ecology==

Lake Clark preserves a wide variety of Alaskan landscapes and ecosystems, corresponding to its four main physiographic areas. The coastal sections running along the Cook Inlet from Tuxedni Bay to Chinitna Bay include coastline and marine ecosystems. The mountains of the Alaska, Aleutian and Chigmit Ranges with their glaciers form a second region. On either side of the mountains the valley, lake and foothill areas present a glacially altered landscape. Boreal forest dominates the lower sections of the southwest part of the park, with white and black spruce making up most of the coniferous trees. White spruce have been affected by spruce bark beetle infestation, and spruce needle rust outbreaks have been so heavy that the surface of Lake Clark has been colored orange by spores. Farther north and west lie the tundra regions, primarily the result of elevation. The tundra supports caribou and ptarmigans.

Salt marshes along the Cook Inlet represent one of the most productive ecosystems in the park. They account for under 1% of the park&#x27;s area, but provide a source of food in early summer for both brown and black bears. Lake Clark&#x27;s coastal areas are rated as some of the top bear viewing destinations in the world, along with the coast of Katmai National Park. Most bears are concentrated at Chinitna Bay or Silver Salmon Creek when the fish are running. Chinitna Bay is considered by some to be one of the top bear viewing destinations in Alaska. Tuxedni Bay, north of Chinitna Bay, also provides excellent bear viewing; up to 20 brown bears have been spotted feeding on clams and sedges at a time. Fewer people visit the bay and therefore it is easier to view bears in peace. Inland areas of the park also provide bear viewing. Crescent Lake provides excellent bear viewing in June, July and August. Both grizzly and black bears are present, but grizzly bears are more common and seen more often, since black bears are shier and are easily displaced by their larger cousins. On the other side of the park, the Kvichak River is the world&#x27;s most productive watershed for sockeye salmon, whose offspring account for 33% of the species&#x27; catch in the United States and 16% of world production. Salmon are so plentiful that a wolf pack at Lake Clark has been documented as the only salmon-dependent pack in the world.
Major birds of prey as well as terrestrial mammals in the park include bald eagle, golden eagle, Dall&#x27;s sheep, moose, caribou, peregrine falcon, and timber wolf. Smaller mammals include coyotes, marten, Arctic and red foxes, wolverine, river otter, beaver and Canadian lynx. Marine mammals include sea lion, beluga whale, harbor seal, and porpoise. Both black and brown bear species are present in the park. Black bears use all areas of the park and preserve, except the higher elevations. Brown bears are most numerous along the coast. A recent survey found that about 219 bears graze in salt marshes during the summer in the coastal areas of the park. Caribou have recently declined in population size from 200,000 to 30,000 due to an unknown cause.

Weather in the park is extremely variable. Marine air from the Pacific Ocean meets drier air of the continental airmass over the park. The average summer temperature is between with highs around and typical winter lows of . Snow can happen at any time.

==History==

The earliest human presence known in the area of Lake Clark was at Bristol Bay. People of the Paleo-Arctic tradition lived there between 10,000 years before the present and 7500 BP. These people were followed by the northern Archaic tradition between 6,000 BP and 4,000 BP. Two sites from this tradition have been documented in the park. The Arctic small tool tradition followed from about 5,000 BP to 3,000 BP. The Norton tradition came between 2,200 BP and 1,000 BP, concentrated around Bristol Bay. The Thule tradition was established around 2,000 BP and lasted until historic times. The northern Athabaskan Dena&#x27;ina presently live in the area. Kijik village is the primary archaeological site in the park, inhabited by Dena&#x27;ina until the early 20th century. Settlements have also been documented around Chinitna Bay.

The Cook Inlet was surveyed by British Captain James Cook in 1778. In succeeding decades Russian traders established themselves in the region. The major settlement during the 19th century was at Kijik, with a population in the low hundreds. By the 1890s American traders had arrived in the area, meeting a native population that had been greatly reduced by imported diseases. Kijik has been designated a National Historic Landmark district.

In 1930 the first floatplane landed on Lake Clark. In 1942 the first air taxi service was provided to Lake Clark, run by Leon &quot;Babe&quot; Alsworth Sr. to Port Alsworth. Apart from Port Alsworth, there are five other communities near but not within the park: Lime Village, Nondalton, Iliamna, Newhalen and Pedro Bay. Most local residents are Dena&#x27;ina.

During the 20th century the future park area was lightly populated by people with a high tolerance for solitude. One such person was Richard Proenneke, a former Iowan who came to Alaska in 1949. Proenneke lived at Twin Lakes from 1968 to 1999 in a cabin he built himself, feeding himself through subsistence hunting and by salvaging meat from animals left by sport hunters. In 1973 a friend published the book &quot;One Man&#x27;s Wilderness: An Alaskan Odyssey&quot; based on his journals. Some of the movie footage shot by Proenneke of his life at the lake was compiled into the documentary, &quot;Alone in the Wilderness&quot;. Produced posthumously, it has become popular on public television in the United States. Proenneke&#x27;s cabin is now owned by the park service and listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Lake Clark was proclaimed a national monument on December 1, 1978, by President Jimmy Carter, using his authority under the Antiquities Act. In 1980, Congress passed the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA), which established the unit as a national park and preserve.

A large open-pit mine was proposed in 2007 near the western boundary of the park. The Pebble Mine is proposed to mine molybdenum, gold and copper from an open pit about across and thousands of feet deep. Another ore body is proposed to be exploited using underground mining. Tailings from the mine are to be stored behind dams on the site, and roads and a deepwater port will be required. Concerns about the mine&#x27;s relationship to the park center on dust contamination and on the mine&#x27;s possible effect on the sockeye salmon population.

The Jay S. Hammond Wilderness covers much of the park&#x27;s area, excluding preserve lands and the Cook Inlet coast. The area includes three Wild and Scenic Rivers: the Chilikadrotna River, the Mulchatna River and the Tlikakila River. It was renamed after the former Alaska governor in 2018.

In September 2021, archaeologists announced the discovery of a 54-inch-long strip of curved hunting bow under 2 feet of water. According to radiocarbon dating analyses conducted in March, the bow was probably 460 years old, and its origin ranged from 1506 to 1660. The bow has a Yup&#x27;ik or Alutiq style features, although researchers have uncovered it in Dena&#x27;ina land.

==See also==

* List of national parks of the United States
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Lake Clark National Park and Preserve

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* Gaul, Karen (2007) &quot;Nanutset ch&#x27;u Q&#x27;udi Gu (Before Our Time and Now)&quot; National Park Service, 

==External links==

* of the National Park Service
* Lake Clark National Park and Preserve (archive) - National Park Service Alaska Regional Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="0" end="37" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="43" end="70" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="United States national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="75" end="83" title="National preserve" label="preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="97" end="103" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="124" end="133" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="167" end="184" title="national monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="258" end="305" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q917872" start="361" end="372" title="Bristol Bay" label="Bristol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="373" end="379" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476428" start="412" end="422" title="Lake Clark (Alaska)" label="Lake Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="571" end="581" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q840735" start="671" end="684" title="Mount Redoubt" label="Mount Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950549" start="689" end="702" title="Mount Iliamna" label="Mount Iliamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="927" end="941" title="sockeye salmon" label="sockeye salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="1022" end="1033" title="grizzly bear" label="brown bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119075" start="1265" end="1275" title="floatplane" label="floatplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740280" start="1329" end="1342" title="Port Alsworth, Alaska" label="Port Alsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186841" start="1420" end="1433" title="Dena&amp;#x27;ina" label="Dena&amp;#x27;ina"/>
<link wikidata="Q937007" start="1566" end="1583" title="Richard Proenneke" label="Richard Proenneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462287" start="1630" end="1640" title="Twin Lakes (Alaska)" label="Twin Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="1761" end="1773" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="1784" end="1799" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="1945" end="1955" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="2019" end="2036" title="national preserve" label="national preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="2112" end="2125" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="2207" end="2223" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q572018" start="2227" end="2246" title="southcentral Alaska" label="southcentral Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="2267" end="2276" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="2364" end="2381" title="national preserve" label="national preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="2398" end="2408" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072536" start="2420" end="2437" title="Chigmit Mountains" label="Chigmit Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468538" start="2446" end="2463" title="Neacola Mountains" label="Neacola Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q678687" start="2492" end="2506" title="Aleutian Range" label="Aleutian Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476428" start="2541" end="2551" title="Lake Clark" label="Lake Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="2979" end="2989" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q840735" start="3071" end="3084" title="Mount Redoubt" label="Mount Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950549" start="3089" end="3102" title="Mount Iliamna" label="Mount Iliamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189330" start="3113" end="3124" title="Mount Spurr" label="Mount Spurr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569668" start="3199" end="3212" title="Kvichak River" label="Kvichak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437508" start="3239" end="3254" title="Tlikakila River" label="Tlikakila River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339115" start="3366" end="3380" title="Newhalen River" label="Newhalen River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3613" end="3628" title="Lake Clark Pass" label="Lake Clark Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740280" start="3796" end="3809" title="Port Alsworth, Alaska" label="Port Alsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="4263" end="4276" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="4823" end="4836" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="4845" end="4865" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q810808" start="5181" end="5190" title="batholith" label="batholith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5225" end="5238" title="Drift Glacier" label="Drift Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q265922" start="5453" end="5467" title="KLM Flight 867" label="KLM Flight 867"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614340" start="5753" end="5760" title="2009 Mount Redoubt eruptive activity" label="erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="5766" end="5783" title="pyroclastic flows" label="pyroclastic flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="5810" end="5815" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5824" end="5835" title="Drift River" label="Drift River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307445" start="5853" end="5882" title="Drift River Terminal Facility" label="Drift River Terminal Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="6283" end="6291" title="fumarole" label="fumarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6372" end="6401" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="6454" end="6471" title="Subarctic climate" label="Subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="6809" end="6848" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="6860" end="6874" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7625" end="7636" title="Tuxedni Bay" label="Tuxedni Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7640" end="7652" title="Chinitna Bay" label="Chinitna Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="7900" end="7913" title="taiga" label="Boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882220" start="7983" end="7988" title="white spruce" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q218425" start="7993" end="7998" title="black spruce" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q109699187" start="8081" end="8099" title="spruce bark beetle" label="spruce bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967400" start="8117" end="8135" title="Chrysomyxa ledi var. rhododendri" label="spruce needle rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="8262" end="8268" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="8706" end="8726" title="Katmai National Park" label="Katmai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8915" end="8926" title="Tuxedni Bay" label="Tuxedni Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="9039" end="9043" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="9049" end="9054" title="sedge" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184384" start="9197" end="9210" title="Crescent Lake (Alaska)" label="Crescent Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569668" start="9479" end="9492" title="Kvichak River" label="Kvichak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="9543" end="9557" title="sockeye salmon" label="sockeye salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="9862" end="9872" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="9874" end="9886" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="9888" end="9905" title="Dall&amp;#x27;s sheep" label="Dall&amp;#x27;s sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="9907" end="9912" title="Alaska moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="9923" end="9939" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="9945" end="9956" title="Northwestern wolf" label="timber wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="9982" end="9988" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="9991" end="9997" title="American marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="9999" end="10005" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="10010" end="10017" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="10021" end="10030" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="10032" end="10043" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="10045" end="10051" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="10056" end="10069" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="10094" end="10102" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="10104" end="10116" title="beluga whale" label="beluga whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="10118" end="10129" title="harbor seal" label="harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="10135" end="10143" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="10150" end="10155" title="American black bear" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="10160" end="10170" title="grizzly bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130753746" start="10450" end="10457" title="Porcupine caribou" label="Caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931866" start="10910" end="10932" title="Paleo-Arctic tradition" label="Paleo-Arctic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="11032" end="11058" title="Archaic period in North America" label="northern Archaic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787593" start="11158" end="11185" title="Arctic small tool tradition" label="Arctic small tool tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060706" start="11232" end="11248" title="Norton tradition" label="Norton tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q72813" start="11322" end="11337" title="Thule tradition" label="Thule tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q20738" start="11407" end="11426" title="Northern Athabaskan languages" label="northern Athabaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186841" start="11427" end="11440" title="Dena&amp;#x27;ina" label="Dena&amp;#x27;ina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406159" start="11469" end="11474" title="Kijik, Alaska" label="Kijik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="11695" end="11705" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="12052" end="12078" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433389" start="12353" end="12365" title="Lime Village, Alaska" label="Lime Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q79326" start="12367" end="12376" title="Nondalton, Alaska" label="Nondalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q509197" start="12378" end="12385" title="Iliamna, Alaska" label="Iliamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79547" start="12387" end="12395" title="Newhalen, Alaska" label="Newhalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820282" start="12400" end="12409" title="Pedro Bay, Alaska" label="Pedro Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q937007" start="12585" end="12602" title="Richard Proenneke" label="Richard Proenneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462287" start="12666" end="12676" title="Twin Lakes (Alaska)" label="Twin Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="13245" end="13281" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="13312" end="13329" title="national monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="13364" end="13376" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="13408" end="13423" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="13454" end="13501" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414429" start="13659" end="13670" title="Pebble Mine" label="Pebble Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="13691" end="13701" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784525" start="13848" end="13856" title="Tailings" label="Tailings"/>
<link wikidata="Q880546" start="14125" end="14139" title="Jay S. Hammond" label="Jay S. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="14263" end="14285" title="Wild and Scenic Rivers" label="Wild and Scenic Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072928" start="14291" end="14310" title="Chilikadrotna River" label="Chilikadrotna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293534" start="14316" end="14331" title="Mulchatna River" label="Mulchatna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437508" start="14340" end="14355" title="Tlikakila River" label="Tlikakila River"/>
<link wikidata="Q458304" start="14507" end="14518" title="Bowhunting" label="hunting bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="14555" end="14573" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906610" start="14694" end="14705" title="Yup&amp;#x27;ik" label="Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745405" start="14709" end="14715" title="Alutiiq" label="Alutiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186841" start="14774" end="14787" title="Denaʼina" label="Dena&amp;#x27;ina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="14811" end="14854" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976548" start="14857" end="14943" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758487" wikidata="Q2374888" url="?curid=758487" title="Jillian Barberie">
<text>Jillian Marie Barberie (née Warry; born September 26, 1966) is a Canadian-born American television hostess, sportscaster, radio personality and actress. From 1995 to 2012, she was a co-host on the Los Angeles television morning news and entertainment program &quot;Good Day L.A.&quot; on Fox owned-and-operated station KTTV. From 2000 to 2005, she appeared on Fox Sports as the weather host for &quot;Fox NFL Sunday&quot;. From 2006 to 2013, she was known as Jillian Reynolds, from her second marriage.

==Early life==
Barberie was born Jillian Warry in Burlington, Ontario, and was adopted soon after her birth. Later in life after finding her biological parents, she learned they had later married and raised two daughters. Barberie suffered some kind of abuse as a child. She graduated from Mohawk College in Hamilton, Ontario, with a diploma from its two-year program in broadcast journalism. After completing her diploma, she worked for several television stations, including The Weather Network in Montreal, Quebec, WSVN in Miami, Florida, and KTTV in Los Angeles, California.

==Career==
Barberie has appeared on several television series including &quot;Clueless&quot;, &quot;V.I.P.&quot;, and &quot;Melrose Place&quot;, as well as several comedies in the CBS comedy series &quot;Yes, Dear&quot; and the Fox sketch comedy series &quot;MADtv&quot;. She hosted the syndicated reality series &quot;EX-treme Dating&quot;. In 2000, she was hired to present the national weather segment of Fox Sports &quot;Fox NFL Sunday&quot; pre-game show, working alongside James Brown, Howie Long, and Terry Bradshaw. She became a national figure and earned significant fan interest in the male-dominated sports demographic, and several spots for Prestone antifreeze that aired during NFL game broadcasts.

In addition to Barberie&#x27;s work on &quot;Good Day L.A.&quot;, she worked on the national version of the show &quot;Good Day Live&quot;. However, she was ultimately fired from that show, ending her tenure on June 4, 2004.

She served as a weather and entertainment reporter for Fox Sports during the 2002 Super Bowl, the 2005 Super Bowl, and the 2008 Super Bowl. In 2005, she was Regis Philbin&#x27;s co-host for his New Year&#x27;s Eve special on Fox. She has appeared on the cover of &quot;Maxim&quot; magazine twice. In 2006, she participated as a contestant on the Fox reality television series &quot;Skating with Celebrities&quot;, partnered with professional skater John Zimmerman and came in second place. She was an ice skater in her childhood. Beginning in November 2006, she became the co-host of KTTV&#x27;s &quot;That&#x27;s So Hollywood&quot; with fellow KTTV/KCOP-TV personality, Mark Thompson.

Barberie is a former NutriSystem spokesperson appearing in commercials alongside former NFL players Dan Marino and Terry Bradshaw.

In March 2009, Barberie was also the host of &quot;American Idol Extra&quot; on Fox Reality Channel. She interviewed the eliminated participant each week and other guests who appear on the show. She has appeared alongside her then-husband, Grant Reynolds, in the Fox Reality Channel original series, &quot;Househusbands of Hollywood&quot;.

Beginning in February 2014, she co-hosted &quot;Midday Live&quot; with John Phillips on 790 KABC in Los Angeles. In December 2019 KABC moved Phillips back to middays but did not renew Barberie&#x27;s contract. She has also hosted the short-lived entertainment program &quot;Hollywood Mix&quot; on KTLA.

==Personal life==
Barberie was married to former Major League Baseball player Bret Barberie from 1996 to 2002. In 2003, Barberie announced that she is bisexual.

She married former Marine sniper turned actor Grant Reynolds in a private ceremony on July 8, 2006. She initially stated that she was legally changing her name to Jillian Reynolds, but keeping Barberie as her professional surname.

In December 2006, &quot;People&quot; magazine said Reynolds was pregnant with her first child, due July 7. She officially announced her pregnancy the morning of December 18, 2006, during the broadcast of &quot;Good Day L.A.&quot; Barberie took a three-month maternity leave from the show beginning on June 22, 2007. On July 9, an announcement on &quot;Good Day L.A.&quot; stated that she had given birth to a girl, Ruby Raven Reynolds, on July 6, 2007. On July 6, 2009, she announced on &quot;Good Day LA&quot; that she was pregnant with her second child. She gave birth to a boy, Rocco Rio Reynolds, on January 11, 2010.

In 2011, Barberie became a naturalized citizen of the United States.

On March 15, 2013, Barberie announced that she and her husband Grant Reynolds were divorcing. The divorce was finalized on February 14, 2014.

In November 2018, Barberie announced that she has breast cancer that had spread to her lymph node. She received a double mastectomy within two weeks of the diagnosis.

==References==
==External links==
* Jillian&#x27;s Appearance on The Eric Andre Show on YouTube </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2374888" start="0" end="22" title="Jillian Barberie" label="Jillian Marie Barberie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="24" end="27" title="Maiden and married names" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374888" start="28" end="33" title="Jillian Barberie" label="Warry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="197" end="208" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582504" start="265" end="278" title="Good Day L.A." label="Good Day L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="288" end="291" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="319" end="323" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="360" end="370" title="Fox Sports (United States)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838997" start="401" end="415" title="Fox NFL Sunday" label="Fox NFL Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374888" start="459" end="475" title="Jillian Barberie" label="Jillian Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q34218" start="554" end="573" title="Burlington, Ontario" label="Burlington, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893766" start="794" end="808" title="Mohawk College" label="Mohawk College"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="812" end="829" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081584" start="875" end="895" title="broadcast journalism" label="broadcast journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q664520" start="981" end="1000" title="The Weather Network" label="The Weather Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1004" end="1012" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1014" end="1020" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956000" start="1022" end="1026" title="WSVN" label="WSVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="1030" end="1035" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="1050" end="1054" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1058" end="1069" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103347" start="1162" end="1170" title="Clueless (TV series)" label="Clueless"/>
<link wikidata="Q761532" start="1184" end="1190" title="V.I.P. (American TV series)" label="V.I.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q550238" start="1208" end="1221" title="Melrose Place" label="Melrose Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1264" end="1267" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="1288" end="1297" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="1312" end="1315" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064766" start="1343" end="1348" title="Mad TV" label="MADtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324669" start="1403" end="1418" title="EX-treme Dating" label="EX-treme Dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960108" start="1429" end="1433" title="2000 NFL season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="1492" end="1502" title="Fox Sports (United States)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838997" start="1509" end="1523" title="Fox NFL Sunday" label="Fox NFL Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130347" start="1563" end="1574" title="James Brown (sportscaster)" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q962794" start="1576" end="1586" title="Howie Long" label="Howie Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q633263" start="1592" end="1606" title="Terry Bradshaw" label="Terry Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1775" end="1778" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582504" start="1842" end="1855" title="Good Day L.A." label="Good Day L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="2100" end="2115" title="2002 Super Bowl" label="2002 Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="2121" end="2136" title="2005 Super Bowl" label="2005 Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="2146" end="2161" title="2008 Super Bowl" label="2008 Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q463673" start="2180" end="2193" title="Regis Philbin" label="Regis Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="2217" end="2236" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="2292" end="2297" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="2373" end="2391" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q505091" start="2405" end="2429" title="Skating with Celebrities" label="Skating with Celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q509260" start="2472" end="2486" title="John Zimmerman (figure skater)" label="John Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="2607" end="2611" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327204" start="2673" end="2680" title="KCOP-TV" label="KCOP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769991" start="2694" end="2707" title="Mark Thompson (newscaster)" label="Mark Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070498" start="2731" end="2742" title="NutriSystem" label="NutriSystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q195367" start="2810" end="2820" title="Dan Marino" label="Dan Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744049" start="2893" end="2912" title="American Idol Extra" label="American Idol Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476882" start="2922" end="2941" title="Fox Reality Channel" label="Fox Reality Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915861" start="3148" end="3174" title="Househusbands of Hollywood" label="Househusbands of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="3480" end="3484" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3536" end="3557" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924538" start="3565" end="3578" title="Bret Barberie" label="Bret Barberie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3668" end="3674" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="3675" end="3681" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="3905" end="3911" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="4139" end="4154" title="maternity leave" label="maternity leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="4767" end="4780" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="4804" end="4814" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="4831" end="4848" title="double mastectomy" label="double mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732373" start="4950" end="4969" title="The Eric Andre Show" label="The Eric Andre Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="4973" end="4980" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758491" wikidata="Q545482" url="?curid=758491" title="Schleswig–Holstein question">
<text>The Schleswig–Holstein question (; ) was a complex set of diplomatic and other issues arising in the 19th century from the relations of two duchies, Schleswig () and Holstein (), to the Danish Crown, to the German Confederation, and to each other. 

Schleswig was part of Denmark during the Viking Age, and became a Danish duchy in the 12th century -- legally part of Denmark, but in many ways autonomous. Denmark repeatedly tried to fully reintegrate the Duchy of Schleswig into the Danish kingdom. Holstein, just on the other side of the Danish border from Schleswig, was in the Middle Ages a fief of the Holy Roman Empire. From 1460 on, the two had been ruled together by a common Duke, who in practice was also the King of Denmark. The Treaty of Ribe, agreed to by the Danish King in order to gain control of both states, seemed to indicate that Schleswig and Holstein were to remain united, though that interpretation was later challenged. 

The Holy Roman Empire was dissolved in 1806. The German Confederation, formed in 1815, included Holstein. By the early 19th century, the population of Holstein, as well as that of much of Southern Schleswig, was almost entirely ethnically German.

Both Schleswig and Holstein had been ruled through institutions separate from the rest of the Kingdom of Denmark. On 27 March 1848, King Frederik VII of Denmark announced to the people of Schleswig the promulgation of a liberal constitution under which the duchy, while preserving its local autonomy, would become an integral part of Denmark. This led to an open uprising by the German majority in both Schleswig and Holstein in support of independence from Denmark and of close association with the German Confederation. The military intervention of the Kingdom of Prussia supported the uprising: the Prussian army drove Denmark&#x27;s troops from Schleswig and Holstein, beginning the First Schleswig War (1848–1851), which ended in a Danish victory at Idstedt; with the London Protocol, the international community agreed on the duchies&#x27; status.

A second crisis emerged due to a succession dispute. The dukedoms of Holstein and Lauenburg were legally inherited under the German Salic Law, which ignored females; differing laws in the Kingdom of Denmark with Schleswig permitted male heirs to inherit through a female line. Under these varying laws, the childless King Frederik VII of Denmark had one legal heir as King of Denmark and duke of Schleswig, and a different heir as Duke of Holstein. But when Frederik died in 1863, his Danish heir, King Christian IX, claimed to have inherited the Duchy of Holstein as well, and attempted to reintegrate the Duchy of Schleswig into the Danish kingdom by signing the so-called November Constitution. This was seen as a violation of the London Protocol, and it led to the Second Schleswig War of 1864 and ultimately to the Duchies&#x27; absorption into the German Confederation.

The underlying legal dispute over the duchies was seen as complex and somewhat obscure by contemporaries, as evidenced by a quip attributed to British statesman Lord Palmerston: &quot;Only three people have ever really understood the Schleswig-Holstein businessthe Prince Consort, who is deada German professor, who has gone madand I, who have forgotten all about it.&quot; Nevertheless, the Schleswig–Holstein question gave rise to conflicts between major powers for much of the 19th century. Following the defeat of the German Empire in World War I, the Danish-majority area of Northern Schleswig was finally unified with Denmark after two plebiscites organised by the Allied powers. A small minority of ethnic Germans still lives in North Schleswig, while a Danish minority remains in South Schleswig.

== Constitutional problem ==
Since 1849, disparate systems of government had co-existed within the Danish state. Denmark proper had become a constitutional democracy. However, absolutism was still the system of Schleswig and Holstein, with advisory assemblies based on the estates system which gave more power to the most affluent members of society. The three units were governed by one cabinet, consisting of liberal ministers of Denmark who urged economic and social reforms, and conservative ministers from the Holstein nobility who opposed political reform. After the uprising in Holstein and Schleswig, the Danish monarch had no interest in sharing rule with the people, many formerly rebellious. Estates of the realm, with their fear of being replaced by democratic institutions, were easier to be compromised.

This caused a deadlock for practical lawmaking, hardened by ethnic tensions, and a complete inability to govern was imminent. Moreover, Danish opponents of this so-called Unitary State (&quot;Helstaten&quot;) feared that Holstein&#x27;s presence in the government and, at the same time, Holstein&#x27;s membership of the German Confederation would lead to increased German interference with Holstein, or even into purely Danish affairs.

In Copenhagen, the palace and most of the administration supported a strict adherence to the status quo. The same applied to foreign powers such as the United Kingdom, France and Russia, who would not accept a weakened Denmark in favour of a German power, such as Austria or Prussia, acquiring Holstein with the important naval harbour of Kiel or controlling the entrance to the Baltic.

==Language and nationality==

There was also the national question: both Germany and Denmark wished, characteristically of the nineteenth century, to create and consolidate nationalities from a background of fragmented cultural practices and dialects.

Lastly, there was the international question: the rival ambitions of the German powers involved, and beyond them the interests of other European states, notably that of the United Kingdom in preventing the rise of a German sea-power in the north.

German had been the language of government in Schleswig and Holstein, while the Danish king and partly the Gottorf dukes ruled, and had been a language of government of the kingdom of Denmark in several eras. Since the Lutheran Reformation, German had been dominant in church and schools in the southern parts of Schleswig, and Danish was the dominant language among the peasantry in Schleswig.

Low German was the language of all of Holstein. During the centuries following the Middle Ages, Low German had come to dominate in Southern Schleswig, which had originally been predominantly Danish-speaking. The Danish language still dominated in Northern Schleswig. Around 1800, German and Danish were spoken in approximately equal proportions throughout what is now Central Schleswig.

The German language had been slowly spreading at the expense of Danish in previous centuries: for example, Danish was still spoken on the peninsula of Schwansen around 1780 (the last known use of Danish was in the villages near the Schlei), but then became extinct.

The language border in the nineteenth century conformed approximately to the current border between Denmark and Germany .

It was clear that Danish dominance in Schleswig was vulnerable and weakening. Through its vigorous economic activity, the ethnically German area to the south expanded its geographic domain. Linguistically Low German immigrants constantly arrived, and previously Danish-speaking families often came to find it convenient to change languages. The Low German language, rather than Danish, had become typical of Holstein and much of south Schleswig.

One solution, which afterwards had the support of Napoleon III, would have been to partition Schleswig on the lines of nationality, assigning the Danish part to Denmark, the German to Holstein. This idea, which afterwards had supporters among both Danes and Germans, proved impracticable at the time owing to the intractable disposition of the majority on both sides. This solution was subsequently implemented by plebiscites in 1920 as a condition of the Treaty of Versailles, and Northern Schleswig was returned to Denmark.
==Treaty of Ribe==
German Schleswig-Holsteiners often cited a clause from the Treaty of Ribe of 1460, stating that Schleswig and Holstein should &quot;always be together and never partitioned (&quot;or&quot; separated)&quot;. Although this treaty played a minor role at the more formal level of the conflict, its proclamation &quot;Forever Inseparable&quot; (&quot;Up ewig ungedeelt&quot;) obtained proverbial status during the German nationalist awakening, both among those wishing an independent Schleswig-Holstein, and in the German unification movement in general.

In Denmark it was granted less significance, and the citing widely regarded to be out of context, as it could either hint at the duchies not being separated from each other, or their not being partitioned into smaller shares of inheritance. This had happened many times anyway, leaving a confusing pattern of feudal units. Danes also brought forward rulings of a Danish clerical court and a German Emperor, of 1424 and 1421 respectively, stating that Schleswig rightfully belonged to Denmark, because it was a Danish fief and Holstein was a fief of the Holy Roman Empire, wanting Schleswig and Holstein to separate from each other.

The major powers appear to have given the Treaty of Ribe little notice in comparison to the ethnic conflict and worries about the European balance of power.

==Resolution==
The Second Schleswig War resolved the Schleswig–Holstein Question violently, by forcing King Christian IX of Denmark to renounce (on 1 August 1864) all his rights in the duchies in favour of &quot;Kaiser&quot; Franz Joseph I of Austria and King Wilhelm I of Prussia. By Article XIX of the definitive Treaty of Vienna signed on 30 October 1864, a period of six years was allowed during which the inhabitants of the duchies might opt for Danish nationality and transfer themselves and their goods to Denmark; and the rights pertaining to birth in the provinces were guaranteed to all, whether in the kingdom or the duchies, who had been entitled to those rights at the time of the exchange of ratifications of the treaty.

In the Austro–Prussian War of 1866, Prussia took Holstein from Austria and the two duchies subsequently merged into the Province of Schleswig-Holstein. From this point on, the Schleswig–Holstein question was subsumed by the larger issue of Austro-Prussian relations, which the 1866 war deeply influenced. It survived, however, as between Danes and Germans, though narrowed to the question of the fate of the Danish population of Schleswig. This question is of great interest to students of international law and as illustrating the practical problems involved in asserting the modern principle of nationality.

For the effect on the Danes of Schleswig and events afterwards, see History of Schleswig-Holstein.

Following the defeat of the German Empire in the First World War, the Allied powers organised two plebiscites in Northern and Central Schleswig on 10 February and 14 March 1920, respectively. In Northern Schleswig, 75% voted for reunification with Denmark and 25% for remaining in Germany. It became South Jutland County in Denmark, now part of the Region of Southern Denmark. In Central Schleswig, the situation was reversed with 80% voting for Germany and 20% for Denmark. No vote ever took place in the southern third of Schleswig or in Holstein, as the result was considered a foregone conclusion. Today, they form the German state of Schleswig-Holstein.

==Literature==
Elements of the Schleswig–Holstein question were fictionalised in &quot;Royal Flash&quot;, the second of George MacDonald Fraser&#x27;s &quot;The Flashman Papers&quot; novels.

Its potential solution (or lack thereof) also forms part of the solution to the mystery at the centre of Kim Newman&#x27;s short story &quot;Tomorrow Town&quot;.

Danish author Herman Bang wrote of life on the island of Als in the aftermath of the Battle of Dybbøl in the Second War of Schleswig in his novel &quot;Tine&quot;, published in 1889.

Dostoevsky refers to this as &quot;The farce in Schleswig–Holstein&quot; in &quot;Notes from Underground&quot;.

The question appears in the first volume of the &quot;Reminiscences&quot; of Carl Schurz as an issue of concern in the Revolutions of 1848, and also as the farcical recollections of his friend Adolf Strodtmann regarding Strodtmann&#x27;s participation in the conflict (see Chapter 5, pp. 130–132, and Chapter 6, pp. 141–143).

Terry Pratchett parodied it in several Discworld books as &quot;The Muntab Question&quot; (&quot;Where&#x27;s Muntab?&quot; &quot;That, indeed, is the question.&quot;)

==See also==
* History of Schleswig-Holstein

==References==

==Further reading==
* Müller, Friedrich Max. &quot;The Schleswig–Holstein Question and Its Place in History&quot; in &quot;Last Essays by the Right Hon. Professor F. Max Müller&quot;, 1881, (accessed on-line August 2017).
* Price, Arnold. &quot;Schleswig–Holstein&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions&quot; (2005) online
* Sandiford, Keith AP. &quot;Great Britain and the Schleswig–Holstein question, 1848-64: a study in diplomacy, politics, and public opinion&quot; (University of Toronto Press, 1975).
* Steefel, Lawrence D. &quot;The Schleswig–Holstein Question. 1863-1864&quot; (Harvard U.P. 1923).
* Thaler, Peter. &quot;Of Mind and Matter: The Duality of National Identity in the German-Danish Borderlands&quot; (West Lafayette: Purdue University Press, 2009).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545482" start="4" end="31" title="Schleswig–Holstein question" label="Schleswig–Holstein question"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="149" end="158" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="166" end="174" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="186" end="192" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="207" end="227" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="272" end="279" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="291" end="301" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="323" end="328" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="406" end="413" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="581" end="592" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="607" end="624" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="657" end="688" title="Personal union" label="ruled together by a common Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q478059" start="740" end="754" title="Treaty of Ribe" label="Treaty of Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="1327" end="1355" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="King Frederik VII of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="1397" end="1409" title="promulgation" label="promulgation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="1695" end="1715" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1750" end="1768" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="1797" end="1810" title="Prussian army" label="Prussian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q685683" start="1882" end="1901" title="First Schleswig War" label="First Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352179" start="1950" end="1957" title="Battle of Isted" label="Idstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136035" start="1968" end="1983" title="London Protocol (1852)" label="London Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="2182" end="2191" title="Salic Law" label="Salic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="2548" end="2565" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="King Christian IX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2725" end="2746" title="History of Schleswig-Holstein#The November Constitution" label="November Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="2819" end="2839" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="3088" end="3103" title="Henry Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="3188" end="3206" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="the Prince Consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3449" end="3462" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3466" end="3477" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q692146" start="3569" end="3580" title="Schleswig Plebiscites" label="plebiscites"/>
<link wikidata="Q516787" start="3621" end="3647" title="North Schleswig Germans" label="minority of ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q164071" start="3663" end="3678" title="North Schleswig" label="North Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q682109" start="3688" end="3703" title="Danish minority of Southern Schleswig" label="Danish minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q705758" start="3715" end="3730" title="South Schleswig" label="South Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="3874" end="3898" title="constitutional democracy" label="constitutional democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="3909" end="3919" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="4436" end="4456" title="Estates of the realm" label="Estates of the realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4993" end="5003" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="5329" end="5333" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975148" start="5427" end="5444" title="national question" label="national question"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="5925" end="5934" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="5939" end="5947" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381174" start="6107" end="6118" title="Reformation in Denmark-Norway and Holstein" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="6275" end="6285" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6358" end="6369" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q639956" start="6814" end="6823" title="Schwansen" label="Schwansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="7258" end="7268" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="7550" end="7562" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="7956" end="7976" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164071" start="7982" end="8000" title="Northern Schleswig" label="Northern Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q478059" start="8104" end="8118" title="Treaty of Ribe" label="Treaty of Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="8555" end="8573" title="Unification of Germany" label="German unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796119" start="8905" end="8917" title="Danish Royal Enclaves" label="feudal units"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="9113" end="9117" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="9406" end="9426" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="9490" end="9518" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="King Christian IX of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q138340" start="9599" end="9605" title="Kaiser" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9612" end="9637" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="9642" end="9667" title="William I, German Emperor" label="King Wilhelm I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683848" start="9702" end="9718" title="Treaty of Vienna (1864)" label="Treaty of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="10130" end="10149" title="Austro–Prussian War" label="Austro–Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q286977" start="10243" end="10273" title="Province of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Province of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="10720" end="10731" title="nationality" label="nationality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10802" end="10831" title="History of Schleswig-Holstein#Danes under German rule" label="History of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="10862" end="10875" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10883" end="10898" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q692146" start="10928" end="10943" title="1920 Schleswig plebiscites" label="two plebiscites"/>
<link wikidata="Q164071" start="11134" end="11154" title="South Jutland County" label="South Jutland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26061" start="11183" end="11209" title="Region of Southern Denmark" label="Region of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="11457" end="11469" title="States of Germany" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="11473" end="11491" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374178" start="11581" end="11592" title="Royal Flash" label="Royal Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q965456" start="11614" end="11637" title="George MacDonald Fraser" label="George MacDonald Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178410" start="11651" end="11670" title="The Flashman Papers" label="The Flashman Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="11791" end="11801" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q439370" start="11863" end="11874" title="Herman Bang" label="Herman Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q165383" start="11906" end="11909" title="Als Island" label="Als"/>
<link wikidata="Q695107" start="11934" end="11950" title="Battle of Dybbøl" label="Battle of Dybbøl"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="11958" end="11981" title="Second War of Schleswig" label="Second War of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="12033" end="12043" title="Dostoevsky" label="Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q695116" start="12115" end="12137" title="Notes from Underground" label="Notes from Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="12223" end="12234" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="12265" end="12284" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q119527" start="12339" end="12355" title="Adolf Strodtmann" label="Adolf Strodtmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="12473" end="12488" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="12512" end="12521" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830626" start="12657" end="12686" title="History of Schleswig-Holstein" label="History of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758492" wikidata="Q171767" url="?curid=758492" title="Johnny Servoz-Gavin">
<text>Georges-Francis &quot;Johnny&quot; Servoz-Gavin (18 January 1942 – 29 May 2006) was a French motor racing driver in both sportscars and single seaters.

He participated in 13 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix between 1967 and 1970, failing to qualify in one. He achieved one podium, and scored a total of nine championship points. He drove for the Tyrrell Formula One team, mainly as Jackie Stewart&#x27;s teammate.

==Early life==
Servoz-Gavin was born in Grenoble, a city in the foothills of the Alps. As a teenager he worked as a ski instructor, during which time he became known as &quot;Johnny&quot;.

==Career==

===Lower formulae===
Servoz-Gavin&#x27;s early work included developing sports cars for Matra. After initially competing in rallying, Servoz-Gavin moved to single-seater racing. He had previously attended the racing drivers&#x27; school at the Magny-Cours circuit in the centre of France, (from which he was &quot;thrown out&quot;) and in 1965 entered the French Formula Three Championship in a private Brabham BT18. By the late 1960s, Servoz-Gavin was a rising star, following in the footsteps of Jacky Ickx and Jean-Pierre Beltoise. He became French Formula Three Champion in 1966 driving a works Matra MS5, and in 1969 he won the European Formula Two Championship.

===Formula One===
His Formula Three racing performances won Servoz-Gavin the attention of Matra, resulting in his moving into Formula One. His best season was 1968, particularly the 1968 Italian Grand Prix in which he finished second and scored six points, driving a Matra. He also impressed at the Monaco Grand Prix, entering as Jackie Stewart&#x27;s stand-in, starting from the front row of the grid, and leading from Graham Hill at the start, until his race ended early after clipping a barrier and breaking a driveshaft in a similar incident to the one that resulted in the death of Lorenzo Bandini in the Monaco Grand Prix the previous year. Next year, he also scored a sixth place in the 1969 Canadian Grand Prix at Mosport Park, which secured him a place in history as the only driver ever to score a world championship point with a four-wheel-driven Formula One car, the Matra MS84.

Servoz-Gavin suffered an eye injury in an off-road event in the winter of 1969–70, and had been worrying that his eyesight had been damaged. Driving a March 701, for the Tyrrell team he finished fifth (yet last) in the 1970 Spanish Grand Prix at Jarama. Then after hitting a barrier again, and failing to qualify for the 1970 Monaco Grand Prix he decided to retire. Servoz-Gavin felt that the risks inherent in Formula One and racing in general were not worthwhile but the problems with his vision may have influenced his decision.

===Other motorsport interests===
In 1969, Servoz-Gavin participated in Matra endurance events, co-driving with Pedro Rodríguez.

==Later life==
A man of good looks and high society, he was among a number of Formula One drivers rumoured to be the unknown driver in Claude Lelouch&#x27;s 1977 short footage film &quot;C&#x27;était un rendez-vous&quot;, although Lelouch claimed to have driven the car himself.

After his racing career was over, Servoz-Gavin lived on a houseboat and suffered serious burns when a gas bottle exploded on his boat in 1982. He died in May 2006 as the result of a pulmonary embolism, following a period of ill health. He was 64 years old.

==Racing record==

===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171767" start="0" end="15" title="Johnny Servoz-Gavin" label="Georges-Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171767" start="22" end="28" title="Johnny Servoz-Gavin" label="Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q171767" start="35" end="47" title="Johnny Servoz-Gavin" label="Servoz-Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="93" end="105" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="175" end="186" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q69229" start="226" end="230" title="1967 Formula One season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q47225" start="235" end="239" title="1970 Formula One season" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="357" end="364" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="393" end="407" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35982" start="716" end="721" title="Matra" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q947270" start="984" end="1017" title="French Formula Three Championship" label="French Formula Three Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="1031" end="1038" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173123" start="1126" end="1136" title="Jacky Ickx" label="Jacky Ickx"/>
<link wikidata="Q171526" start="1141" end="1161" title="Jean-Pierre Beltoise" label="Jean-Pierre Beltoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604734" start="1227" end="1236" title="Matra MS5" label="Matra MS5"/>
<link wikidata="Q382708" start="1261" end="1294" title="European Formula Two Championship" label="European Formula Two Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q844092" start="1387" end="1392" title="Equipe Matra Sports" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q69243" start="1456" end="1460" title="1968 Formula One season" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q172028" start="1479" end="1502" title="1968 Italian Grand Prix" label="1968 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q844092" start="1564" end="1569" title="Equipe Matra Sports" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q171931" start="1596" end="1613" title="1968 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="1717" end="1728" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q173006" start="1884" end="1899" title="Lorenzo Bandini" label="Lorenzo Bandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q171926" start="1907" end="1942" title="1967 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix the previous year"/>
<link wikidata="Q65322" start="1991" end="2015" title="1969 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1969 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171570" start="2019" end="2031" title="Mosport Park" label="Mosport Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="2137" end="2154" title="4WD" label="four-wheel-driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q173405" start="2176" end="2186" title="Matra MS84" label="Matra MS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q173930" start="2340" end="2349" title="March 701" label="March 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="2359" end="2366" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171709" start="2408" end="2431" title="1970 Spanish Grand Prix" label="1970 Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172897" start="2435" end="2441" title="Circuito Permanente Del Jarama" label="Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q171956" start="2510" end="2532" title="1970 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1970 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171452" start="2833" end="2848" title="Pedro Rodríguez (racing driver)" label="Pedro Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q295093" start="2986" end="3000" title="Claude Lelouch" label="Claude Lelouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151219" start="3038" end="3065" title="C&amp;#x27;était un rendez-vous" label="C&amp;#x27;était un rendez-vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321309" start="3189" end="3198" title="houseboat" label="houseboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="3313" end="3331" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3500" end="3503" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3650" end="3653" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758496" wikidata="Q16983369" url="?curid=758496" title="Harry &amp; David">
<text>Harry and David, LLC (Harry and David) is an American-based premium food and gift producer and retailer. The company sells its products through direct mail, online, corporate gifting, and in their flagship location in Medford, Oregon, and operates the brands Harry &amp; David, Wolferman&#x27;s, and Vital Choice. 

Harry &amp; David was founded in 1910 by Samuel Rosenberg as &quot;Bear Creek Orchards&quot; in Medford, Oregon, as a premium fruit company. 

As of 2014, it has been owned by 1-800-Flowers.com.

==History==

===Bear Creek Orchards===
The company first began operations in 1910, when Samuel Rosenberg purchased Comice pear orchards in Southern Oregon after encountering the orchard&#x27;s pears at the previous year&#x27;s Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition. Located in Medford, Oregon, the pear orchards themselves dated from 1885, and were named Bear Creek Orchards after Bear Creek, which ran through the property.

In 1914, Rosenberg&#x27;s sons Harry and David Rosenberg took over the management of the property, after their father&#x27;s death and the completion of their agricultural degrees at Cornell University. The brothers named the pears &quot;Royal Riviera,&quot; and focused on selling them to customers in Europe. As their business continued to grow in the 1920s, the brothers built a packing house and a pre-cooling plant to prepare the pears to be shipped long distances. 

When the Great Depression reduced the demand for their pears in Europe, the brothers began to market their products to customers in the United States, first to businessmen in Seattle, and by 1934, to customers in San Francisco and New York City.

The company officially began to sell its products to customers via mail order in 1934. The brothers advertised in magazines and newspapers, with their first ad appearing in &quot;Fortune&quot; in 1936. Other ads appeared in &quot;National Geographic&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;. 

In 1937, the company introduced its &quot;Box of the Month&quot; plan. This was later renamed the &quot;Rare Fruit Club&quot; and eventually the &quot;Fruit of the Month&quot; club. 

In the late 1930s, Harry and David adopted their stepfather&#x27;s last name, Holmes, due to concerns about rising antisemitism as World War II approached.

===Harry and David===
In 1946, the name &quot;Bear Creek Orchards&quot; was replaced, when the company incorporated under the name &quot;Harry and David&quot;. Following David Holmes Sr.&#x27;s death in 1950, the company was handed down to his son, David H. Holmes Jr., who served as president of Harry &amp; David from 1955 to 1970. Harry Holmes died in 1959. While David H. Holmes Jr. was president, Harry &amp; David acquired the rose company Jackson &amp; Perkins. After 9 years, David H. Holmes Jr. (son of David Sr.) passed the business to his cousin, John R. H. Holmes (son of Harry Holmes).

In 1972, David H. Holmes Jr. created Bear Creek Corporation (a name similar to the original 1885–1914 names) as a parent company to Harry &amp; David, as well as other subsidiaries. Bear Creek Corporation went public in 1976, and remained public until its purchase by RJR Nabisco in 1984. Two years later, the company was acquired by the Shaklee Corporation. Shaklee was then purchased in 1989 (along with its newly acquired subsidiary Bear Creek) by the Japanese firm Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical. During the 1990s, Harry &amp; David expanded its retail locations, opening more than 119 stores. Bear Creek Corporation launched its website in 1996 to sell all of its product lines, including Harry &amp; David.

In June 2004, approximately 97% ownership of Harry &amp; David was acquired by two investment firms in the United States: Wasserstein &amp; Co. of New York, which purchased 63% of the company&#x27;s stock; and Highfields Capital Management of Boston, which acquired 34%. In 2007, Harry &amp; David sold the rose business Jackson &amp; Perkins, to focus solely on its gift and premium food business. The next year the company acquired two online and catalog retailers: Wolferman&#x27;s, which specializes in English muffins and breakfast foods; and Cushman&#x27;s, a Florida-based fruit company specializing in a tangerine-grapefruit hybrid.

After the private-equity buyout in 2004, and the efforts at diversification through acquisitions, the financial downturn of the late 2000s hurt Harry &amp; David&#x27;s revenues and sales. The company&#x27;s debt from its 2004 acquisition was part of the reason the recession hurt the company. In March 2011, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Harry &amp; David remained operational while in bankruptcy and, in May 2011, filed a reorganization plan in bankruptcy court. The company emerged from bankruptcy in September 2011. Following its exit from bankruptcy, Harry &amp; David increased its profitability and revenue and, in September 2012, was named the &quot;large company turnaround of the year&quot; by the Turnaround Management Association.

In November 2012, the company established a winery using Oregon grapes; the white and red wines were developed in partnership with a local winemaker. The company began selling its winery wines through its website that same year. Harry &amp; David was sold in August 2014 to internet retailer 1-800-Flowers for $142.5 million. Harry &amp; David is a wholly owned subsidiary of 1-800-Flowers.com Inc. and Harry &amp; David Operations, Inc. The company&#x27;s CEO from October 2011 through February 2015 was Craig Johnson. Steven Lightman (briefly CEO of The Sharper Image from 2007 to 2008) became CEO of Harry &amp; David in March 2015.

At the end of April 2020, Harry &amp; David permanently closed nearly all of its brick-and-mortar retail stores, except for its flagship Country Village store in Medford.

==Operations==
Harry &amp; David produces and sells premium food and gifts under three brands: Harry &amp; David; Wolferman&#x27;s; and Stockyards. Harry &amp; David&#x27;s product lines include gift baskets, flowers and plants, fresh fruit, chocolate and sweets, and wine. Wolferman&#x27;s main products include gourmet English muffins and other breakfast foods, and Stockyards is primarily known for selling USDA Prime and Choice quality meats and chops.

The company operates three individual websites for its brands on the 1800flowers.com multi-brand portal, HarryAndDavid.com, Wolfermans.com and Stockyards.com. In addition to selling online and through mail order, Harry &amp; David&#x27;s brands are sold in its retail stores nationwide. As of 2013, there were approximately fifty permanent retail locations and thirty temporary stores open for the holiday season. Cashflow is highly cyclical; Harry &amp; David earns the majority of its profits in the fall and winter as a result of holiday-related orders.

Harry &amp; David is headquartered in Medford, Oregon, where as of 2015 the company is the Rogue Valley&#x27;s largest non-medical employer. As of 2007, the company operated 2,000 acres of orchards, manufacturing facilities and a distribution center in Medford. In 1997, Harry &amp; David opened a second office in Hebron, Ohio, called the Hopewell Campus, which handles distribution. The company employed more than 8,000 employees in 2013, including temporary seasonal workers. As of 2015, the company has begun planting orchards as part of their long-term corporate strategy.

===Naming rights===
The company owns the naming rights to Medford&#x27;s main baseball park, Harry &amp; David Field.

==See also==
*List of companies based in Oregon

==References==

https://corporateofficeheadquarters.org/harry-and-david/

==Bibliography==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16983369" start="0" end="20" title="Harry &amp;amp; David" label="Harry and David, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45" end="53" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="412" end="427" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545752" start="492" end="509" title="1-800-Flowers.com, Inc." label="1-800-Flowers.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q146281" start="627" end="638" title="European Pear" label="Comice pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570233" start="651" end="666" title="Southern Oregon" label="Southern Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708674" start="739" end="770" title="Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition" label="Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="783" end="798" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876379" start="887" end="897" title="Bear Creek (Rogue River)" label="Bear Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="1091" end="1103" title="agricultural science" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1115" end="1133" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123027" start="1314" end="1327" title="packing house" label="packing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1414" end="1430" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q425779" start="1719" end="1729" title="mail order" label="mail order"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="1831" end="1838" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="1882" end="1901" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1915" end="1933" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="1950" end="1954" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2263" end="2275" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2279" end="2291" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116931" start="2751" end="2772" title="Jackson &amp;amp; Perkins" label="Jackson &amp;amp; Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462961" start="3243" end="3262" title="Shaklee" label="Shaklee Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q528842" start="3374" end="3399" title="Astellas Pharma" label="Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3736" end="3757" title="Wasserstein &amp;amp; Co.#Career" label="Wasserstein &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5758517" start="3824" end="3853" title="Highfields Capital Management" label="Highfields Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116931" start="3935" end="3956" title="Jackson &amp;amp; Perkins" label="Jackson &amp;amp; Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q429483" start="4121" end="4135" title="English muffin" label="English muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148866" start="4226" end="4253" title="Tangelo" label="tangerine-grapefruit hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="4358" end="4394" title="Great Recession" label="financial downturn of the late 2000s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="4587" end="4608" title="Chapter 11, Title 11, United States Code" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892354" start="4729" end="4745" title="United States bankruptcy court" label="bankruptcy court"/>
<link wikidata="Q156362" start="5070" end="5076" title="winery" label="winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545752" start="5318" end="5331" title="1-800-Flowers" label="1-800-Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088009" start="5578" end="5595" title="The Sharper Image" label="The Sharper Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517772" start="6691" end="6705" title="Christmas and holiday season" label="holiday season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047513" start="6707" end="6715" title="Cashflow" label="Cashflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="6889" end="6904" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10825386" start="6942" end="6954" title="Rogue Valley" label="Rogue Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592869" start="7166" end="7178" title="Hebron, Ohio" label="Hebron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666735" start="7523" end="7546" title="Harry &amp;amp; David Field" label="Harry &amp;amp; David Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032110" start="7563" end="7596" title="List of companies based in Oregon" label="List of companies based in Oregon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758498" wikidata="Q748597" url="?curid=758498" title="Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve">
<text>Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve is a United States national park and preserve in south central Alaska. The park, the largest in the United States, covers the Wrangell Mountains and a large portion of the Saint Elias Mountains, which include most of the highest peaks in the United States and Canada, yet are within of tidewater, one of the highest reliefs in the world. The park&#x27;s high point is Mount Saint Elias at , the second tallest mountain in both the United States and Canada. The park has been shaped by the competing forces of volcanism and glaciation, with its tall mountains uplifted by plate tectonics. Mount Wrangell and Mount Churchill are among major volcanos in these ranges. The park&#x27;s glacial features include Malaspina Glacier, the largest piedmont glacier in North America, Hubbard Glacier, the longest tidewater glacier in Alaska, and Nabesna Glacier, the world&#x27;s longest valley glacier. The Bagley Icefield covers much of the park&#x27;s interior, which includes 60% of the permanently ice-covered terrain in Alaska. At the center of the park and preserve, the boomtown of Kennecott exploited one of the world&#x27;s richest deposits of copper from 1903 to 1938. The abandoned mine buildings and mills comprise a National Historic Landmark district.

The park and preserve were established in 1980 by the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, following its designation as Wrangell–St. Elias National Monument on December 1, 1978, by President Jimmy Carter using the Antiquities Act, pending final legislation to resolve the allotment of public lands in Alaska. The protected areas are included in an International Biosphere Reserve and are part of the Kluane/Wrangell–St. Elias/Glacier Bay/Tatshenshini-Alsek UNESCO World Heritage Site, which includes the Canada&#x27;s Kluane National Park and Reserve to the east and Glacier Bay National Park to the south.

The park and preserve form the largest area managed by the National Park Service with a total of , an expanse larger than nine U.S. states and around the same size as Croatia. are designated as the national park, and the remaining are designated as the preserve; the chief distinction between park and preserve lands is that sport hunting is prohibited in the park and permitted in the preserve. The area designated as the national park alone is larger than the 47 smallest American national parks (out of 63) combined, and it is over 43 million times larger than Gateway Arch National Park, the smallest American national park. In addition, , or about two-thirds of the park and preserve, are designated as the Wrangell–St. Elias Wilderness, the largest single wilderness area in the United States.

==Park purpose==
As stated in the foundation document:
==Geography==

Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve includes the entire Wrangell range, the western portion of the Saint Elias Mountains and the eastern portion of the Chugach Mountains. Lesser ranges in the park or preserve include the Nutzotin Mountains, which are an extension of the Alaska Range, the Granite Range and the Robinson Mountains. Broad rivers run in glacial valleys between the ranges, including the Chitina River, Chisana River and the Nabesna River. All but the Chisana and Nabesna are tributaries to the Copper River, which flows along the western margin of the park and which has its headwaters within the park, at the Copper Glacier. The park includes dozens of glaciers and icefields. The Bagley Icefield covers portions of the St. Elias and Chugach ranges, and Malaspina Glacier covers most of the southeastern extension of the park, with Hubbard Glacier at the park&#x27;s extreme eastern boundary, the largest tidewater glacier in North America. The eastern boundary of the park is Alaska&#x27;s border with Canada, where it is adjoined by Kluane National Park and Reserve.

On the southeast the park is bounded by Yakutat Bay, Tongass National Forest and the Gulf of Alaska. The remainder of the southern boundary follows the crest of the Chugach Mountains, adjoining Chugach National Forest. The western boundary is the Copper River, and the northern boundary follows the Mentasta Mountains and borders Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge.

Mount St. Elias is situated on the border between Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Kluane National Park and Reserve. At , it is the second-highest mountain in both Canada and the United States. Nine of the 16 highest peaks on U.S. soil are located in the park, along with North America&#x27;s largest subpolar icefield, glaciers, rivers, an active volcano, and the historic Kennecott copper mines. Both the St. Elias and Wrangell ranges have seen volcanic activity. The St. Elias volcanoes are considered extinct, but some of the volcanoes of the Wrangell Range have been active in Holocene time. Ten separate volcanoes have been documented in the western Wrangell Range, of which Mount Blackburn is the highest and Mount Wrangell is the most recently active.

Nearly 66 percent of park and preserve land is designated as wilderness: at , the Wrangell–St. Elias Wilderness is the largest designated wilderness in the United States.

The park region is divided between national park lands, which only allow subsistence hunting by local rural residents, and preserve lands, which allow sport hunting by the general public. Preserve lands include the Chitina valley north of the river, two parts of the Copper River valley east of the river, most of the Chisana and Nabesna valleys, and lands along Yakutat Bay.

The park is accessible by highway from Anchorage; two rough gravel roads (the McCarthy Road and the Nabesna Road) wind through the park which makes portions of the interior accessible for backcountry camping and hiking. Chartered aircraft also fly into the park. Wrangell–St. Elias received 79,450 visitors in 2018. The park area includes a few small settlements. Nabesna and Chisana are in the northern part of the park. Kennicott and McCarthy are relatively close together in the center of the park, with a few smaller settlements nearby and along the McCarthy Road. Chitina serves as a gateway community where the McCarthy Road meets the Edgerton Highway along the Copper River. The McCarthy Road and the Nabesna Road are the only significant roads in the park.

==Activities==
Access to the park is open all year, and most of the park facilities are open from May to September, although some locations open as late as the end of May and close in mid-August. The main visitor center remains open on weekdays in the winter.
The Edgerton Highway runs along the valley of the Copper River on the western margin of the park. The headquarters and visitor center are at mile 106.8 near Copper Center. Road access to the park&#x27;s interior is along the Nabesna Road and the McCarthy Road. The abandoned mining town of Kennecott can be accessed by footbridge from a continuation of the McCarthy road. Backcountry access is available by air taxi services.

The Kendesnii campground on the Nabesna Road is the only Park Service-managed campground in the park. There are a number of private campgrounds and lodgings on the McCarthy and Nabesna roads, and there are fourteen public-use cabins. Most of these cabins are accessible only by air. A few are accessible by road near the Slana Ranger Station, and most are associated with airstrips. Backcountry camping is allowed without a permit. There are few established and maintained trails in the park.

Mountain biking is mainly limited to roads due to prevailing boggy conditions in the summer. On the other hand, float trips on the rivers are a popular way to see the park on the Copper, Nizina, Kennicott and Chitina rivers. Because the park and preserve include some of the highest peaks in North America, they are a popular destination for mountain climbing. Of the 70 tallest mountains in Alaska, 35 are in the park, including seven of the top ten peaks. Climbing these peaks is technically demanding, and requires expeditions to access remote and dangerous terrain.

In addition to the Copper Center visitor center, the park maintains a visitor center at Kennecott and an information station at Mile 59 on the McCarthy Road. There are ranger stations at Slana on the Nabesna Road, in Chitina at the end of the Edgerton Highway, and in Yakutat. The Yakutat ranger station is shared with Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve. The park has three improved airstrips, at McCarthy, May Creek and Chisana, with a number of unimproved strips scattered around the park. Air taxis provide sightseeing services and visitor transportation within the park, based in Glennallen, Chitina, Nabesna, and McCarthy. Air taxis provide access to sea kayak tours that operate in the vicinity of Icy Bay. Farther east on the park&#x27;s coast, cruise ships are frequent visitors to Hubbard Glacier in Yakutat Bay.

Sport hunting and trapping are allowed only within the preserve lands. Subsistence hunting by local residents is permitted in both the park and preserve. Hunting is managed jointly by the National Park Service, and the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, which issues hunting licenses. The use of off-road vehicles (ORVs) is restricted to specific routes and permits are required to use ORVs in the preserve.

==Geology==

The southern part of Alaska is composed of a series of terranes that have been pushed against the North American landmass by the action of plate tectonics. The Pacific Plate moves northwestward relative to the North American Plate at about to per year, meeting the continental landmass in the Gulf of Alaska. The Pacific Plate subducts under the Alaskan landmass, compressing the continental rocks and giving rise to a series of mountain ranges. Terranes or island arcs carried on the surface of the Pacific Plate are carried against the Alaskan landmass and are themselves compressed and folded, but are not fully carried into the Earth&#x27;s interior. As a result, a series of terranes, collectively known as the Wrangellia composite terrane, have been pushed against the south coast of Alaska, followed by the Southern Margin composite terrane to the south of the Border Ranges fault system. A byproduct of the subduction process is the formation of volcanoes at some distance inland from the subduction zone. At present the Yakutat Terrane is being pushed under material of similar density, resulting in uplift and a combination of accretion and subduction. Nearly all of Alaska is composed of a series of terranes that have been pushed against North America. The coastal region is seismically active with frequent large earthquakes. Major quakes occurred in 1899 (four between magnitudes 7 and 8) and 1958 (7.7), followed by the 1964 Alaska earthquake (9.2). The 1979 St. Elias earthquake reached magnitude 7.9.

Six terranes and one sedimentary belt have been documented in Wrangell–St. Elias. From north to south, and oldest to youngest, they are the Windy or Yukon-Tanana (180 million years ago), Gravina-Nutzotin Belt (120 MYa), Wrangellia, Alexander, Chugach (previously assembled elsewhere, then accreted as the Wrangellia composite terrane 110–67 MYa), Prince William (50MYa) and Yakutat terranes (beginning 26 MYa). The Wrangellian rocks include fossiliferous sedimentary rocks interspersed with volcanic rocks.

The Alaskan coast reached an approximation of its modern configuration about 50 million years ago, with the complete subduction of the now-vanished Kula Plate under North America. The present subduction of the Pacific Plate in southern Alaska has been going on for about 26 million years. The oldest volcanoes in Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve are about 26 million years old, near the Alaska-Yukon Territory border in the St. Elias Range. Activity has moved north and west from that area.

===Volcanic activity===

The majority of the volcanoes in the Wrangell volcanic field lie at the western end of the Wrangell Mountains. The western Wrangell volcanoes are unusual for subduction-related volcanoes, in their generally non-explosive nature. The majority of the volcanoes are unusually large shield volcanoes that built to their present size quickly from voluminous flows of andesite lavas which erupted from multiple centers. Their growth is associated with the arrival of the Yakutat terrane, with considerable activity until about 200,000 years ago, when movement along the Denali-Totchunda and Fairweather faults began to accommodate some of the Pacific Plate&#x27;s motion. For that reason, very large magmatic flows are regarded as unlikely in the present day. The majority of the Wrangell volcanoes are shield volcanoes with large collapse calderas at their summits. All but Mount Wrangell have been modified by glaciers to sharper, steeper relief than the gentle, rounded forms that characterize young shield volcanoes. The shield volcanoes are surrounded by cinder cones that formed after the main volcano.
The ten highest summits in the Wrangell Mountains are all of volcanic origin, and several are among the most voluminous volcanoes in the world. Mount Wrangell is the only Wrangell volcano considered active. Wrangell measures in height. It was built by a series of large lava flows from 600,000 to 200,000 years ago. Three comparatively modest eruptive episodes were reported in 1784, 1884–85 and 1900. The gently sloping dome features an ice-filled summit caldera measuring by . Three craters containing fumaroles produce a steam plume that can be visible on calm, clear days. The summit produces occasional phreatic eruptions that can coat the ice with ash. During the 1980s the summit&#x27;s heat flux was sufficient to melt of ice and form a small crater lake. That activity has subsided since 1986 and ice has accumulated since. The last large eruption of magma from Wrangell is estimated to have been about 50,000 to 100,000 years ago. The summit caldera is estimated to have collapsed between 200,000 and 50,000 years ago. Mount Zanetti is a large cinder cone on Wrangell&#x27;s northwest flank, estimated to be less than 25,000 years old.

Mount Drum is the westernmost Wrangell volcano. high, it dominates the local landscape more than much higher mountains. Mount Drum is either a shield volcano or a stratovolcano that has been extensively eroded by glacial activity, preceded by explosive activity about 250,000–150,000 years ago that destroyed a summit that may have once measured . These eruptions generated extensive mudflows, and represent the last activity at Mount Drum. Mount Drum supports at least eleven glaciers that flow from its summit icefield.
Mount Sanford is the tallest of the western Wrangell volcanoes at , the 13th highest peak in North America. It is a complex shield volcano that first formed about 900,000 years ago. The latest eruption is estimated to have been between 320,000 and 100,000 years ago. Like Drum, Sanford has a large icefield above that feeds a series of glaciers. Capital Mountain is located near Mount Sanford, but is much smaller at in height. It is a shield volcano, about in diameter. Its summit has collapsed to form a caldera roughly in diameter. Its last activity was about a million years ago, and it has been deeply eroded by glacial activity. Tanada Peak is an older and larger neighbor of Capital Mountain, tall with a by summit caldera. The shield volcano last erupted 900,000 years ago and has been dissected by glaciers. The Skookum Creek Volcano is a volcanic center that has been heavily eroded. It was active between 3.2 million and 2 million years ago. high at its highest point, the old shield volcano has been severely eroded. Its caldera is surrounded by a series of dacite and rhyolite domes. Mount Jarvis is a shield volcano. high, with one or more indistinct summit calderas. It is covered with ice and erupted between 1.7 million and 1 million years ago. Mount Blackburn is at the highest point in the Wrangells, the 12th highest peak in North America, and the oldest volcano in the range. It is a shield volcano with a filled caldera that was active between 4.2 million and 3.4 million years ago. Mount Blackburn is ice-covered and is the source of Kennicott Glacier and Nabesna Glacier, among others. The Boomerang volcano is a very small shield volcano, only rising . It is at least one million years old and is overlaid by deposits from Capital Mountain. Mount Gordon is a cinder cone, one of the largest in the Wrangells at .

Several hot springs or mud volcanoes in the vicinity of Mount Drum produce warm brackish water charged with carbon dioxide. The largest are called Shrub, Upper Klawasi and Lower Klawasi. Their deposits of hydrothermally-altered mud have built cones high and in diameter.

The chief volcanoes in the St. Elias Range are Mount Bona and Mount Churchill. At and , respectively, they are the highest and fourth-highest volcanoes in the United States and the fourth and seventh highest in North America, and Bona is the tenth highest peak of any kind in North America. Churchill is often regarded as a subsidiary peak of Bona. Both are ice-covered stratovolcanoes. Churchill is the source of the White River Ash. It erupted about 100 AD and 700 AD, spreading ash across much of Alaska and northwestern Canada.

===Glaciers and icefields===

The mountain ranges of Wrangell–St. Elias account for 60 percent of glacial ice in Alaska, covering more than . The glaciers have advanced and retreated repeatedly, reaching the sea and filling the valley of the Copper River. A glacial dam in the valley retained Lake Atna during the Wisconsin glaciation. Drainage of the lake has scoured the riverbed to bedrock above the Bremner River. Several features are particularly notable. The Malaspina Glacier is the largest piedmont glacier in North America, Hubbard Glacier is at the longest tidewater glacier in Alaska, and the Nabesna Glacier is the world&#x27;s longest valley glacier, at more than .

Glaciers in Wrangell–St. Elias are mostly in retreat. The Bagley Icefield has grown thinner and its glaciers have retreated, including portions feeding Malaspina Glacier, which is stagnant or retreating. Malaspina&#x27;s west and east lobes filled Icy Bay and Yakutat Bay, respectively, about 1000 years ago, and Guyot, Yahtse and Tyndall Glaciers have individually retreated at the head of Icy Bay. However, Hubbard Glacier advanced from 1894, closing Russell Fjord.

===Minerals===
Five major mining districts were developed in Wrangell–St. Elias during the heyday of mining between the 1890s and 1960. Gold was found in the Bremner district in 1901, and in the Nizina area near Kennecott. Most of the gold from these areas was placer gold, obtained through hydraulic mining. Copper nuggets were found with the gold and were usually discarded as uneconomical to ship until roads were improved to the area. Other gold strikes were made in the Chisana district, with a minor stampede between 1913 and 1917 to the area by miners. During the 1930s lode ore was mined in the Nabesna district.

The chief source of copper was the Kennecott lode next to the Kennicott Glacier. The copper sulfide ore assayed at 70% copper when first discovered, among the richest ever found. Total production amounted to more than 536,000 metric tons of copper and about 100 metric tons of silver. After the chalcocite ore was exhausted the mines worked malachite and azurite deposits embedded in hydrothermally-altered dolomite. The copper is believed to have been dissolved in hot water moving through copper-rich Nikolai Greenstone, then redeposited in concentrated form in Chitistone Limestone through reaction with sulfide-rich waters in the limestone. A number of other sites on the southern side of the Wrangells were investigated and prospected, and some even produced small amounts of ore, but none were commercially exploited. Large, but low-grade deposits of nickel and molybdenum were investigated as late as the 1970s.

==History==

===Early history and exploration===
Archeological evidence indicates that humans entered the Wrangell Mountains about 1000 AD. The Ahtna people settled in small groups along the course of the Copper River. A few Upper Tanana speakers settled along the Nabesna and Chisana Rivers. The Eyak people settled near the mouth of the Copper River on the Gulf of Alaska. Along the coast the Tlingit people dispersed, with some settling at Yakutat Bay. The first Europeans in the area were Russian explorers and traders. Vitus Bering landed in the area in 1741. Fur traders followed. A permanent Russian trading post was established in 1793 by the Lebedev-Lastochkin Company at Port Etches on Hinchinbrook Island near the mouth of the Copper River. A competing post operated by the Shelikov Company was established in 1796 at Yakutat Bay. The Shelikov Company sent Dmitri Tarkhanov to explore the lower Copper River and to look for copper deposits, inspired by reports that the native peoples used implements and points made of pure copper. Another exploration party in 1797 was killed by natives. Semyen Potochkin was more successful in 1798, reaching the mouth of the Chitina River and spending the winter with the Ahtna. In 1799 Konstantin Galaktionov reached the Tazlina River, but was wounded in an attack by the Ahtna. He was killed on a return trip in 1803. The Tlingit and Eyak attacked and destroyed the Russian post at Yakutat in 1805. It was not until 1819 that a party under Afanasii Klimovskii was sent to explore the Copper River again, reaching the upper portion of the river and establishing the Copper Fort trading post near Taral. A party that started from Taral in 1848 with the intention of reaching the Yukon River was killed by the Ahtna, ending Russian exploration.

American interest in the area after Alaska&#x27;s acquisition by the United States in 1867 was limited until gold was found in the Yukon Territory in the 1880s. George Holt was the first American known to have explored the lower Copper River, in 1882. In 1884 John Bremner prospected the lower river. The same year a U.S. Army party led by Lieutenant William Abercrombie attempted to explore the lower river, and found a passage to the country&#x27;s interior over a glacier at the Valdez Arm. In 1885 Lieutenant Henry Tureman Allen fully explored the Copper and Chitina rivers, going on to cross the Alaska Range and enter the Yukon River system and eventually reaching the Bering Sea. The Allen expedition also noted the use of copper by native peoples along the Copper River. Several other expeditions explored the coastal regions in the late 1880s, and some attempted to climb the mountains. An 1891 expedition led by Yukon explorer Frederick Schwatka descended the Nizina, Chitina and Copper Rivers from the north.

===Mineral extraction===

The discovery of gold in the Canadian Klondike brought prospectors to the region who discovered some gold along the Copper River. Explorers&#x27; reports of copper tools and copper nuggets caused the U.S. Geological Survey to send a geologist, Oscar Rohn, to look for the source. Rohn reported finding copper ore in Kennicott Glacier, but did not find the source. Shortly afterwards prospectors Jack Smith and Clarence Warner are said to have noticed a green spot on a hillside at what is now Kennecott, which proved to be a rich copper lode. Engineer Stephen Birch acquired the rights to the deposit and established the Alaska Copper and Coal Company in 1903 to mine it. Birch obtained cash from investors like J. P. Morgan and the Guggenheim family, who became known as the &quot;Alaska Syndicate&quot; and his venture became Kennecott Mines in 1906, eventually becoming the Kennecott Copper Corporation. The town was named after the glacier, but misspelled, so that &quot;Kennicott&quot; became &quot;Kennecott.&quot; Other copper deposits were found on the south side of the Wrangells at Bremner and Nizina. Smaller deposits of both gold and copper were found in the Nabesna area.
Development of the remote site required the construction of a railway long and costing $23.5 million at the time of its construction. The Copper River and Northwestern Railway (CR&amp;NW) took five years to build, extending to Cordova on the coast. The towns of Chitina and McCarthy grew up on the line. The Kennecott mine employed surface mining, underground galleries, and, uniquely, mining in glacial ice to recover ore that had been scraped off the surface deposit by the Kennicott Glacier encased in ice.

By the 1920s the highest-grade ore had been exhausted and the decline extended into the 1930s, until the Kennecott operation was finally shut down in 1938 after extracting over 4.5 million tons of ore, which yielded 600,000 tons of copper and of silver with a net profit of $100 million to the investors.

Reports of oil and gas seeps in the vicinity of Cape Yakutaga and Controller Bay inspired petroleum exploration on the southern margin along the Gulf of Alaska. A small oilfield at Katalla produced oil from 1903 to 1933, when its refinery was destroyed by fire. The petroleum deposits were instrumental in the exclusion of the coast from Icy Bay to the Copper River delta from the future park. Coal seams were also noted near Kushtaka Lake. A boom took place from 1974 to 1977 with the construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System near the western margin of the future park. The boom was short-lived, and local residents returned to trapping, fishing and guiding hunters for their living. Thirteen test wells were drilled offshore in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

===National park proposals===
The first proposals for protected lands in the region came from the newly established U.S. Forest Service in 1908, but were not pursued. Early studies of possible new Park Service units in Alaska took place in the 1930s and 1940s. The first study, entitled &quot;Alaska — Its Resources and Development&quot; was centered on the development of tourism in existing parks such as Denali (then called Mount McKinley National Park), despite a dissent from co-author Bob Marshall, who advocated strict preservation. In 1939 Ernest Gruening, then Director of the Division of Territories and Island Possessions in the Department of the Interior and later governor of the Alaska Territory, proposed the establishment of a park in the Chitina Valley, to be called Panorama National Park or Alaska Regional National Park, together with Kennicott National Monument, a area that was to include Kennicott Glacier and the Kennecott mine site. Gruening was supported by Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes, but President Franklin D. Roosevelt declined to act, noting that there was no urgency, and citing his directive that all non-defense related measures be deferred to preparations for the looming World War II.

A lukewarm assessment by Mount McKinley superintendent Frank Been in 1941 further diminished enthusiasm. However, Canada proposed a St. Elias Mountains International Park for the region in 1942, and established the Kluane Game Sanctuary in 1943 on its side of the border, which would eventually become Kluane National Park. These actions inspired the Interior Department to discuss a corresponding system of parks on the Alaska side, which would include what was then Glacier Bay National Monument, portions of the Wrangell and Chugach Mountains, and Malaspina and Bering Glaciers.

In 1964, George B. Hartzog Jr., director of the National Park Service, initiated a new study entitled &quot;Operation Great Land&quot;, advocating the development and promotion of the existing Alaska parks. Gruening, by then one of Alaska&#x27;s senators, proposed a &quot;National Park Highway&quot; for the region in 1966. Further action by the Park Service in the late 1960s resulted in a master plan and draft legislation. By 1969 Interior&#x27;s Bureau of Outdoor Recreation proposed that the Bureau of Land Management oversee a Wrangell Mountain Scenic Area. This management scheme was proposed to allow resource development in addition to preservation and recreation. Park Service reaction was hostile, but Secretary of the Interior and former Alaska governor Walter J. Hickel supported the idea. Despite the effort to preserve the possibility of resource development, Hickel&#x27;s successor as governor, Keith Harvey Miller, opposed the proposed National Scenic Area on the grounds that it would pre-empt potential Alaska state land claims in the area.

The 1971 Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) spurred new proposals for Alaska parks. As part of the process of divesting federal lands to the state of Alaska and to native corporations, the act required the withdrawal of of lands for conservation. The National Park Service responded with a proposal for a Alaska National Park in the Wrangell Mountains region. Hickel&#x27;s successor as Interior secretary Rogers Morton cut the proposed area to , withdrawing the western Wrangell Mountains and excluding Mount Wrangell itself and Mount Sanford. Later amendments brought the proposed acreage back to . A scaled-back park of was proposed by Interior in 1973, together with a Wrangell Mountain National Forest, getting a cold reception from both preservationists and developers. Competing bills were drafted during 1974 by both preservation and development interests with little advancement. In the same year the Park Service and Forest Service started a joint study for the Wrangell area and cooperated in glacier studies and in architectural surveys of the Kennecott mills.

A variety of bills were introduced in Congress in 1976 with widely varying proposed acreage and levels of protection. None succeeded, but one bill proposed by conservation-oriented groups introduced the concept of national preserves, which would enjoy most of the protections associated with national parks, but which would allow hunting. In 1977 Representative Morris K. Udall introduced the first version of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) as H.R. 39, in which a Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and a Chisana National Preserve were proposed. Although supported by the Park Service, the bill was opposed by Alaska. A revised bill was proposed by the Interior Department, with in national park lands and in an adjoining preserve, both to be named Wrangell–St. Elias. Hearings in 1978 adjusted the areas, boundaries and relative proportions of park and preserve lands, with a view to allowing the hunting of Dall sheep in the Wrangell Mountains, and introducing a National Recreation Area to the north of the mountains.

Alaska senator Mike Gravel threatened to filibuster the proposed ANILCA bill, effectively killing it. Following this blockage and with efforts on the part of Alaska authorities to claim lands that fell within the proposed protections, President Jimmy Carter invoked the Antiquities Act to proclaim 17 Alaskan national monuments, including in Wrangell–St. Elias National Monument on December 1, 1978.

The monument designation carried no dedicated funding for park development or operations, but did engender considerable hostility from Alaskans, who regarded the designation under the Antiquities Act as a federal land grab. The few Park Service personnel assigned to the area received threats, and a Park Service airplane was destroyed by fire in August 1979. Attitudes were sharply divided between white Alaskans, who were largely opposed to the park and felt that they were being forced out, and native Ahtnas, who were granted subsistence hunting rights and who expected to profit from tourism.

===National park and preserve===

In January 1979, Udall introduced a modified version of H.R. 39. Following markup and negotiations between the House and Senate versions, the bill as modified by the Senate was approved by the House on November 12. On December 2, 1980, the ANILCA bill was signed into law by Jimmy Carter, converting Wrangell–St. Elias to a national park and preserve with an initial area of in the park and in the preserve. Boundaries between the park and preserve areas were drawn according to perceived values of scenery versus hunting potential In accordance with the legislation, the designated areas included of wilderness, stipulated in a somewhat less restrictive manner than standard practice in the continental United States.

Opposition to the park persisted after Congressional designation from some Alaskans, who resented federal government presence in general and National Park Service presence in particular. Vandalism persisted, with a ranger cabin burned and an airplane damaged, while others skirted regulations and voiced resentment of what, in their view, was an elitist attitude embodied in the park and the Park Service. However, relations improved for a time, with local businesses promoting the park and working with the Park Service on tourism projects. Incidents continued, notably involving arson at a ranger station, and relations bottomed again in 1994 when the park superintendent Karen Wade testified before Congress for increased funding in a way that was perceived to confirm residents&#x27; suspicions about the Park Service, exacerbated by commentary from local newspapers that was wrongly attributed to Wade. This marked the high point of resentment against the park, as local residents began to take part in Park Service sponsored events. Nevertheless, the 1979 designation of the region as a UNESCO World Heritage Site continued to be seen with suspicion. The John Birch Society claimed that the designation was part of a United Nations plan to assume control of the U.S. national park system.

The state of Alaska proposed major improvements to the McCarthy Road in 1997, planning to pave it and add scenic turnouts and trailheads along its length. Although the road remains gravel, it has been widened and smoothed. Some rental car agencies continue to prohibit use of their vehicles on the McCarthy Road.

===Additional designations===
The transborder park system Kluane / Wrangell–St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek (comprising Wrangell–St. Elias and three other national and provincial parks) was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979 for the spectacular glacier and icefield landscapes as well as for the importance of grizzly bears, caribou and Dall sheep habitat. of the park and preserve were designated as the Wrangell–Saint Elias Wilderness upon the park&#x27;s establishment in 1980, the largest single wilderness area in the United States.

==Climate==

The climate of the park&#x27;s interior is dominated by long, cold winters in which temperatures may remain below freezing for five months. Nighttime low temperatures can sink to and daytime highs of to are usual. Summer lasts two months, June and July, bringing flowers and biting insects, with maximum temperatures of . Late summers can bring drizzle. It begins to get cool in August, and first snows fall in September. Conditions are more temperate along the coast, and the high mountains retain snow all year.

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve encompasses the following three types;

1) Continental Subarctic - Cold Dry Summer (&quot;Dsc&quot;). Dsc climates are characterized by their coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F), 1–3 months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F), at least three times as much precipitation in the wettest month of winter as in the driest month of summer, and driest month of summer receives less than 30 mm (1.2 in).

2) Subarctic With Cool Summers And Dry Winters (&quot;Dwc&quot;). Dwc climates are characterized by their coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F), 1–3 months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F), and 70% or more of average annual precipitation received in the warmest six months.

3) Subarctic With Cool Summers And Year Around Rainfall (&quot;Dfc&quot;). Dfc climates are characterized by their coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F), 1–3 months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F), and no significant precipitation difference between seasons.

According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at the Kennecott Visitor Center (1985 ft / 605 m) is 3a with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -37.8 °F (-38.8 °C).

==Ecology==
As the park and preserve cover an area larger than Switzerland, extending from the Gulf of Alaska to the Alaskan interior, with altitudes that vary from sea level to , Wrangell–St. Elias has a wide variety of habitats. Much of the park is high mountain peaks covered with permanent ice, glaciers and icefields. Rivers occupy broad, flat glacial valleys and have constantly-changing braided riverbeds. The environment can be divided into five major categories, apart from the relatively sterile glacial and riverbed areas: lowlands, wetlands, uplands, sub-alpine and alpine. Some of these environments are influenced and defined by the presence of permafrost, permanently frozen sub-soil.

===Plant communities===

The lowland regions of the park border the Gulf of Alaska as well as the lower levels of the river valleys. Black spruce dominates areas of permafrost, with understories of alder, Labrador tea, willows and blueberry, with a variety of ground mosses.

Wetlands can occur along the coast as well as the interior river basins. Permafrost regions are often marshy regions of muskeg. The wetland areas are primarily grassy, with sedges and small shrubs. Horsetails such as &quot;Equisetum palustre&quot; and spikerush are also found.

The drier forested upland portions of the park are mostly interior boreal forest, or taiga. The distribution of tree species is determined by fire frequency and extent. The most abundant conifers in the forest are Black spruce and larger white spruce, with white spruce more prevalent in areas without permafrost. Black spruce are better adapted to fire conditions. Both quaking aspen and paper birch are common deciduous species that are among the first trees to grow following a fire. They are followed by balsam poplar and eventually white spruce.

Subalpine environments occur above the local tree line, which in Wrangell–St. Elias usually varies from to . Plants are low and slow-growing shrubs, mainly graminoids and forbs.

The alpine environment is variable according to the availability of water. It starts at a variable altitude from in dry areas to in wetter areas. Heaths and low-growing willows are common, along with forbs.

===Wildlife===
Large, terrestrial mammals include the timber wolf, grizzly bear, black bear, and Mentasta and Chisana herds of caribou. Cougar (mountain lions) are considered possible, as the park may constitute the northernmost extent of their range, but none have been officially documented. Mountain goats, and roughly 13k Dall sheep—one of the densest populations on the continent—are found in the remote, montane areas. Moose, while not abundantly common in the region, may sometimes be observed in areas of dense willow growth. A few Canadian wood bison have been established in two herds within the park, mostly in the Copper and Chitina River valleys.

The smaller mammals include the wolverine, North American beaver, Canadian lynx, porcupine, pine marten, river otters, red fox, some coyote, Arctic ground and flying squirrels, hoary marmot, weasels, ermine, snowshoe hare, several species of voles and mice, and pikas. The waters along the coast host many migrating whales (including orcas, humpback and gray whales), resident Dall’s and harbor porpoises, harbor seals and California sea lions. The larger (and endangered) Steller sea lion may also be observed along the park’s coastal waters, in addition to the rare and over-hunted Alaskan sea otter.

Twenty-one species of fish have been documented in fresh waters in the park. Differences in fish distribution depend on drainage: northern pike are not seen in the Copper River drainages, and no salmon species are seen in Yukon River drainages. Large freshwater fish include Chinook, chum, coho, pink and sockeye salmon, as well as other salmonids such as lake trout, cutthroat trout, Dolly Varden, Arctic grayling and rainbow trout. Other fish include eulachon, burbot, round whitefish, northern pike, Pacific lamprey, lake chub and a variety of sculpins.

About 93 species of birds inhabit Wrangell–St. Elias, though only 24 remain during the harsh winter. The most common birds include bald eagle, willow and rock ptarmigan, Canada jays, ravens, hermit thrushes, American robins, lesser yellowlegs, wandering tattler, hairy woodpeckers and northern flickers. Owls include the great horned, great gray, northern hawk and boreal owls. Waterfowl includes trumpeter swan, common loon, northern pintail, mallards, and green-winged teal.

==See also==

* List of national parks of the United States
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Bleakley, Geoffrey T. (2002). &quot;Contested Ground: Administrative History of Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve 1978–2001&quot; (PDF). National Park Service.
*Eppinger, R. G., et al. (2000). geochemical studies of selected mineral deposits in Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve, Alaska&quot; (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1619. Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
*Richter, Donald H. Rosenkrans, Danny S.; Steigerwald, Margaret J. (1995). &quot;Guide to the Volcanoes of the Western Wrangell Mountains, Alaska—Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve&quot; (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 2072. Denver: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
*Winkler, G. R. (2000). &quot;A Geologic Guide to Wrangell-Saint Elias National Park and Preserve, Alaska : A Tectonic Collage of Northbound Terranes&quot; (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1616. Denver: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.

==External links==

* of the National Park Service
*Alaskan national parklands – National Park Service
*Wilderness.net: Wrangell–Saint Elias Wilderness
*World Heritage Site
*Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) documentation, filed under McCarthy, Valdez-Cordova Census Area, AK:
**
**
**
**
**</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="0" end="45" title="Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="51" end="78" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="United States national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="83" end="91" title="national preserve" label="preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="109" end="115" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q616559" start="172" end="190" title="Wrangell Mountains" label="Wrangell Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q48719" start="218" end="239" title="Saint Elias Mountains" label="Saint Elias Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q770496" start="414" end="431" title="Mount Saint Elias" label="Mount Saint Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="617" end="632" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185847" start="634" end="648" title="Mount Wrangell" label="Mount Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48689" start="653" end="668" title="Mount Churchill" label="Mount Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q617835" start="752" end="769" title="Malaspina Glacier" label="Malaspina Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632936" start="818" end="833" title="Hubbard Glacier" label="Hubbard Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q610535" start="880" end="895" title="Nabesna Glacier" label="Nabesna Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q116999" start="942" end="957" title="Bagley Icefield" label="Bagley Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="1112" end="1120" title="boomtown" label="boomtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q995915" start="1124" end="1133" title="Kennecott, Alaska" label="Kennecott"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="1264" end="1290" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="1356" end="1403" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="1505" end="1517" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="1528" end="1543" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="1662" end="1693" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="International Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q604604" start="1714" end="1770" title="Kluane / Wrangell–St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek" label="Kluane/Wrangell–St. Elias/Glacier Bay/Tatshenshini-Alsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1771" end="1777" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1778" end="1797" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q738582" start="1832" end="1864" title="Kluane National Park and Reserve" label="Kluane National Park and Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="1881" end="1906" title="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve" label="Glacier Bay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2089" end="2096" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="2396" end="2419" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="American national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="2486" end="2512" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="2653" end="2663" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600875" start="2684" end="2699" title="List of wilderness areas of the United States" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q616559" start="2859" end="2873" title="Wrangell Mountains" label="Wrangell range"/>
<link wikidata="Q48719" start="2902" end="2923" title="Saint Elias Mountains" label="Saint Elias Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089367" start="2955" end="2972" title="Chugach Mountains" label="Chugach Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070603" start="3024" end="3042" title="Nutzotin Mountains" label="Nutzotin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q156684" start="3074" end="3086" title="Alaska Range" label="Alaska Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3092" end="3105" title="Granite Range (Alaska)" label="Granite Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3114" end="3132" title="Robinson Mountains" label="Robinson Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074901" start="3204" end="3217" title="Chitina River" label="Chitina River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3219" end="3232" title="Chisana River" label="Chisana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961991" start="3241" end="3254" title="Nabesna River" label="Nabesna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131444" start="3311" end="3323" title="Copper River (Alaska)" label="Copper River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3427" end="3441" title="Copper Glacier" label="Copper Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="3471" end="3478" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132248" start="3484" end="3492" title="icefield" label="icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q116999" start="3499" end="3514" title="Bagley Icefield" label="Bagley Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q617835" start="3572" end="3589" title="Malaspina Glacier" label="Malaspina Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632936" start="3650" end="3665" title="Hubbard Glacier" label="Hubbard Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q738582" start="3853" end="3885" title="Kluane National Park and Reserve" label="Kluane National Park and Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476323" start="3928" end="3939" title="Yakutat Bay" label="Yakutat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="3941" end="3964" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="3973" end="3987" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="4082" end="4105" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502747" start="4187" end="4205" title="Mentasta Mountains" label="Mentasta Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q955538" start="4218" end="4249" title="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge" label="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="4403" end="4411" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q116999" start="4528" end="4574" title="Bagley Icefield" label="North America&amp;#x27;s largest subpolar icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q185847" start="4597" end="4611" title="Mount Wrangell" label="active volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q995915" start="4630" end="4652" title="Kennecott Mines" label="Kennecott copper mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520855" start="4937" end="4952" title="Mount Blackburn" label="Mount Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q185847" start="4972" end="4986" title="Mount Wrangell" label="Mount Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="5078" end="5088" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="5605" end="5614" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q802288" start="5644" end="5657" title="McCarthy Road" label="McCarthy Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q802306" start="5666" end="5678" title="Nabesna Road" label="Nabesna Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q946867" start="5930" end="5937" title="Nabesna, Alaska" label="Nabesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837791" start="5942" end="5949" title="Chisana, Alaska" label="Chisana"/>
<link wikidata="Q995915" start="5988" end="5997" title="Kennicott, Alaska" label="Kennicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q590790" start="6002" end="6010" title="McCarthy, Alaska" label="McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074916" start="6135" end="6142" title="Chitina, Alaska" label="Chitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q802088" start="6207" end="6223" title="Edgerton Highway" label="Edgerton Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923536" start="6749" end="6762" title="Copper Center, Alaska" label="Copper Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131444" start="7692" end="7698" title="Copper River (Alaska)" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342312" start="7700" end="7706" title="Nizina River" label="Nizina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074901" start="7722" end="7729" title="Chitina River" label="Chitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="8352" end="8359" title="Yakutat, Alaska" label="Yakutat"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="8403" end="8441" title="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve" label="Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="9389" end="9396" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="9473" end="9488" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="9494" end="9507" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="9544" end="9564" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="9661" end="9669" title="subduction" label="subducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="9792" end="9802" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="10769" end="10791" title="1964 Alaska earthquake" label="1964 Alaska earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320205" start="11509" end="11519" title="Kula Plate" label="Kula Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="12170" end="12184" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="12253" end="12261" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="12688" end="12704" title="shield volcanoes" label="shield volcanoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="12725" end="12732" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="12945" end="12956" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185847" start="13138" end="13152" title="Mount Wrangell" label="Mount Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067217" start="13602" end="13619" title="phreatic eruption" label="phreatic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467623" start="14141" end="14151" title="Mount Drum" label="Mount Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="14304" end="14317" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638692" start="14663" end="14676" title="Mount Sanford (Alaska)" label="Mount Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49018026" start="15009" end="15025" title="Capital Mountain" label="Capital Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081278" start="15298" end="15309" title="Tanada Peak" label="Tanada Peak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15484" end="15505" title="Skookum Creek Volcano" label="Skookum Creek Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q466481" start="15733" end="15739" title="dacite" label="dacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="15744" end="15752" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q391440" start="15760" end="15772" title="Mount Jarvis" label="Mount Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520855" start="15925" end="15940" title="Mount Blackburn" label="Mount Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16277" end="16294" title="Boomerang volcano" label="Boomerang volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467669" start="16429" end="16441" title="Mount Gordon" label="Mount Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193457" start="16525" end="16536" title="mud volcano" label="mud volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="16610" end="16624" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q48691" start="16821" end="16831" title="Mount Bona" label="Mount Bona"/>
<link wikidata="Q48689" start="16836" end="16851" title="Mount Churchill" label="Mount Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995280" start="17192" end="17207" title="White River Ash" label="White River Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454836" start="17600" end="17609" title="Lake Atna" label="Lake Atna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="17621" end="17641" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632936" start="17840" end="17855" title="Hubbard Glacier" label="Hubbard Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q610535" start="17911" end="17926" title="Nabesna Glacier" label="Nabesna Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622856" start="18300" end="18305" title="Guyot Glacier" label="Guyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046896" start="18307" end="18313" title="Yahtse Glacier" label="Yahtse"/>
<link wikidata="Q113353111" start="18318" end="18334" title="Tyndall Glacier (Alaska)" label="Tyndall Glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="18717" end="18723" title="Placer mining" label="placer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062592" start="18747" end="18763" title="hydraulic mining" label="hydraulic mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196612" start="19163" end="19177" title="copper sulfide" label="copper sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q278106" start="19373" end="19383" title="chalcocite" label="chalcocite"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="19419" end="19428" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108212" start="19433" end="19440" title="azurite" label="azurite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="19485" end="19493" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="19712" end="19721" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="19935" end="19941" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="19946" end="19956" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46826" start="20142" end="20154" title="Ahtna people" label="Ahtna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q28281" start="20223" end="20244" title="Upper Tanana language" label="Upper Tanana speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385649" start="20295" end="20306" title="Eyak people" label="Eyak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="20357" end="20371" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="20393" end="20407" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit people"/>
<link wikidata="Q127641" start="20522" end="20534" title="Vitus Bering" label="Vitus Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230618" start="20679" end="20690" title="Port Etches" label="Port Etches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269870" start="20694" end="20713" title="Hinchinbrook Island (Alaska)" label="Hinchinbrook Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397984" start="21268" end="21281" title="Tazlina River" label="Tazlina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="21725" end="21736" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="21922" end="21937" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607332" start="22304" end="22323" title="Henry Tureman Allen" label="Henry Tureman Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="22419" end="22430" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="22466" end="22476" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q636108" start="22728" end="22746" title="Frederick Schwatka" label="Frederick Schwatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="22876" end="22884" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="23038" end="23060" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608717" start="23390" end="23403" title="Stephen Birch" label="Stephen Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="23550" end="23562" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032400" start="23571" end="23588" title="Guggenheim family" label="Guggenheim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q689745" start="24161" end="24198" title="Copper River and Northwestern Railway" label="Copper River and Northwestern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79607" start="24250" end="24257" title="Cordova, Alaska" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074916" start="24285" end="24292" title="Chitina, Alaska" label="Chitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q590790" start="24297" end="24305" title="McCarthy, Alaska" label="McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24888" end="24901" title="Cape Yakutaga" label="Cape Yakutaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24906" end="24920" title="Controller Bay" label="Controller Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193912" start="25021" end="25028" title="Katalla, Alaska" label="Katalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q771013" start="25178" end="25185" title="Icy Bay" label="Icy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25266" end="25279" title="Kushtaka Lake" label="Kushtaka Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="25346" end="25374" title="Trans-Alaska Pipeline System" label="Trans-Alaska Pipeline System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="25727" end="25746" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="26018" end="26024" title="Denali National Park" label="Denali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907745" start="26102" end="26114" title="Bob Marshall (wilderness activist)" label="Bob Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q878956" start="26159" end="26174" title="Ernest Gruening" label="Ernest Gruening"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="26251" end="26277" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056509" start="26522" end="26539" title="Kennicott Glacier" label="Kennicott Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400386" start="26621" end="26636" title="Harold L. Ickes" label="Harold L. Ickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="26652" end="26673" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536552" start="27439" end="27460" title="George B. Hartzog Jr." label="George B. Hartzog Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4998407" start="27881" end="27909" title="Bureau of Outdoor Recreation" label="Bureau of Outdoor Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="27928" end="27953" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q516594" start="28197" end="28213" title="Walter J. Hickel" label="Walter J. Hickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q881854" start="28343" end="28362" title="Keith Harvey Miller" label="Keith Harvey Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978245" start="28385" end="28405" title="National Scenic Area (United States)" label="National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="28502" end="28537" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q942318" start="28908" end="28921" title="Rogers Morton" label="Rogers Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q841646" start="29790" end="29807" title="national preserve" label="national preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941315" start="29938" end="29953" title="Morris K. Udall" label="Morris K. Udall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="29990" end="30037" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132998" start="30569" end="30593" title="National Recreation Area" label="National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="30641" end="30652" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q624036" start="30667" end="30677" title="filibuster" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="30871" end="30883" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="30896" end="30911" title="Antiquities Act" label="Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q893745" start="30935" end="30952" title="national monument" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="33541" end="33559" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="33603" end="33617" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q604604" start="34048" end="34110" title="Kluane / Wrangell–St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek" label="Kluane / Wrangell–St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="34204" end="34210" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="34211" end="34230" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="34324" end="34336" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="34339" end="34346" title="reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="34351" end="34361" title="Dall sheep" label="Dall sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="34419" end="34450" title="Wrangell–Saint Elias Wilderness" label="Wrangell–Saint Elias Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="34514" end="34529" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="35098" end="35127" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="36138" end="36177" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="36189" end="36203" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="36730" end="36743" title="braided river" label="braided river"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="36995" end="37005" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q218425" start="37170" end="37182" title="Picea mariana" label="Black spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720096" start="37235" end="37240" title="Alnus crispa" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q247753" start="37242" end="37254" title="Ledum groenlandicum" label="Labrador tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q146967" start="37268" end="37277" title="Vaccinium uliginosum" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075786" start="37433" end="37439" title="muskeg" label="muskeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="37486" end="37491" title="sedge" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21122" start="37536" end="37554" title="Equisetum palustre" label="Equisetum palustre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159020" start="37565" end="37574" title="eleocharis palustris" label="spikerush"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="37677" end="37682" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882220" start="37830" end="37842" title="white spruce" label="white spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q469576" start="37963" end="37976" title="quaking aspen" label="quaking aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76971" start="37981" end="37992" title="paper birch" label="paper birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q149471" start="38100" end="38113" title="Populus balsamifera" label="balsam poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="38189" end="38198" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12363071" start="38300" end="38309" title="graminoid" label="graminoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467207" start="38315" end="38319" title="forb" label="forb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="38585" end="38596" title="Northwestern wolf" label="timber wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="38598" end="38610" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="38612" end="38622" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130753746" start="38658" end="38665" title="Porcupine caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044439" start="38667" end="38673" title="North American cougar" label="Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="38825" end="38838" title="Mountain goat" label="Mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="38857" end="38867" title="Dall sheep" label="Dall sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708653" start="38956" end="38961" title="Alaska moose" label="Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336049" start="39071" end="39090" title="Wood bison" label="Canadian wood bison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39157" end="39163" title="Copper River (British Columbia)" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074901" start="39168" end="39181" title="Chitina River" label="Chitina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="39224" end="39233" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="39235" end="39256" title="North American beaver" label="North American beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="39258" end="39271" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="39273" end="39282" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="39284" end="39295" title="American marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="39297" end="39309" title="North American river otter" label="river otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="39311" end="39318" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="39325" end="39331" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q674275" start="39333" end="39346" title="Arctic ground squirrel" label="Arctic ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q9490" start="39351" end="39367" title="flying squirrels" label="flying squirrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q326998" start="39369" end="39381" title="hoary marmot" label="hoary marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25311" start="39383" end="39390" title="Least weasel" label="weasels"/>
<link wikidata="Q41085321" start="39392" end="39398" title="American ermine" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="39400" end="39413" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="39434" end="39439" title="voles" label="voles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185540" start="39454" end="39458" title="collared pika" label="pika"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="39508" end="39514" title="Cetaceans" label="whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="39526" end="39531" title="orcas" label="orcas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="39533" end="39541" title="humpback whale" label="humpback"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="39546" end="39557" title="gray whales" label="gray whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q738564" start="39569" end="39575" title="Dall’s porpoise" label="Dall’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="39580" end="39595" title="harbor porpoise" label="harbor porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="39598" end="39609" title="harbor seal" label="harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379732" start="39615" end="39634" title="California sea lion" label="California sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q431981" start="39665" end="39681" title="Steller sea lion" label="Steller sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="39776" end="39793" title="sea otter" label="Alaskan sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="39926" end="39939" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="40071" end="40078" title="Chinook salmon" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q475211" start="40080" end="40084" title="chum salmon" label="chum"/>
<link wikidata="Q934874" start="40086" end="40090" title="coho salmon" label="coho"/>
<link wikidata="Q673380" start="40092" end="40096" title="pink salmon" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="40101" end="40108" title="sockeye salmon" label="sockeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q469946" start="40152" end="40162" title="lake trout" label="lake trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717060" start="40164" end="40179" title="cutthroat trout" label="cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q327067" start="40181" end="40193" title="Dolly Varden trout" label="Dolly Varden"/>
<link wikidata="Q81014" start="40195" end="40210" title="Arctic grayling" label="Arctic grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="40215" end="40228" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q348917" start="40249" end="40257" title="eulachon" label="eulachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q144700" start="40259" end="40265" title="burbot" label="burbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q326570" start="40267" end="40282" title="round whitefish" label="round whitefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="40284" end="40297" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q25703311" start="40299" end="40314" title="Pacific lamprey" label="Pacific lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540189" start="40316" end="40325" title="lake chub" label="lake chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136740" start="40343" end="40350" title="sculpin" label="sculpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="40485" end="40495" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178702" start="40497" end="40503" title="willow ptarmigan" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q205930" start="40508" end="40512" title="rock ptarmigan" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80858" start="40524" end="40534" title="Canada jay" label="Canada jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="40537" end="40542" title="common raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q846350" start="40545" end="40558" title="hermit thrush" label="hermit thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q460967" start="40562" end="40576" title="American robin" label="American robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28000" start="40579" end="40596" title="lesser yellowlegs" label="lesser yellowlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728057" start="40598" end="40615" title="wandering tattler" label="wandering tattler"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074928" start="40617" end="40633" title="hairy woodpecker" label="hairy woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16819" start="40639" end="40655" title="northern flicker" label="northern flicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q81515" start="40675" end="40687" title="Great horned owl" label="great horned"/>
<link wikidata="Q200724" start="40689" end="40699" title="Great gray owl" label="great gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q193192" start="40701" end="40714" title="Northern hawk owl" label="northern hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174466" start="40719" end="40729" title="boreal owl" label="boreal owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q733375" start="40751" end="40765" title="trumpeter swan" label="trumpeter swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190342" start="40767" end="40778" title="common loon" label="common loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25450" start="40780" end="40796" title="northern pintail" label="northern pintail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="40798" end="40806" title="mallards" label="mallards"/>
<link wikidata="Q704074" start="40812" end="40829" title="green-winged teal" label="green-winged teal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="40848" end="40891" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977917" start="40894" end="40988" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="42223" end="42259" title="Historic American Engineering Record" label="Historic American Engineering Record"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758500" wikidata="Q2110967" url="?curid=758500" title="Pritikin diet">
<text>The Pritikin diet is a low-fat, high-fibre diet which forms part of the &quot;Pritikin Program for Diet and Exercise&quot;, a lifestyle regimen originally created by Nathan Pritikin. The 1979 book describing the diet became a best-seller.

== Reception ==

The diet is based around low-fat, high-fibre food and limiting red meat, alcohol, and processed food. When it was launched, the diet was considered radical, but its precepts are now considered largely in alignment with mainstream nutritional advice. The Pritikin Diet has been categorized as a fad diet with possible disadvantages including a boring food choice, flatulence, and the risk of feeling too hungry.

Gastroenterologist David Hershel Alpers and colleagues described the Pritikin diet as &quot;nutritionally adequate, but the low fat content makes it unpalatable, and the likelihood of compliance is low.&quot;

== See also ==
* List of diets

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2110967" start="4" end="17" title="Pritikin diet" label="Pritikin diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969294" start="166" end="181" title="Nathan Pritikin" label="Nathan Pritikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455067" start="551" end="559" title="food faddism" label="fad diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="620" end="630" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808798" start="688" end="708" title="David Hershel Alpers" label="David Hershel Alpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349446" start="896" end="909" title="List of diets" label="List of diets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758503" wikidata="Q7448495" url="?curid=758503" title="Selion">
<text>A selion is a medieval open strip of land or a small field used for growing crops, usually owned by or rented to peasants. A selion of land was typically one furlong (660 ft) long and one chain (66 ft) wide, so one acre in area. However exact measurements could vary depending on the geography of the land. Monasteries or similar institutions were often bequeathed selions and derived an income by letting them.

==Relationship to strip farming==

A strip of land consisted of one, two or three selions, although Rackham reports that a strip might be &quot;a block of up to forty selions&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7448495" start="2" end="8" title="Selion" label="selion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14" end="22" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q188869" start="53" end="58" title="Field (agriculture)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="113" end="121" title="peasants" label="peasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q494083" start="158" end="165" title="furlong" label="furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q552299" start="188" end="193" title="chain (unit)" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81292" start="215" end="219" title="acre" label="acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="307" end="318" title="Monasteries" label="Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142845" start="450" end="455" title="Open-field_system" label="strip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758508" wikidata="Q102291" url="?curid=758508" title="Francis William Aston">
<text>Francis William Aston FRS (1 September 1877 – 20 November 1945) was a British chemist and physicist who won the 1922 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery, by means of his mass spectrograph, of isotopes in many non-radioactive elements and for his enunciation of the whole number rule. He was a fellow of the Royal Society and Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.

==Biography==

=== Early life ===

Francis Aston was born in Harborne, now part of Birmingham, on 1 September 1877. He was the third child and second son of William Aston and Fanny Charlotte Hollis. He was educated at the Harborne Vicarage School and later Malvern College in Worcestershire where he was a boarder. In 1893 Francis William Aston began his university studies at Mason College (which was then external college of University of London) where he was taught physics by John Henry Poynting and chemistry by Frankland and Tilden. From 1896 on he conducted additional research on organic chemistry in a private laboratory at his father&#x27;s house. In 1898 he started as a student of Frankland financed by a Forster Scholarship; his work concerned optical properties of tartaric acid compounds. He started to work on fermentation chemistry at the school of brewing in Birmingham and was employed by W. Butler &amp; Co. Brewery in 1900. This period of employment ended in 1903 when he returned to the University of Birmingham under Poynting as an Associate.

=== Research ===
With a scholarship from the University of Birmingham, he pursued research in physics following the discovery of X-rays and radioactivity in the mid-1890s. Aston studied the current through a gas-filled tube. The research, conducted with self-made discharge tubes, led him to investigate the volume of the Aston dark space.

After the death of his father, and a trip around the world in 1908, he was appointed lecturer at the University of Birmingham in 1909 but moved to the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge on the invitation of J. J. Thomson in 1910.

Birmingham University awarded him a BSc in Applied/Pure Science in 1910 and a DSc in Applied/Pure Science in 1914.

Joseph John Thomson revealed the nature of the cathode ray and then discovered the electron and he was now doing research on the positively charged &quot;Kanalstrahlen&quot; discovered by Eugen Goldstein in 1886. The method of deflecting particles in the &quot;Kanalstrahlen&quot; by magnetic fields was discovered by Wilhelm Wien in 1908; combining magnetic and electric fields allowed the separation of different ions by their ratio of charge and mass. Ions of a particular charge/mass ratio would leave a characteristic parabolic trace on a photographic plate, demonstrating for the first time that atoms of a single element could have different masses. The first sector field mass spectrometer was the result of these experiments.
It was speculations about isotopy that directly gave rise to the building of a mass spectrometer capable of separating the isotopes of the chemical elements. Aston initially worked on the identification of isotopes in the element neon and later chlorine and mercury.

In 1912, Aston discovered that the neon splits into two tracts, roughly corresponding to atomic mass 20 and 22. He named the mass 22 one &quot;meta-neon&quot;, a name he took from &quot;Occult Chemistry&quot;.

First World War stalled and delayed his research on providing experimental proof for the existence of isotopes by mass spectroscopy and during the war, Aston worked at the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough as a Technical Assistant working on aeronautical coatings.

After the war, he returned to research at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge and completed building his first mass spectrograph that he reported on in 1919. Subsequent improvements in the instrument led to the development of a second and third instrument of improved mass resolving power and mass accuracy. These instruments employing electromagnetic focusing allowed him to identify 212 naturally occurring isotopes. In 1921, Aston became a member of the International Committee on Atomic Weights and a fellow of the Royal Society and received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry the following year.

His work on isotopes also led to his formulation of the whole number rule which states that &quot;the mass of the oxygen isotope being defined [as 16], all the other isotopes have masses that are very nearly whole numbers&quot;, a rule that was used extensively in the development of nuclear energy. The exact mass of many isotopes was measured leading to the result that hydrogen has a 1% higher mass than expected by the average mass of the other elements. Aston speculated about the subatomic energy and the use of it in 1936.

&quot;Isotopes&quot; and &quot;Mass-spectra and Isotopes&quot; are his most well-known books.

=== Private life and death ===

In his private life, he was a sportsman, cross-country skiing and skating in winter time, during his regular visits to Switzerland and Norway; deprived of these winter sports during the First World War he started climbing. Between the ages of 20 and 25 he spent a large part of his spare time cycling. With the invention of motorised vehicles he constructed a combustion engine of his own in 1902 and participated in the Gordon Bennett auto race in Ireland in 1903. Not content with these sports he also engaged in swimming, golf, especially with Rutherford and other colleagues in Cambridge, tennis, winning some prizes at open tournaments in England Wales and Ireland and learning surfing in Honolulu in 1909. Coming from a musical family, he was capable of playing the piano, violin and cello at a level such that he regularly played in concerts at Cambridge. He visited many places around the globe on extensive travel tours starting from 1908 with a trip to Australia and New Zealand which he visited again in 1938–1939.

Aston was a skilled photographer and interested in astronomy. He joined several expeditions to study solar eclipses in Benkoeben in 1925, Sumatra in 1932, Magog in Canada on 31 August 1932 and Kamishari Hokkaido, Japan on June19th 1936. He also planned to attend expeditions to South Africa in 1940 and Brazil in 1945 in later life. He never married.

Aston died in Cambridge on 20 November 1945 at the age of 68.

==Legacy==
The lunar crater Aston was named in his honour.

The British Mass Spectrometry Society awards the Aston Medal in his honour.

==References==
==External links==
*Annotated bibliography for Francis Aston from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
* including the Nobel Lecture, 12 December 1922 &quot;Mass Spectra and Isotopes&quot;
*Aston biography from Cambridge
*History of Mass Spectrometry - Pioneers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102291" start="0" end="21" title="Francis William Aston" label="Francis William Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="22" end="25" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="78" end="85" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="90" end="99" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="117" end="141" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="177" end="194" title="mass spectrograph" label="mass spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="199" end="207" title="isotopes" label="isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920462" start="272" end="289" title="whole number rule" label="whole number rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="314" end="327" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="342" end="368" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699290" start="432" end="440" title="Harborne" label="Harborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536562" start="628" end="643" title="Malvern College" label="Malvern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783621" start="748" end="761" title="Mason College" label="Mason College"/>
<link wikidata="Q470590" start="851" end="870" title="John Henry Poynting" label="John Henry Poynting"/>
<link wikidata="Q541695" start="888" end="897" title="Percy F. Frankland" label="Frankland"/>
<link wikidata="Q903994" start="902" end="908" title="William A. Tilden" label="Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="959" end="976" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="1150" end="1163" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="1197" end="1219" title="Fermentation (biochemistry)" label="fermentation chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="1483" end="1507" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1567" end="1573" title="X-rays" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1578" end="1591" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159201" start="1646" end="1661" title="gas-filled tube" label="gas-filled tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427934" start="1760" end="1776" title="Aston dark space" label="Aston dark space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="1930" end="1950" title="Cavendish Laboratory" label="Cavendish Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="1954" end="1963" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47285" start="1985" end="1998" title="J. J. Thomson" label="J. J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="2172" end="2183" title="cathode ray" label="cathode ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q905278" start="2279" end="2292" title="Anode ray" label="Kanalstrahlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61433" start="2313" end="2328" title="Eugen Goldstein" label="Eugen Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q57068" start="2443" end="2455" title="Wilhelm Wien" label="Wilhelm Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="2805" end="2822" title="mass spectrometer" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="3066" end="3073" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="3090" end="3094" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017299" start="3314" end="3330" title="Occult Chemistry" label="Occult Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3339" end="3354" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="3511" end="3539" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="3661" end="3681" title="Cavendish Laboratory" label="Cavendish Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="3728" end="3745" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647945" start="4074" end="4115" title="Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights" label="International Committee on Atomic Weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="4136" end="4149" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="4167" end="4191" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920462" start="4269" end="4286" title="whole number rule" label="whole number rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="4497" end="4511" title="Nuclear physics" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="4912" end="4932" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="4937" end="4944" title="ice skating" label="skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4990" end="5001" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5006" end="5012" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5057" end="5072" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129377" start="5182" end="5213" title="History of the automobile" label="invention of motorised vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="5231" end="5248" title="Internal combustion engine" label="combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342606" start="5292" end="5316" title="Gordon Bennett Cup in auto racing" label="Gordon Bennett auto race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="5418" end="5428" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5523" end="5528" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="5565" end="5573" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="5848" end="5859" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="5949" end="5958" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="6036" end="6043" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="6101" end="6116" title="Hokkaido, Japan" label="Hokkaido, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6201" end="6207" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="6328" end="6340" title="lunar crater" label="lunar crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708039" start="6341" end="6346" title="Aston (crater)" label="Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155647" start="6422" end="6433" title="Aston Medal" label="Aston Medal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="758512" wikidata="Q754655" url="?curid=758512" title="Locus Award">
<text>The Locus Awards are an annual set of literary awards voted on by readers of the science fiction and fantasy magazine &quot;Locus&quot;, a monthly magazine based in Oakland, California. The awards are presented at an annual banquet.

Originally a poll of &quot;Locus&quot; subscribers only, voting is now open to anyone, but the votes of subscribers count twice as much as the votes of non-subscribers. The award was inaugurated in 1971, and was originally intended to provide suggestions and recommendations for the Hugo Awards. They have come to be considered a prestigious prize in science fiction, fantasy and horror literature. &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; regards the Locus Awards as sharing the stature of the Hugo and Nebula Awards. 

Gardner Dozois holds the record for the most wins (43), while Neil Gaiman has won the most awards for works of fiction (18). Robert Silverberg has received the highest number of nominations (158).

== Frequently nominated ==
As of the 2021 awards, the following have had the most nominations:
==Categories==
*Locus Award for Best Novel (1971–1979)
**Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel (1980–)
**Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel (1980–)
**Locus Award for Best Horror Novel (1989–90, 1994, 2017–present)
***Locus Award for Best Horror/Dark Fantasy Novel (1991–93, 1996–97)
***Locus Award for Best Dark Fantasy/Horror Novel (1995, 1999)
**Locus Award for Best First Novel (1981–)
**Locus Award for Best Young Adult Book (2003–)
*Locus Award for Best Novella
*Locus Award for Best Novelette
*Locus Award for Best Short Story
*Locus Award for Best Magazine
*Locus Award for Best Publisher
*Locus Award for Best Anthology
*Locus Award for Best Collection
*Locus Award for Best Editor
*Locus Award for Best Artist
*Locus Award for Best Non-fiction/Art Book (discontinued)
*Locus Award for Best Illustrated and Art Book

==Inactive categories==
There are several categories that no longer receive Locus Awards:

*Locus Award for Best Original Anthology (1972–1975)
**1972: &quot;Universe 1&quot; edited by Terry Carr
**1973: &quot;Again, Dangerous Visions&quot; edited by Harlan Ellison
**1974: &quot;&quot; edited by Harry Harrison
**1975: &quot;Universe 4&quot; edited by Terry Carr
*Locus Award for Best Reprint Anthology/Collection (1972–1975)
**1972: &quot;World&#x27;s Best Science Fiction: 1971&quot; edited by Donald A. Wollheim and Terry Carr
**1973: &quot;The Best Science Fiction of the Year #2&quot; edited by Terry Carr
**1974: &quot;The Best Science Fiction of the Year #2&quot; edited by Terry Carr
**1975: &quot;Before the Golden Age&quot; edited by Isaac Asimov
*Locus Award for Best Fanzine (1971–1977)
**1971: &quot;Locus&quot;
**1972: &quot;Locus&quot;
**1973: &quot;Locus&quot;
**1974: &quot;Locus&quot;
**1975: &quot;Outworlds&quot;
**1976: &quot;Locus&quot;
**1977: &quot;Locus&quot;
*Locus Award for Best Single Fanzine Issue (1971)
**1971: &quot;Locus&quot;
*Locus Award for Best Critic (1974–1977)
**1974: Richard Geis
**1975: P. Schuyler Miller
**1976: Richard Geis
**1977: Spider Robinson
*Locus Award for Best Fan Writer (1971–1973)
**1971: Harry Warner, Jr.
**1972: Charlie Brown
**1973: Terry Carr
*Locus Award for Best Fan Critic (1971)
**1971: Ted Pauls
*Locus Award for Best Publisher - Hardcover (1975–1976)
**1975: Science Fiction Book Club
**1976: Science Fiction Book Club
*Locus Award for Best Publisher - Paperback (1975–1976)
**1975: Ballantine
**1976: Ballantine
*Locus Award for Best Paperback Cover Artist (1971–1973)
**1971: Leo &amp; Diane Dillon
**1972: Gene Szafran
**1973: Frank Kelly Freas
*Locus Award for Best Magazine Artist (1972–1973)
**1972: Frank Kelly Freas
**1973: Frank Kelly Freas
*Locus Award for Best Fan Artist (1971–1975)
**1971: Alicia Austin
**1972: Bill Rotsler
**1973: Bill Rotsler
**1974: Tim Kirk
**1975: Tim Kirk
*Locus Award for Best Fan Cartoonist (1971)
**1971: Bill Rotsler
*Locus Award for Best Convention (1971)
**1971: Noreascon

==References==
==External links==
* Excerpts and synopses for Locus winning and nominated novels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="4" end="16" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="124" end="129" title="Locus (magazine)" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="165" end="184" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="517" end="527" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="639" end="674" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="745" end="758" title="Nebula Awards" label="Nebula Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="762" end="776" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="824" end="835" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="887" end="904" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q595998" start="1071" end="1097" title="Locus Award for Best Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576795" start="1112" end="1154" title="Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q607354" start="1165" end="1199" title="Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404950" start="1210" end="1243" title="Locus Award for Best Horror Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Horror Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404950" start="1277" end="1323" title="Locus Award for Best Horror/Dark Fantasy Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Horror/Dark Fantasy Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404950" start="1346" end="1392" title="Locus Award for Best Dark Fantasy/Horror Novel" label="Locus Award for Best Dark Fantasy/Horror Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090893" start="1408" end="1440" title="Locus Award for Best First Novel" label="Locus Award for Best First Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722414" start="1451" end="1488" title="Locus Award for Best Young Adult Book" label="Locus Award for Best Young Adult Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008972" start="1498" end="1526" title="Locus Award for Best Novella" label="Locus Award for Best Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008964" start="1528" end="1558" title="Locus Award for Best Novelette" label="Locus Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008985" start="1560" end="1592" title="Locus Award for Best Short Story" label="Locus Award for Best Short Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894207" start="2043" end="2053" title="Universe 1 (Carr anthology)" label="Universe 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2070" end="2080" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690992" start="2095" end="2119" title="Again, Dangerous Visions" label="Again, Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="2136" end="2150" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q489193" start="2182" end="2196" title="Harry Harrison (writer)" label="Harry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078236" start="2211" end="2221" title="Universe 4" label="Universe 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2238" end="2248" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q908589" start="2382" end="2400" title="Donald A. Wollheim" label="Donald A. Wollheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2405" end="2415" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2486" end="2496" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2567" end="2577" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="2630" end="2642" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="2699" end="2704" title="Locus Magazine" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="3017" end="3035" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443070" start="3065" end="3080" title="Spider Robinson" label="Spider Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="3182" end="3192" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="3439" end="3449" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine"/>
</links>
</doc>
