<doc id="780055" wikidata="Q311280" url="?curid=780055" title="Sidney Crosby">
<text>Sidney Patrick Crosby (born August 7, 1987) is a Canadian professional ice hockey centre and captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins of the National Hockey League (NHL). Nicknamed &quot;Sid the Kid&quot; and dubbed &quot;The Next One&quot;, he was selected first overall by the Penguins in the 2005 NHL entry draft. Born and raised in Halifax, Crosby was considered one of the most lauded prospects in ice hockey history and is widely regarded as one of the greatest ice hockey players of all time.

During his two-year major junior career with the Rimouski Océanic, he earned many awards and led his club to the 2005 Memorial Cup final. Océanic and the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League retired Crosby&#x27;s jersey number 87 in 2019, and the QMJHL began presenting their Rookie of the Year award as the “Sidney Crosby Trophy” in 2025. Crosby debuted in the NHL during the 2005–06 season, recording 102 points and finishing as runner-up for the Calder Memorial Trophy as the NHL Rookie of the Year. At 18 years and 253 days, he is the youngest player to date to reach 100 points in an NHL season. By his second season, he led the NHL with 120 points to capture the Art Ross Trophy, becoming the youngest player and the only teenager to win a scoring title in any major North American sports league. That same season, Crosby won the Hart Memorial Trophy as the league&#x27;s most valuable player (MVP) and the Lester B. Pearson Award for most outstanding player as judged by his peers. He started the 2007–08 season with the team&#x27;s captaincy and subsequently led them to the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals, where they were defeated by the Detroit Red Wings in six games. The Penguins returned to the Finals against Detroit the following year and won in seven games; Crosby became the youngest captain in NHL history to win the Stanley Cup.

In 2009–10, he received the Mark Messier Leadership Award and scored 51 goals, winning the Maurice Richard Trophy as the NHL&#x27;s leading goal scorer. In early 2011, Crosby sustained a concussion that left him sidelined for the rest of the season and for most of the 2011–12 campaign. In 2014, Crosby again won the Hart Memorial Trophy as well as his second Art Ross Trophy (104 points) and his third Ted Lindsay Award. Crosby led Pittsburgh to Stanley Cup championships in 2016 and 2017, becoming the third player to win the Conn Smythe Trophy (playoff MVP) in consecutive years. In 2017, he won his second Richard Trophy and was named one of the 100 Greatest NHL Players in history.

Internationally, Crosby has represented Canada on numerous occasions. He won gold at the 2005 World Junior Championships, and was later named to Team Canada for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. Playing against the United States in the gold medal game, he scored the game-winning goal in overtime. Crosby captained Team Canada at the 2014 Winter Olympics, winning his second consecutive Olympic gold medal. A year later, he led his country to gold in the World Championship in Prague, thus becoming a member of the Triple Gold Club and the only player in the club to have captained all three winning teams. In 2016, Crosby captained Canada to gold in the World Cup of Hockey and was elected MVP by a unanimous vote. In 2025, Crosby captained Canada to a championship win in the inaugural 4 Nations Face-Off.

==Early life==

Crosby was born in the Grace Maternity Hospital in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on August 7, 1987, to Troy and Trina (née Forbes) Crosby. Crosby&#x27;s jersey number (87) and 2007 contract signing ($8.7 million per year) reflect his birthdate (8/7/87). Crosby grew up in nearby Cole Harbour and has a younger sister named Taylor. His father Troy was a goaltender who played for the Verdun Junior Canadiens in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL). He helped the team win the 1985 President&#x27;s Cup which lead them to the 1985 Memorial Cup. Troy was drafted 240th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in 1984, but never played at the NHL level. Growing up, Crosby admired Steve Yzerman and, like his father, was a Canadiens fan. Crosby began playing hockey by himself in his basement at the age of two, shooting pucks in a net that had the family dryer behind it, leading to a longstanding misconception that he was actually practising with the dryer; he learned to skate at age three.

From age 12 to 15, Crosby attended Astral Drive Junior High School. He was a straight-A student and, according to the vice-principal, &quot;an amazing role model, who was really kind to students in the learning centre and to special needs kids&quot;. At age 15, Crosby transferred to Shattuck-Saint Mary&#x27;s in Faribault, Minnesota to play with the school&#x27;s hockey program. While playing for the Rimouski Océanic of the QMJHL, Crosby went to Harrison Trimble High School in Moncton, New Brunswick, where he graduated in 2005.

==Playing career==

===Minor hockey===
Early in his minor hockey years, Crosby began attracting media attention for his play and gave his first newspaper interview at age seven. When Crosby was 13, Nova Scotia&#x27;s Minor Hockey Council refused to allow him to play midget, a level of minor hockey designated for 15- to 17-year-olds. His family sued but lost. The following year, he entered the midget level with the triple-A Dartmouth Subways and went on to score a combined 217 regular season and playoff points, leading Dartmouth to a second-place finish at the 2002 Air Canada Cup. He was named the MVP and Top Scorer awards at the national tournament at the tournament banquet held after the preliminary round and he finished the tournament with 24 points (11 goals and 13 assists) in 7 games. Crosby was called up as a 14-year-old to play two games with the Maritime Junior A Hockey League&#x27;s Truro Bearcats that season. Crosby had been drafted by the Bearcats in the 2001 MJAHL Draft as a 13-year-old.

During his midget season, Crosby appeared on the CBC&#x27;s &quot;Hockey Day in Canada&quot; telecast. He has recalled numerous instances in which opposing players intentionally attempted to injure him, as well as constant verbal abuse from parents on and off the ice. Parents taunted and threatened Crosby so harshly, he took to not wearing his jersey between tournament games while he waited to play so that he would not be recognized. Due to this treatment, he elected to play for the American hockey program at Shattuck-Saint Mary&#x27;s Boarding School, Minnesota for the 2002–03 hockey season. In 57 games with the Sabres, he recorded 72 goals and 162 points, leading the team to a U18 AAA national championship.

===Junior career===

====Rimouski Océanic (2003–2005)====
Crosby was selected first overall in the 2003 Midget Draft by the Rimouski Océanic of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL). In his first exhibition game, he scored eight points, leading his teammates to nickname him &quot;Darryl&quot; (in reference to Darryl Sittler&#x27;s ten-point NHL game in 1976). In his first regular season game in the QMJHL, he scored one goal and added two assists. He was named QMJHL Player of the Week for two consecutive weeks at the start of the season and won the honour four more times as the season progressed. He was named QMJHL Player of the Month and Canadian Hockey League (CHL) Player of the Week three times each. Crosby finished his rookie QMJHL season with 54 goals and 81 assists over 59 games to capture the Jean Béliveau Trophy as the league&#x27;s leading point-scorer. He was further recognized with the RDS/JVC Trophy (overall rookie of the year) and Michel Brière Memorial Trophy (most valuable player), becoming the first QMJHL player to win all three major awards at once. Rounding out Crosby&#x27;s accolades for the 2003–04 regular season were QMJHL All-Rookie and first All-Star team honours, as well as Offensive Rookie, Offensive Player and Personality of the Year Awards. As a team, the Océanic led the Eastern Division with 34 wins and 76 points. After receiving a first-round bye in the 2003 QMJHL playoffs, they defeated the Shawinigan Cataractes in the quarterfinals, then were eliminated by the Moncton Wildcats in the semifinals. Crosby recorded 16 points (7 goals and 9 assists) over 9 playoff games.

During the off-season, the World Hockey Association, a major professional league proposed to rival the NHL, held an entry draft on July 17, 2004. Holding the first overall selection, Toronto chose Crosby. The following month, it was reported that Crosby turned down a US$7.5 million contract over three years to play for Hamilton. Crosby told reporters that while &quot;it took a lot to say no to that much money&quot;, he &quot;work[ed] hard most of his life to play in the NHL&quot;. The contract would have paid him $2.5 million annually and an additional $2 million payout regardless of whether the WHA was realized as a legitimate league or not. However, it was not clarified how Hamilton could have signed Crosby, as Toronto held his WHA playing rights. Nevertheless, the WHA never materialized.

Returning to the Océanic for the 2004–05 season, Crosby continued dominating the league, leading the league with 66 goals, 102 assists and 168 points over 62 games to capture his second consecutive Beliveau Trophy. Joining Crosby on Rimouski&#x27;s top line were wingers Dany Roussin and Marc-Antoine Pouliot, who finished second and third in league-scoring with 116 and 114 points respectively. In addition to his scoring title, Crosby was once again awarded Most Valuable Player, Offensive Player and Personality of the Year, while repeating as a QMJHL First All-Star. The Océanic finished the regular season with the best record in the league, registering 45 wins and 98 points, including a league record-setting 28-game undefeated streak. They went on to capture the President&#x27;s Cup as QMJHL playoff champions, defeating the Halifax Mooseheads in the finals. Crosby led the playoffs with 31 points (14 goals and 17 assists) over 13 games, earning him the Guy Lafleur Trophy as postseason MVP. With their QMJHL championship, the Océanic qualified for the 2005 Memorial Cup, Canada&#x27;s national major junior tournament. Meeting the London Knights in the final, the Océanic were shut-out 4–0. Despite the loss, Crosby was named to the Tournament All-Star team and captured the Ed Chynoweth Trophy as the competition&#x27;s leading scorer with 11 points (6 goals and 5 assists) over 5 games. Knights forward Corey Perry was awarded the Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy as the MVP. Soon after, he attended the NHL prospect combine in preparation for the 2005 NHL entry draft.

The Rimouski Océanic retired jersey number 87 in Crosby&#x27;s honor in September 2019, and the QMJHL also retired the number for all of its teams.

===Pittsburgh Penguins (2005–present)===

====Rise to superstardom (2005–2007)====

Entering the 2005 NHL entry draft, Crosby was listed first overall in the NHL Central Scouting Bureau and International Scouting Services&#x27; respective rankings of prospects. He also won the Mike Bossy Trophy as the QMJHL&#x27;s best prospect. Crosby was selected first overall in the draft by the Pittsburgh Penguins on July 30, 2005. Due to the labour lockout that suspended the entire 2004–05 NHL season, positioning for the 2005 draft was conducted via a weighted lottery based on each team&#x27;s playoff appearances and draft lottery victories in the last four years. This lottery system led to the draft being popularly referred to as the &quot;Sidney Crosby Lottery&quot; or the &quot;Sidney Crosby Sweepstakes&quot;.

&quot;Sid the Kid&quot;, a nickname given to him by the media early in his career, made his NHL debut on October 5, 2005, against the New Jersey Devils, and registered an assist on the team&#x27;s first goal of the season, scored by Mark Recchi in a 5–1 loss. He scored his first NHL goal in the Penguins&#x27; home opener on October 8 against goaltender Hannu Toivonen of the Boston Bruins. Despite having registered two assists for a three-point night, the Penguins were defeated 7–6 in overtime. Crosby began his rookie season playing alongside Hall of Famer Mario Lemieux, though Lemieux was forced to retire due to an irregular heartbeat after having played just 26 games into the season. Near the midway point of the season, Penguins head coach Ed Olczyk was fired and replaced by Michel Therrien on December 15, 2005. The following day, Therrien designated Crosby as an alternate captain for the Penguins. The move drew criticism from some hockey pundits, including commentator Don Cherry, who claimed that Crosby did not have the experience for the position. Cherry said, &quot;An 18-year-old kid says he&#x27;s going to give us ideas. What, from the Quebec League, he&#x27;s going to give them ideas? Come on. That&#x27;s ridiculous.&quot; Although hopes were high in Pittsburgh for the club to succeed, largely in part to the beginning of Crosby&#x27;s NHL career and bolstered by the acquisitions of Sergei Gonchar, Žigmund Pálffy, and Mark Recchi, the Penguins still finished with the worst record in the Eastern Conference. Nevertheless, Crosby&#x27;s first NHL campaign was a personal success as he established franchise records in assists (63) and points (102) for a rookie, both of which were previously held by Mario Lemieux. He also scored 39 goals and became the youngest player in NHL history to score 100 points in a single season, and only the seventh rookie ever to hit the benchmark. Overall, Crosby finished sixth in the NHL scoring race and seventh in the NHL in assists. Among Canadian NHL players, he trailed only Joe Thornton and Dany Heatley. Throughout the season, Crosby had battled with Washington Capitals winger and 2004 first-overall pick Alexander Ovechkin for the rookie scoring lead. He finished second to Ovechkin&#x27;s 106 points and also lost to the Capitals forward for the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL rookie of the year. It marked the start of a rivalry that would help &quot;define the league&quot; for over a decade. Throughout his first season, Crosby was accused by opposing players and coaches of taking dives and complaining to officials, which was typically attributed to his youth. He became the first rookie to earn 100 penalty minutes and 100 points in the same season, which magnified his reputation for complaining to NHL officials. Hockey analyst Kelly Hrudey compared Crosby to Wayne Gretzky, who had a similar reputation as a &quot;whiner&quot; in his youth, and suggested that as Crosby matured, he would mellow out and his reputation would fade.
In his second NHL season, Crosby built on his rookie success. On October 28, 2006, Crosby scored his first NHL hat-trick in an 8–2 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers. His success against the Flyers continued as just over six weeks later, on December 13, he recorded the first six-point game of his career (one goal and five assists). The multi-point effort vaulted Crosby into the NHL scoring lead, which he would retain for the remainder of the season. He finished the 2006–07 with 36 goals and 84 assists for 120 points in 79 games to become the first teenager to lead the NHL in scoring since Wayne Gretzky in 1980. Being only 19 years old at the time, he became the youngest player in NHL history to win the Art Ross Trophy and the youngest scoring champion in any major North American professional sport.
Crosby&#x27;s second NHL season also saw significant improvements for the Penguins franchise as a whole, as the emergence of rookie forwards, eventual Calder Trophy-winner Evgeni Malkin and runner-up Jordan Staal complemented the club&#x27;s offence. As a result, the Penguins jumped from last place in the Eastern Conference the previous season to fifth for the club&#x27;s first playoff appearance since 2001. Playing the Ottawa Senators in the opening round, Crosby scored a goal in his Stanley Cup playoff debut in a 6–3 loss. He finished the series with five points in all five games as the Penguins were ousted in a 4–1 by the eventual Stanley Cup runner-up.

====Beginning of Penguins captaincy, runner–up and first Stanley Cup title (2007–2009)====
Crosby was named Pittsburgh&#x27;s team captain on May 31, 2007, making him (at 19 years, 9 months, and 24 days) the youngest team captain in NHL history. During the season, the Penguins offered him the captaincy, but he turned it down. In the press conference naming him the team captain, he explained:
&quot;I just thought it wasn&#x27;t right for me. As a team, we were playing great and you don&#x27;t want to disrupt things like that. Individually, I was not ready to accept that responsibility quite yet. Going through the playoffs and having that experience has probably given me more confidence. I understand there is going to be a lot more responsibility on my shoulders with this, but it&#x27;s something I&#x27;m ready for, I feel very comfortable with it and I&#x27;m just excited to get things going.&quot;

At the NHL&#x27;s annual awards show two weeks later in June 2007, Crosby completed a rare off-season &quot;hat-trick&quot;, winning the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Lester B. Pearson Award in addition to his previously clinched Art Ross Trophy. He became the youngest player in NHL history to win the Lester B. Pearson, and only the second youngest player ever to win the Hart (after Gretzky). He became the youngest player ever to be named to the NHL&#x27;s first All-Star team.

With Crosby&#x27;s initial three-year, entry-level contract set to expire at the end of the following season, the Penguins signed him to a five-year, $43.5 million contract extension on July 10, 2007, ensuring his stay with the Penguins through the 2012–13 season. Midway through the subsequent season, Crosby recorded a Gordie Howe hat-trick on December 20 in a game against the Boston Bruins. His first assist came 55 seconds into the first period. At 8:26 of the same period, Crosby scored to give the Penguins a 2–0 lead. Then, five minutes and nine seconds into the second frame, Crosby fought ex-Penguin defenceman Andrew Ference to complete the hat-trick. This was Crosby&#x27;s first NHL fight. In the NHL&#x27;s first Winter Classic (with a record crowd of 71,217 fans in attendance), Crosby scored the shootout winner in heavy snowfall to defeat the Buffalo Sabres. However, two and a half weeks later, on January 18, 2008, Crosby suffered a high ankle sprain crashing leg-first into the boards in a game against the Tampa Bay Lightning. As a result, he missed the 2008 All-Star Game, to which he was named a starter. After missing 21 games, he returned on March 4 against the Tampa Bay Lightning and earned an assist on a Max Talbot goal. However, two games after his return, he felt his ankle was not up to shape and decided that he needed more time for it to heal. Crosby consequently sat out of the Penguins&#x27; next seven games and returned on March 27, 2008, to help the Penguins defeat the New York Islanders 3–1. Despite his injury-shortened campaign, Crosby still managed 72 points (24 goals, 48 assists) in just 53 games. Crosby&#x27;s absence from the Penguins&#x27; line-up served as a stepping stone for teammate Evgeni Malkin, who, now in his second season, was developing into a superstar in his own right. Picking up the offensive slack, Malkin finished second in league scoring to Washington Capitals winger Alexander Ovechkin and was also a Hart Memorial Trophy nominee as MVP honours also went to Ovechkin. In addition to Crosby&#x27;s return to the line-up late in the season, the Penguins acquired star winger Marián Hossa from the Atlanta Thrashers at the trade deadline, placing the club in a strong position to make a deep playoff run. Pittsburgh finished the season as Atlantic Division champions and just two points shy of the first-seeded Montreal Canadiens. In a rematch of the previous year&#x27;s opening round, the Penguins began the 2008 playoffs facing the Ottawa Senators, whom they quickly swept in four games. After then defeating the New York Rangers and archrival Philadelphia Flyers, each in five games, the Penguins reached the final round for the first time since 1992, to face the Detroit Red Wings. After being shut-out as a team for the first two games of the series, Crosby scored the first two goals of game three as the series shifted to Pittsburgh to fuel a 3–2 win. The Penguins lost the next game and despite staving off defeat in game five, they were overcome by the Red Wings in six games. Crosby finished the playoffs with 27 points (six goals and 21 assists in all 20 games), tying forward and Conn Smythe-winner Henrik Zetterberg (13 goals and 14 assists in 22 games) for the playoff scoring lead.
Early in the following season, on October 18, 2008, Crosby scored one goal and three assists against the Toronto Maple Leafs to surpass benchmarks of 100 goals, 200 assists, and 300 points for his career. On the play in which Crosby scored, teammate Evgeni Malkin assisted to record his own 200th point. As a result, Crosby had a team trainer cut the puck in half so both players could commemorate the achievement. Minor injury troubles kept Crosby from five games early in the season as he was listed day-to-day, but he was, for the most part, able to bounce back from the previous injury-riddled season and stay healthy. He recorded 33 goals and 70 assists for 103 points to finish third in league scoring, as Evgeni Malkin captured his first career Art Ross Trophy. Entering the 2009 playoffs as the defending Prince of Wales Trophy winners, the Penguins defeated the Philadelphia Flyers in the opening round before meeting the Washington Capitals for a highly publicized second-round matchup. The series was heavily followed as it pitted Ovechkin of the Capitals against both Crosby and Malkin, who together finished as the league&#x27;s top three scorers that season. In the second game, Crosby and Ovechkin recorded matching three-goal efforts for their first career playoff hat-tricks in a 4–3 Capitals victory. Despite being down 2–0 in the series, Crosby and the Penguins won the next three games and eventually defeated the Capitals in a seventh and deciding game, in which Crosby added another two goals. Following a sweep of the Carolina Hurricanes in the Eastern Conference finals, Crosby opted against recent NHL tradition and picked up the Prince of Wales Trophy, which he had left untouched the previous year. In explanation of the change of heart, Crosby said, &quot;We didn&#x27;t touch the trophy last year, and obviously we didn&#x27;t have the result we wanted ... Although we haven&#x27;t accomplished exactly what we want ... we can still enjoy it.&quot; The Penguins met the Detroit Red Wings for the second straight year in the Stanley Cup Finals, and this time Crosby won his first Stanley Cup title in seven games. At 21 years, 10 months, and 5 days, Crosby became the youngest NHL captain to win the Stanley Cup since 1895. (The youngest captain to lead his team to the Stanley Cup in the history of the trophy is Mike Grant of the 1895 Montreal Victorias, who was 21 years and 2 months at the time.) In the deciding game 7, Crosby was forced to watch all but 32 seconds of the third period from the bench after suffering a knee injury less than halfway through the second period due to a hit from Wings&#x27; winger Johan Franzén. Following the game, Crosby was criticized by Detroit centre Kris Draper for neglecting to shake hands with some of Detroit&#x27;s players in the handshake line, most notably Wings&#x27; defenceman and captain Nicklas Lidström. An irate Draper was quoted as saying, &quot;Nick was waiting and waiting, and Crosby didn&#x27;t come over to shake his hand. That&#x27;s ridiculous, especially as their captain.&quot; Crosby replied afterward, saying, &quot;I just won the Stanley Cup. I think I have the right to celebrate with my teammates. I know it&#x27;s not easy waiting around... I understand if they don&#x27;t feel like waiting around. But you know what? It&#x27;s the easiest thing to do in the world, to shake hands after you win. I had no intentions of trying to skip guys and not shake their hands. I think that was a pretty unreasonable comment.&quot;

====Injury–plagued years, back-to-back Stanley Cups and Conn Smythe Trophies (2009–2018)====
In the 2009–10 season, Crosby tied Tampa Bay Lightning centre Steven Stamkos for the lead in goals scored, with 51 goals each, both earning the Rocket Richard Trophy. He also garnered 58 assists for a total of 109 points, enough to tie with Washington Capitals winger and captain Alexander Ovechkin for second in league points, trailing only Vancouver Canucks&#x27; centre Henrik Sedin&#x27;s, who ended the season with 112. Crosby was also named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy and Ted Lindsay Award. Crosby won the Mark Messier Leadership Award, getting recognized as a &quot;superior leader within the sport, setting a positive example through on-ice performance, motivation of team members and a dedication to the community&quot;. This was the second time he had received this honour, the other being in January 2007, during the award&#x27;s first year when it was presented monthly. He was also included on NHL&#x27;s all-decade second team of 2000s. Crosby&#x27;s defending Stanley Cup champion and fourth-seeded Penguins were defeated in the second round of the 2010 playoffs, losing to the Montreal Canadiens in seven games. Crosby had 19 points (six goals, 13 assists) in all 13 games in the 2010 playoffs, though through seven games against the Canadiens, he had only one goal and four assists. Game 7 was also the last game to be played at Mellon Arena, the Penguins&#x27; home rink since the start of the franchise. On July 27, 2010, Crosby joined his mentor from 2005 to 2006, his rookie year Mario Lemieux to be the first to skate on the new ice at the Consol Energy Center. The two skated for about five minutes before being joined on the ice by a group of young hockey fans all wearing Lemieux&#x27;s 66 or Crosby&#x27;s 87 jerseys.


In the 2010–11 season, Crosby had a 25-game point streak, which began on November 5, 2010, against the Anaheim Ducks and ended on December 28, 2010, against the New York Islanders. During this streak, he had 27 goals (including three hat-tricks) and 24 assists for 51 points. This streak was tied for 11th-longest point streak in NHL history. During this streak, Crosby scored his 200th NHL goal in a 4–1 win over the Calgary Flames on Flames&#x27; goaltender Mikka Kiprusoff on November 27 and he was named First Star of the Month in both November and December, respectively. On January 3, 2011, Crosby was selected as a 2011 All-Star, along with teammates Evgeni Malkin, Marc-André Fleury and Kris Letang. However, neither Crosby nor Malkin were available to play in the All-Star Game due to injuries, and rookie Jeff Skinner (along with Paul Stastny) were named as replacements. In consecutive games – the 2011 NHL Winter Classic on January 1, 2011, against the Washington Capitals and then January 5 against the Tampa Bay Lightning – Crosby suffered hits to his head from Dave Steckel and Victor Hedman respectively. After experiencing several concussion symptoms, Crosby did not return for the rest of the season, including the 2011 playoffs, where the fourth-seeded Penguins would lose in seven games in the first round coincidentally to the Lightning, who finished as the fifth seed and surrendered a 3–1 series lead in the process. The Penguins were further crippled when Evgeni Malkin suffered a torn ACL and MCL on February 4, taking him out for the rest of the season and leaving the Penguins without their two highest-scoring players. Despite Crosby&#x27;s injury and subsequent absence for the final 41 games of the season, he finished as the Penguins&#x27; leading scorer. His 66 points in 41 games were 16 points ahead of the second-highest team scorer, defenceman Kris Letang. In so doing, Crosby set an NHL record for fewest games played by an NHL team&#x27;s points leader.

Crosby missed the first 20 games of the 2011–12 season due to the lingering effects of his concussion or possibly multiple. He returned on November 21, 2011, in a game against the New York Islanders, scoring two goals and two assists in a 5–0 shutout for the Penguins. However, after playing another seven games – scoring a total of 12 points in eight games – Crosby&#x27;s concussion-like symptoms returned on December 5, possibly following an elbow hit by Boston Bruins centre David Krejčí in his eighth game of the season. Despite passing a successful ImPACT test, Crosby decided not to return on the ice until he felt perfectly fine, stating that he also must &quot;listen to [his] body&quot;. Crosby returned to action on March 15, 2012, recording two assists on goals by Chris Kunitz and Pascal Dupuis in a 5–2 win against the New York Rangers. Despite only playing 22 games, Crosby recorded eight goals and 29 assists for 37 points. He later credited neurologists at UPMC and chiropractic neurologist Ted Carrick with helping him return to hockey. Crosby&#x27;s return in advance of the 2012 playoffs resulted in many experts predicting that the Penguins would win their second Stanley Cup title in four years, and though the Penguins were accordingly picked to oust the Philadelphia Flyers in their first-round series, it was acknowledged that it would be a tough series for both teams. The Flyers shocked the Penguins by winning the first three consecutive games, the third of which saw the teams combine for 158 penalty minutes. After an 8–4 loss in game 3, Crosby was widely criticized for his conduct during the game, and for his testy post-game interview. When asked about an incident where Flyers winger Jakub Voráček had dropped his glove and Crosby swatted it away with his stick before Voráček could pick it up, Crosby replied, saying, &quot;I don&#x27;t like any guy on their team there, so his glove was near me, went to pick it up, and I pushed it, so yeah, that&#x27;s... [...] I don&#x27;t like them. Because I don&#x27;t like them. I don&#x27;t like... I don&#x27;t like any guy on their team.&quot; When the interviewer suggested that he could have skated away, Crosby replied, &quot;Skate away? Yeah, well, I didn&#x27;t that time.&quot; The Penguins went on to win the next two games, but ultimately lost the series in game 6. Crosby finished with three goals and five assists in six games.
On June 28, 2012, the Penguins announced that Crosby agreed to a 12-year, $104.4 million contract extension set to keep Crosby in Pittsburgh through to the end of the 2024–25 NHL season. The start of the 2012–13 season was postponed until January 2013 due to the owners locking out the players as negotiations took place to solidify a new collective agreement for the players. During this time, Crosby was a regular attendee of meetings taking place between National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA) representatives and NHL owners. The lock-out began on September 15, 2012, and ended on January 6, 2013, with the NHL regular season beginning on January 19. During the 119-day lock-out, Crosby was often questioned about his future plans should the lockout persist, and said on more than one occasion that he was considering contract offers from various teams in European leagues (where many NHL players went so that they could continue playing in a professional capacity while waiting for the lock-out to end or for the NHL season to be officially cancelled). Crosby continued to practice and participated with other NHL players who did not go overseas in several exhibition games open to the public. With the season finally underway in January 2013, Crosby set the pace for scoring, totalling 31 points (nine goals and 22 assists) through the first 21 games. He remained hot through March, scoring another 25 points (six goals and 19 assists) in 15 games as the Penguins went unbeaten over this stretch. However, his regular season came to an abrupt end on March 30 in a home game against the New York Islanders. Crosby&#x27;s teammate Brooks Orpik unleashed a slapshot which caught Crosby in the mouth, causing the centreman to lose several teeth. Crosby was down on the ice for several minutes before the medical staff was able to help him to the dressing room with Crosby holding a towel over his face. Initially, the prognosis was not severe, but it was discovered a short while later that Crosby had broken his jaw and would require several rounds of reconstructive dental surgery. He missed the final 12 games of the regular season and finished fourth in the scoring race, losing the title to Tampa Bay&#x27;s Martin St. Louis by four points. Crosby returned to the ice May 5 for the Penguins&#x27; second game against their first-round playoff opponents, the New York Islanders, ironically, the team who Pittsburgh played when Crosby was injured weeks prior. Despite two goals from Crosby, Pittsburgh lost 3–2, tying the series at one game apiece. The top-seeded Penguins would ultimately prevail 4–2 in the series over the eighth-seeded Islanders with Crosby scoring nine points (three goals and six assists) in the five games in which he played. Crosby and the Penguins moved on to face the Ottawa Senators in the second round, with Crosby scoring a hat-trick in game 2 of the series. Pittsburgh quickly defeated Ottawa four games to one in the series with a still-hot Crosby finishing the series with four goals and two assists. The Eastern Conference finals came down to what many felt were the two best teams in the conference: Pittsburgh and Boston Bruins goaltender Tuukka Rask put on an outstanding performance, shutting down Pittsburgh&#x27;s potent offence with the help of a stifling defensive effort from his teammates. The Penguins were held to just two goals in the series, with Rask stopping 134 of 136 shots on goal (.985%). Crosby, who was strong for the Penguins in the regular season and through the first two rounds of the playoffs was held off the score sheet entirely, finishing the series with no goals and no assists on 13 shots within the four games as the Bruins swept the Penguins in four-straight games. In the off-season, Crosby was awarded his second Ted Lindsay Award and finished as runner-up to the Hart Memorial Trophy and Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy.
Crosby put together a healthy and productive campaign in 2013–14, playing 80 games for the first time since the 2009–10 season. Crosby finished the season with 36 goals and a league-leading 68 assists, marking the first time in his career that he led the league in assists. He also finished with a league-high 104 points, winning the Art Ross Trophy for the second time in his career. He also went on to win the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Ted Lindsay Award. Finishing first overall in the Metropolitan Division, the Penguins were matched-up with a new division rival, the Columbus Blue Jackets, in the first round of the 2014 playoffs. Despite a very back-and-forth series and not a single goal by Crosby, the Penguins defeated the Jackets in six games to advance to a second-round matchup with the New York Rangers. Going into their second-round series with the Rangers, Crosby looked to end a long playoff goal drought, which dated back to the 2013 conference finals against the Boston Bruins. After dropping game 1 at home, Crosby broke his goal drought in game 2 as the Pens tied the series at 1–1 heading back to Madison Square Garden. The Penguins would capitalize on their game 2 win, taking the next two games and eliminating the Rangers&#x27; home-ice advantage. However, the Rangers rebounded, winning games 5, 6 and 7, sending the Penguins home without a prize for the fifth straight season and surrendering a 3–1 series lead. The team&#x27;s collapse prompted Penguins ownership to fire general manager Ray Shero, replacing him with Jim Rutherford, the former general manager of the Carolina Hurricanes. Rutherford&#x27;s first action as GM was to fire Dan Bylsma as head coach, and on June 25, he announced that Mike Johnston was the new head coach.

Crosby finished the 2014–15 season with the highest point-per-game average and a total of 84 points (28 goals, 56 assists), trailing only New York Islanders centre and captain John Tavares (86 points) and Art Ross winner and Dallas Stars winger and captain Jamie Benn (87 points). On November 26, 2014, Crosby scored his 800th career point against the Toronto Maple Leafs, becoming the sixth-fastest player in NHL history to reach that milestone. On April 1, 2015, in a game against goaltender Steve Mason of the Philadelphia Flyers, Crosby scored his 300th career NHL goal. Despite a strong start to the season, the injury-plagued Penguins narrowly entered the playoffs as the Eastern Conference&#x27;s second wild card and eighth seed, beating the Boston Bruins by two points in the standings for the eighth and last playoff spot. Facing the Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning New York Rangers in the opening round of the 2015 playoffs, Crosby helped even the series with two goals in game 2 on Rangers&#x27; goaltender Henrik Lundqvist. Despite this, the Penguins were defeated by the Rangers in five games and was eliminated in the first round for the first time since the 2012 playoffs.
In the 2015 off-season, the Penguins went through a major overhaul of their roster, adding a number of offensive players such as acquiring winger Phil Kessel from the Toronto Maple Leafs. Despite a line-up laced with some of the world&#x27;s finest offensive talents, Crosby struggled to score points, as he and the team had for much of the Johnston era. By the time Johnston was fired on December 12, 2015, after posting a 15–10–3 record through 28 games, some media outlets began speculating that Crosby had aged out of his prime scoring years. On December 16, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; wrote, &quot;Sidney Crosby has widely been regarded as the NHL&#x27;s best player since he burst on the scene as a rookie in 2005 ... But Crosby just hasn&#x27;t been himself this season, scoring just six goals and 13 assists for 19 points in the first 29 games and sitting with a plus/minus of minus-seven. All players go through slumps, but it is clear that the Crosby we knew has been on the decline for some time.&quot; His slow start was capped off by not being selected as a starter for the 2016 NHL All-Star Game. However, under new head coach Mike Sullivan, the 28-year-old turned his season around, outscoring all NHL players from December 12 through the end of the season. On February 2, Crosby scored three-straight goals against the Ottawa Senators for his first natural hat-trick in more than five years. Four days later, Crosby scored his 900th, 901st and 902nd career NHL points to fuel a 3–2 overtime comeback victory over the Florida Panthers. He tallied at least one point in 15 of Pittsburgh&#x27;s 16 games in March, including six multi-point efforts, and was subsequently named the NHL&#x27;s First Star of the Month. On April 2, Crosby recorded his 600th NHL assist as the Penguins clinched their berth in the 2016 playoffs. Six days later, he scored in overtime against the Washington Capitals to secure home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs. Crosby finished the 2015–16 season with 36 goals, 49 assists and 85 points in 80 games, including a career-high nine game-winning goals, and was voted team MVP for the sixth time in his career. His two-way game also received league-wide praise, with Hockey Hall of Fame head coach Scotty Bowman stating that Crosby would be a good candidate for the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the league&#x27;s best defensive forward. Crosby&#x27;s comeback also impressed Wayne Gretzky, who said, &quot;He had a tough start, but the sign of an elite athlete is a guy that battles through it. He didn&#x27;t point any fingers, he just battled through it, and I don&#x27;t think there is any question the last 40 or so games, he made a case for the MVP. He was that good. He went to another level.&quot; On May 7, Crosby was named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy which was eventually given to Chicago Blackhawks winger Patrick Kane. He finished as the first runner-up with 800 points and 11 first-place votes. After losing to New York Rangers in the past two playoffs, the Penguins eliminated the Rangers in the first round, winning in five games, after losing to the Rangers by the same series margin in the first round the previous year. Crosby led the team in scoring with three goals and five assists for eight points in the series. The Penguins then eliminated the Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning Washington Capitals in six games, without much offensive production from either Crosby (two assists) or Malkin (one goal and one assist). Advancing to their first conference finals since 2013, Crosby scored the overtime winner against the Tampa Bay Lightning in game 2. The goal was scored 40 seconds into overtime on Lightning goaltender Andrei Vasilevskiy for a 3–2 win, the fastest overtime goal in Penguins&#x27; playoff history, and the first of his career in the playoffs. In the following game, he scored the game-winning goal in a 4–2 victory. After dropping the next two games, Crosby scored his third game-winning goal of the series on Vasilevskiy in game 6, forcing a final game in Pittsburgh. Defeating the Lightning 2–1 in game 7, Crosby helped his team win the Eastern Conference championship, advancing to the Stanley Cup Finals against the San Jose Sharks and prevent the Lightning from clinching a second consecutive appearance in the Stanley Cup Finals of their own. In the Finals, the Penguins defeated the Sharks in six games to earn Crosby his second Stanley Cup title. He became the ninth player to win the Stanley Cup twice as well as two Olympic gold medals. Finishing the playoffs with 19 points (six goals and 13 assists), including the primary helper on the Cup-winning goal scored by Kris Letang, Crosby was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as the MVP of the playoffs.
Crosby missed the first six games of the 2016–17 season after being diagnosed with a concussion in practice just a few days before the season opener against the Washington Capitals. Upon his return, he scored 30 goals in his first 45 games, and on February 16, 2017, he registered an assist on a Chris Kunitz goal against the Winnipeg Jets to reach 1,000 NHL points, doing so in just his 757th game to become the 12th-fastest (and 11th-youngest) player to reach that milestone. He also participated in his first NHL All-Star Game since 2007, winning the shooting accuracy segment of the Skills Competition. He was named team MVP and finished the season with 89 points (44 goals, 45 assists) in 75 contests played. His 89 points tied with Chicago Blackhawks&#x27; Patrick Kane as the runner(s) up for the Art Ross Trophy. It marked the eighth time he finished a season in the top-three in NHL scoring, tying Mario Lemieux, Stan Mikita and Phil Esposito for the third-most instances in history behind only Wayne Gretzky (15 times) and Gordie Howe (12 times). With his 44 goals, Crosby captured the Rocket Richard Trophy for the second time in his career. Crosby was also named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy and Ted Lindsay Award with both awards eventually going to Edmonton Oilers centre and captain Connor McDavid. Entering the 2017 playoffs as the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Penguins defeated the Columbus Blue Jackets in five games before meeting the back to back Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning Washington Capitals in the second round for the second consecutive year. After winning the first two games on the road, Crosby sustained a concussion after suffering an injury from a slash and cross-check from both Alexander Ovechkin and Matt Niskanen in game 3. He missed game 4 but returned to practice the next day and played in game 5. The Penguins eventually eliminated the Capitals in game 7, with Crosby assisting on the series-winning goal by Bryan Rust. The Penguins then defeated the Ottawa Senators in a gruelling seven-game series to secure their second consecutive trip to the Stanley Cup Finals. Crosby had the primary assist on the series-clinching goal, scored by Chris Kunitz in double overtime. Facing the eighth-seeded Nashville Predators in the Finals, Pittsburgh jumped out to a two-game lead, despite being outplayed for long stretches in both games. The Predators responded by tying up the series, winning games 3 and 4 at home. In game 5, the Penguins&#x27; captain delivered a dominant performance, adding three assists in a 6–0 win to pass Lemieux for most Stanley Cup Finals points (20) in franchise history. After defeating the Predators 2–0 in game 6, the Penguins became the first team to repeat as Stanley Cup champions since the 1997–98 Detroit Red Wings, and the first to do so in the salary cap era (since 2005–06). Crosby also won his second consecutive Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs, only the third player to do so after Bernie Parent (1974, 1975) and Mario Lemieux (1991, 1992). He finished second in scoring behind Evgeni Malkin with 27 points (eight goals and 19 assists) in 24 games.
In the 2017–18 season, Crosby appeared in all 82 of Pittsburgh&#x27;s regular season games for the first time in his career, finishing with 29 goals and 60 assists for 89 points. On February 11, 2018, he scored his 400th NHL goal against Jake Allen of the St. Louis Blues, becoming the 95th player in NHL history to reach the milestone as the Penguins defeated the Blues 4–1. On March 21, he recorded his 700th career NHL assist on a Jake Guentzel goal in a 5–3 victory over the Montreal Canadiens. The Penguins began their 2018 playoff campaign against their inner-state rival, the Philadelphia Flyers. In game 1 of the Battle of Pennsylvania, Crosby recorded a natural hat-trick in a 7–0 win. On April 18, in game 4, Crosby passed Mario Lemieux as the Penguins&#x27; all-time playoff points leader with 173. The Penguins ultimately defeated the fifth-seeded Flyers in six games, with Crosby recording six goals and seven assists for 13 points. After the series, retired Hockey Hall of Fame centre Bryan Trottier said of Crosby, &quot;Sid has a wonderful gift to maintain his composure and not get rattled. You like the emotion he shows, too. I think he fires his team up, and that&#x27;s why he&#x27;s wearing the &#x27;C&#x27; [for captain].&quot; The Penguins were eventually eliminated in game 6 of the second round by the second-seeded and eventual Stanley Cup champion Washington Capitals with Capitals&#x27; centre Evgeny Kuznetsov scoring the winning goal in overtime. Crosby finished with 21 points (nine goals and 12 assists) in all 12 games, pushing his career playoff total to 185, tied with Steve Yzerman for tenth-most all-time.

====Early playoff exits (2018–2022)====
On December 31, 2018, Crosby played his 900th NHL game in a 3–2 win over the Minnesota Wild, becoming the second player in Penguins history to reach the mark. On January 3, 2019, Crosby was selected to play in the NHL All-Star Game for the eighth time in his career. He scored four goals and four assists, helping the Metropolitan Division to victory; his efforts won him his first All-Star MVP award, making him the sixth in NHL history to have won that award after having won the Conn Smythe Trophy and Hart Memorial Trophy. During the 2018–19 season, Crosby passed Mario Lemieux to become the Penguins&#x27; all-time leader in games played (916), and moved into second place on the Pens&#x27; all-time scoring list with his 440th career goal in a 5–1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens on March 3. Two days later, he became the 48th player in NHL history to score at least 1,200 career points against the Florida Panthers. He finished the season with 100 points (35 goals and 65 assists), the first time he has reached the 100-point mark since scoring 104 points in 2013–14. Crosby finished 4th in voting for the Selke Trophy and became a Hart Trophy finalist for the seventh time in his career as the Selke eventually went to St. Louis Blues centre Ryan O&#x27;Reilly and the Hart getting awarded to Tampa Bay Lightning winger Nikita Kucherov, respectively. He was also elected team-MVP.

Crosby was selected to the NHL All-Decade First Team in January 2020. The Penguins finished fifth in the Eastern Conference in the COVID-19 pandemic-shortened 2019–20 season, facing the 12th-seeded Montreal Canadiens in the Eastern Conference qualifying round. The Canadiens upset the Penguins in four games, eliminating Pittsburgh on August 7, 2020, Crosby&#x27;s 33rd birthday.

In the pandemic-shortened 2020–21 season, Crosby led the team in scoring with 62 points (24 goals and 38 assists), and was the recipient of the team&#x27;s MVP Award and the Players&#x27; Player Award. He was also a finalist for the Ted Lindsay Award which was eventually awarded to Edmonton Oilers centre and captain Connor McDavid. On February 20, 2021, Crosby became the first player in Penguins history to play 1,000 games with the franchise in a 3–2 win over the New York Islanders. The team clinched a playoff berth for the 15th consecutive season under Crosby&#x27;s captaincy, the longest active postseason streak among all teams in the North American professional sports leagues. However, the Penguins were eliminated in the first round of the 2021 playoffs by the New York Islanders for the second time in three seasons.

On February 15, 2022, Crosby scored his 500th career goal on a power play against the Philadelphia Flyers, becoming the 46th player to score that many goals in NHL history and the 18th to have scored them all for a single team. He was the second Penguin to score 500 goals, after Lemieux. Continuing to hit new milestones, in an April 10 game against the Nashville Predators he recorded a goal and an assist in regulation time, before scoring the overtime-winning goal, his 1400th point in the NHL. Crosby finished the 2021–22 season with 31 goals and 53 assists for 84 points in 69 games played, while the Penguins were third in the Metropolitan Division. They advanced into the 2022 playoffs to meet the New York Rangers. With both Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang&#x27;s contracts up in the summer, there was some question as to whether this would be the final outing for the core of the Penguins franchise in Crosby&#x27;s era. In game 3 of the series against the Rangers, Crosby recorded his 197th career playoff point, passing Paul Coffey for sixth place in all-time playoff point standings. Two days later, he managed a goal and two assists in the Penguins&#x27; 7–2 victory in game 4 and 3–1 series lead, becoming the sixth player in league history to record 200 career points in the playoffs. Midway through the second period of game 5 in Madison Square Garden, with the Penguins up 2–0, Crosby took an elbow to the head from Rangers defenceman Jacob Trouba and exited the game. In his absence, the Rangers rallied to win 5–3 and stave off elimination, and Crosby&#x27;s departure was widely cited as the game&#x27;s turning point. Head coach Mike Sullivan said that Crosby was being evaluated. After missing game 6, Crosby returned for game 7, alongside absent team goaltender Tristan Jarry and winger Rickard Rakell. However, the Penguins lost to the Rangers in game 7 in overtime with Rangers winger Artemi Panarin scoring the winner for the Rangers to take a 4–3 win in the game and 4–3 win in the series and the Penguins were eliminated from the 2022 playoffs.

====Recent years (2022–present)====
In the 2022 off-season, it was reported that Crosby played a key role in facilitating a new deal between the Penguins and Evgeni Malkin, after the latter had initially announced he would test free agency. Crosby began the 2022–23 season by registering two goals and four assists in his first two games, being named the first star of the first week while leading the league in scoring. After strong initial results, the team struggled with a lengthy losing streak, but Crosby recorded his 900th career assist on a Jake Guentzel goal on November 5, 2022, a 3–2 loss to the Seattle Kraken. He was the sixth-fastest player to this feat in NHL history. On April 8, Crosby registered his 1500th career point in a 5–1 win against the Detroit Red Wings, the fifteenth NHL player to hit that milestone, and in the sixth-fewest games (1188). As the poor performance of the team continued into the spring, the Penguins&#x27; league-best 16-year playoff streak increasingly came into jeopardy, and by the final weeks of the season they were battling the Florida Panthers and the New York Islanders for the two Eastern Conference wildcard positions. A 5–2 loss to the Chicago Blackhawks on April 11, at that moment the team at the bottom of the standings, in the penultimate game of the season, combined with an Islanders victory the following day, sealed the Penguins&#x27; missing the playoffs for the first time since 2005–06, Crosby&#x27;s rookie season and for the first time in Crosby&#x27;s captaincy. This happened despite Crosby playing all 82 games for only the second time in his career, and doing so alongside Evgeni Malkin for the first time. Much recrimination ensued among fans and commentators, with many calling for the sacking of Penguins general manager Ron Hextall for his perceived mistakes in constructing the team in the previous 2022 off-season. Hextall and team executive Brian Burke were both fired the day after the season ended, with owners Fenway Sports Group promising &quot;the goal of contending for the Stanley Cup has not changed.&quot;

Shortly the 2023–24 season, his 19th season in the NHL, on November 4, 2023, Crosby skated in his 1,200th game, recording an assist in a 10–2 victory over the San Jose Sharks. About the achievement, Crosby said: &quot;You don&#x27;t just love it when it&#x27;s good to you. You love it when it&#x27;s tough and when it&#x27;s difficult too. When that passion&#x27;s not there, or that love&#x27;s not there, it&#x27;s probably time to stop doing it.&quot; On April 1, 2024, following a 5–2 win over the New York Rangers, Crosby became the second player in NHL history to average a point per game for the 19th consecutive season, joining Wayne Gretzky. On April 11, Crosby recorded his 1,000th NHL assist on a goal by Erik Karlsson in a 6–5 overtime win over the Detroit Red Wings to become the 14th player in league history and seventh fastest player to hit the mark (at 1,269 games). Crosby finished the season playing in all 82 contests played with 42 goals, 52 assists and 94 points recorded. Despite his continuation of individual productivity, the Penguins finished three points out of a playoff spot marking the first time in Crosby&#x27;s tenure where the Penguins missed the playoffs in two consecutive seasons.

On September 16, 2024, Crosby signed a two-year $17.4 million extension ($8.7 million average) to remain with the Penguins. On November 23, Crosby scored his 600th NHL goal against goaltender Karel Vejmelka of the Utah Hockey Club, becoming the 21st player in league history and second player in Penguins history to achieve the feat as the Penguins lost the game 6–1.

==International play==





===Junior===
Crosby debuted internationally for Canada at the 2003 U-18 Junior World Cup. He was the youngest player on the under-18 team, having turned 16 shortly before the beginning of the tournament. After seven consecutive gold medals at the tournament, Canada lost in the bronze medal game to the Czech Republic 8–2. He scored four goals and six points over five tournament games.

Crosby went on to compete in two World Junior Championships with Canada under-20 team. When he was named to the team in December 2003, he became the fifth 16-year-old to represent Canada at the tournament, following Jay Bouwmeester, Jason Spezza, Eric Lindros and Wayne Gretzky. Competing in the 2004 World Junior Championships, he then became the youngest player to score a goal in the history of the tournament at 16 years, 4 months, and 21 days when he scored against Switzerland in a 7–2 win. This record would last until the 2012 World Juniors when Aleksander Barkov of Finland scored a goal aged 16 years, 4 months. Crosby finished the tournament with two goals and three assists in six games, helping Canada to a silver medal finish. The following year, he returned for Canada at the 2005 World Junior Championships. He improved to six goals and three assists as Canada earned gold. Crosby stated the following year that his most memorable ice hockey moment was winning his World Junior gold medal.

===Men&#x27;s===
After completing his rookie season with the Pittsburgh Penguins, Crosby competed in the 2006 IIHF World Championship as an alternate captain for Canada. Scoring a tournament-best eight goals and eight assists in nine games, he became the youngest player ever to win a World Championship scoring title. Despite his performance, Canada failed to medal, being shut-out by Finland 5–0 in the bronze medal game. Crosby was named the tournament&#x27;s top forward and to the competition&#x27;s all-star team.
After being omitted from Canada&#x27;s Olympic team in 2006, Crosby was named to the Canadian roster on December 30, 2009, as an alternate captain for the 2010 Winter Olympics. He scored the game-winning shootout goal for Canada in the second game of the preliminary round against Switzerland. After going pointless in the quarterfinal and semifinal against Russia and Slovakia respectively, Crosby scored the winning goal 7 minutes and 40 seconds into overtime against the United States in the gold medal game. The goal has later become known as the &quot;Golden Goal&quot; due to it being scored in the gold medal game. It is also regarded by some as &quot;Canada&#x27;s most iconic sports moment&quot;.

Following the Penguins&#x27; second-round elimination in the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs, Crosby declined an invitation to join Canada midway through the 2010 IIHF World Championship. Crosby was selected to represent Canada at the 2014 Winter Olympics and was later named team captain. Canada won gold, with Crosby contributing one goal and two assists in six games. He scored his only goal in the final against Sweden, further establishing his reputation as &quot;a player who rises up in big games&quot;. In 2015, Crosby captained Canada to its first World Championship title since 2007, with the team winning all 10 games and scoring 66 goals. Crosby, scoring four goals and seven assists in nine games, became the 26th member of the Triple Gold Club. He is the first member of the club to captain all three championship teams, and the first member to be a first overall NHL draft pick.

In 2016, Hockey Canada named Crosby captain for the 2016 World Cup of Hockey. Crosby, who led the tournament in scoring with 10 points, helping Canada win the championship, and was named the most valuable player. He joined Bobby Orr and Wayne Gretzky as the only players to win the Conn Smythe Trophy, Hart Memorial Trophy and World Cup MVP. Canada&#x27;s head coach Mike Babcock described Crosby as a serial winner, saying, &quot;He&#x27;s that high-end competitor. He&#x27;s a good leader because he tries to do it right all the time. He demands a lot out of himself. In doing so, he demands a lot out of his teammates.&quot; In 2020, he was named to the IIHF All-Time Canada Team and the Men&#x27;s All-Decade Team.

On October 3, 2021, Crosby was one of the first three players named to roster for Canada&#x27;s team for the 2022 Winter Olympics, alongside Connor McDavid and Alex Pietrangelo. However, due to the NHL&#x27;s subsequent decision not to attend the Winter Olympics as a result of the Omicron variant&#x27;s impacts on scheduling, Crosby was unable to compete. He said afterward that &quot;I&#x27;ve been fortunate enough to be part of two. I definitely feel for the guys who have missed numerous opportunities.&quot;

On June 28, 2024, Crosby was one of the first six players selected to represent Team Canada in the 2025 4 Nations Face-Off. He was later named captain of the team on January 30, 2025. Canada won the tournament with Crosby contributing 5 points.

==Player profile==

===Style of play===
As captain and first-line centre for Canada, Crosby played with different line mates in almost every game as the coaching staff struggled to find players capable of keeping pace with the superstar centre at the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver, and again at the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi. Crosby&#x27;s fellow countryman and Olympic teammate, Rick Nash, was questioned by the media about this, at one point saying, &quot;I think he&#x27;s a tough guy to keep up with. He&#x27;s so fast. The way he thinks about the game seems like it&#x27;s far beyond everyone else&#x27;s process. It&#x27;s the same thing in the last Olympics, keep shuffling around until you found something that fit.&quot; Team Canada&#x27;s assistant coach in Vancouver, Ken Hitchcock, recalled, &quot;Sid thinks at a level, when the other team has the puck, that&#x27;s above everyone else in the league [NHL]. His anticipation when the other team has the puck is so high, he knows where it&#x27;s going ahead of time. He can pick off passes, make you make errors. And then he also knows where people are located on the ice, so he can turn that turnover into a scoring chance.&quot;

Other professional NHL players have particularly noted Crosby for his backhand shot. For example, in his column for &quot;The Players&#x27; Tribune&quot; in July 2015, Jonathan Quick of the Los Angeles Kings praised Crosby for having &quot;the best backhand shot&quot; in the NHL. &quot;His blade is almost completely flat, which combined with his ridiculous forearm strength gives him the ability to go forehand to your five hole instantly or turn it over to the backhand and roof it (a lot of guys can&#x27;t do this with a flat blade).&quot;

===Reputation===

Noted for his on-ice vision, passing ability, leadership, work ethic, and complete overall game, Crosby is considered to be one of the greatest players of all time. Bobby Orr named Crosby among the five best players in the history of NHL. Wayne Gretzky said of Crosby in September 2016, &quot;He&#x27;s proven over and over that he&#x27;s the best player in the game today. And it seems like the more important the game, the more impact that he makes on a game.&quot; Gordie Howe was also impressed by Crosby, &quot;I met him and I&#x27;ve seen him play. Unless you put two guys on him, he&#x27;ll kill you in a game.&quot; In October 2016, Mario Lemieux praised his protégé for his ability to play both sides of the puck: &quot;I think he&#x27;s more of a complete player. Defensively, I think he&#x27;s improved a lot over the last couple of years.&quot; In an April 2018 article for &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, other players, teammates and coaches highlighted his work ethic and strive for greatness as a major factor to Crosby&#x27;s lasting success. &quot;While his natural ability – powerful skating, pistol-quick hands, uncommon feel – made him a phenom, his creative, distinct capacity for work has enabled him to stay atop the NHL.&quot; In March 2019, Pittsburgh head coach Mike Sullivan described Crosby as &quot;best 200-foot player in the game&quot; and the &quot;heartbeat&quot; of the Penguins.

On January 27, 2017, in a ceremony during the All-Star Weekend in Los Angeles, Crosby was named one of the 100 Greatest NHL Players in history. In that same year, Fox Sports ranked Crosby 15th on their &quot;21 greatest athletes of the 21st century (so far)&quot; list, and TSN named him the eighth-best NHL player of all time. Four months before the 2022 Winter Olympics, Rob Rossi of &quot;The Athletic&quot; called him &quot;arguably North America&#x27;s most dominant team-sport Winter Olympian.&quot; In a survey conducted by Sportsnet in June 2017, Crosby was voted by Canadians to be the greatest athlete of the 21st century. A poll conducted by the NHLPA in March 2018 of more than 500 players resulted in Crosby being voted the &quot;most difficult to play against, best role model, best team player, the player you&#x27;d want to win one game, and the player who would be a great coach upon retirement&quot;. In April 2018, Crosby was chosen as Nova Scotia&#x27;s &quot;Best athlete ever&quot; by the Nova Scotia Sport Hall of Fame. In March 2019, an anonymous survey conducted by &quot;The Athletic&quot; showed that Crosby was regarded the best all-around NHL player by his peers.

Considered a generational talent and a franchise player, drafting Crosby changed the fortunes of a struggling Pittsburgh Penguins. It helped secure funding for a new arena and ended speculation that the franchise would relocate to another city. In 2005–06, his presence helped Pittsburgh&#x27;s attendance increase by 33%. Crosby&#x27;s arrival also aided in reinvigorating and expanding the roots of hockey in the Pittsburgh area. Penguins CEO and president David Morehouse said, &quot;We were in last place, we were last in revenues, we were last in attendance, our TV ratings were minimal and we were in the oldest building in the NHL... We were able to draw attention to us as a franchise because of the drafting of Sidney Crosby and the subsequent success we had.&quot;

Crosby is well known for welcoming new teammates with open arms. Former teammate and NHL veteran Matt Cullen has said that &quot;[he watches] how he makes time to make a real effort to include guys and go out of his way to spend time with younger guys, and I know that goes a long way.&quot; Crosby often does research on new members of the organization, even players who have not yet made the roster, and makes sure to greet them.

Some current players who grew up watching Crosby, such as Jack Hughes of the New Jersey Devils, have said that they tried to emulate other players as emerging youth hockey stars because &quot;playing at his [Crosby&#x27;s] level just wasn&#x27;t realistic.&quot;

==Jerseys==
Crosby&#x27;s number 87 Pittsburgh Penguins jersey was the top seller on the NHL&#x27;s website from September 2005 to February 2008. It has continued to be among the top-selling jerseys since his rookie season. In January 2005, an Air Canada baggage handler in Montreal stole Crosby&#x27;s red Canada jersey from the World Junior Hockey Championship. It was recovered later in a mailbox. His white jersey from the tournament was temporarily delisted from an auction while the red one was missing. It eventually sold for $22,100, which went to youth hockey charities and 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake relief.

Less than a year later, one of Crosby&#x27;s game-worn sweaters disappeared. The jersey he wore in his first NHL game, played against the New Jersey Devils, disappeared from his father&#x27;s luggage during a flight from Pittsburgh to Buffalo. The jersey was later found at the Pittsburgh International Airport between a piece of equipment and a stairwell. Crosby&#x27;s jersey from his third NHL game was the highest-selling NHL jersey in an auction for Hurricane Katrina relief – it sold for $21,010. During an online auction held by the NHL and the NHL Players Association to benefit Hockey Fights Cancer, Crosby&#x27;s game-worn jersey from the first period of the 2007 All-Star Game earned the most money. Crosby&#x27;s sold for $47,520, more than eight times the next highest price—$5,681 for the jersey worn by Brendan Shanahan of the New York Rangers.

Following Crosby&#x27;s Olympic gold medal victory with Canada in 2010, it was announced that his stick and glove were missing. It was initially suspected that they might have been stolen; Reebok Canada offered a reward of CAD$10,000 for their return, &quot;no questions asked&quot;. On March 10, the items were found: Crosby&#x27;s stick had been placed in a shipment bound for the International Ice Hockey Federation Hall of Fame in Saint Petersburg, Russia, (the shipment was intercepted in Toronto) and his glove was found in a hockey bag belonging to Olympic teammate and Boston Bruins&#x27; centre Patrice Bergeron, whose stall was beside Crosby&#x27;s in the locker room.

==Personal life==

Crosby rarely discusses his personal life and avoids social media. Andy O&#x27;Brien, Crosby&#x27;s fitness trainer for over 15 years, has said: &quot;He [Crosby] wants to be one of the guys and doesn&#x27;t really seek to separate himself or get special treatment in any way... He takes a lot of enjoyment in the regular, simple things in life and having a normal, ordinary routine&quot;. Greg Powers described Crosby as essentially the brother of Lemieux&#x27;s son Austin, as he lived with Lemieux&#x27;s family in Sewickley, Pennsylvania, from 2005 until 2010. In May 2010, Crosby purchased his own home in the same area. In June 2006, he had bought his first house on Grand Lake in Halifax, Nova Scotia.

On May 29, 2010, it was announced that Crosby would sign the richest endorsement contract in NHL history with Reebok, expected to pay Crosby $1.4 million per year for five to seven years. In 2015, he signed a six-year endorsement contract with Adidas. Crosby also has endorsement deals with Bell, Tim Hortons, and Gatorade. Regarded as one of Canada&#x27;s &quot;legendary goal-scorers and storied leaders&quot;, Crosby was featured in Canada Post&#x27;s &quot;NHL Great Canadian Forwards&quot; stamp collection, alongside Phil Esposito, Guy Lafleur, Darryl Sittler, Mark Messier, and Steve Yzerman. In September 2016, he won an Emmy Award for his role in &quot;There&#x27;s No Place Like Home With Sidney Crosby&quot;. He also won for his participation in the &quot;Merci Sidney&quot; video that followed his return to Rimouski for his QMJHL jersey retirement ceremony.

Crosby has a younger sister named Taylor who is a hockey goaltender. Like her brother, she went to high school at Shattuck-Saint Mary&#x27;s in Faribault, Minnesota, to play with the school&#x27;s hockey program. In 2014, Taylor joined the Northeastern Huskies women&#x27;s ice hockey team as a freshman at Northeastern University in Boston. In 2015, she transferred to Minnesota&#x27;s St. Cloud State University and played with the St. Cloud State Huskies women&#x27;s ice hockey team through to graduation at the end of the 2017–18 school year.

Crosby continues to be active in the community in Cole Harbour, Nova Scotia. He created the Sidney Crosby Foundation in 2009, an organization committed to helping charities benefiting children. In 2015, he started a hockey school in Cole Harbour. His &quot;Little Penguins Program&quot; has provided free equipment and lessons to more than ten thousand local youngsters in Pittsburgh.

==Career statistics==

===Regular season and playoffs===

* 1999–2000 stats are from &quot;Age-old question: Cole Harbour hockey association bars peewee player from bantam tourney&quot;. The Halifax Daily News. April 5, 2000.

===International===
==Honours and achievements==


==Records==

===IIHF===
* Youngest player to win a World Championship scoring title

===Pittsburgh Penguins===
* Assists (63) and points (102) in a season by a rookie
* Most regular season overtime goals (13)
* Most games played
* Most playoff points
* Most playoff assists
* Most playoff games
* Most points in the Stanley Cup Finals (20)
* Most playoff multi-point games

===NHL===
* First rookie to record 100 points and 100 penalty minutes in a season
* Youngest player to record 100 points in a season (18 years, 253 days)
* Youngest player to record 200 career points (19 years and 207 days)
* Youngest player to record 2 consecutive 100-point seasons (19 years, 215 days). 
* Youngest player voted to the starting line-up in an All-Star Game
* Youngest Art Ross Trophy and Lester B. Pearson Award winner
* Youngest player to be named to the first All-Star team
* Youngest player to lead NHL playoffs in scoring (20 years, 9 months, and 28 days)
* Youngest NHL captain to win Stanley Cup (21 years, 10 months, and 5 days)
* 6th player in NHL history to win multiple Conn Smythe Trophies.
* Fewest games played by an NHL team&#x27;s leading scorer (his 66 points in 41 games were the most of any player on the 2010–11 Penguins squad)

==See also==
* List of Pittsburgh Penguins players
* List of NHL players with 50 goal seasons
* List of NHL players with 100-point seasons
* List of NHL players with 1,000 points
* List of NHL players with 1,000 games played
* List of NHL players with 500 goals

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311280" start="0" end="21" title="Sidney Crosby" label="Sidney Patrick Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="71" end="81" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="82" end="88" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="93" end="100" title="Captain (ice hockey)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="108" end="127" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="135" end="157" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q311280" start="181" end="192" title="Sidney Crosby" label="Sid the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q722955" start="216" end="228" title="The Next One (ice hockey)" label="The Next One"/>
<link wikidata="Q784519" start="252" end="265" title="List of first overall NHL draft picks" label="first overall"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="289" end="309" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="330" end="337" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="515" end="527" title="major junior" label="major junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268664" start="544" end="560" title="Rimouski Océanic" label="Rimouski Océanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162644" start="608" end="625" title="2005 Memorial Cup" label="2005 Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="649" end="682" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="869" end="883" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550236" start="899" end="905" title="Point (ice hockey)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="941" end="963" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="1100" end="1113" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="1161" end="1176" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="1259" end="1293" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major North American sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="1328" end="1348" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="1370" end="1390" title="most valuable player" label="most valuable player"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="1405" end="1428" title="Lester B. Pearson Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="1496" end="1510" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006542" start="1575" end="1598" title="2008 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2008 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="1632" end="1649" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049079" start="1720" end="1734" title="2009 Stanley Cup Finals" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="1820" end="1831" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="1837" end="1844" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550433" start="1862" end="1891" title="Mark Messier Leadership Award" label="Mark Messier Leadership Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317522" start="1906" end="1911" title="Goal (ice hockey)" label="goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="1925" end="1947" title="Maurice Richard Trophy" label="Maurice Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="1996" end="2000" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="2021" end="2031" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="2103" end="2119" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="2124" end="2128" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="2237" end="2254" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Ted Lindsay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190374" start="2310" end="2314" title="2016 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995070" start="2319" end="2323" title="2017 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="2362" end="2380" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28665614" start="2484" end="2508" title="100 Greatest NHL Players" label="100 Greatest NHL Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="2562" end="2568" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090382" start="2611" end="2642" title="2005 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2005 World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q218258" start="2687" end="2707" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="2711" end="2720" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="2742" end="2755" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="2794" end="2811" title="game-winning goal" label="game-winning goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="2815" end="2823" title="overtime (ice hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672792" start="2861" end="2881" title="Ice hockey at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401" start="2982" end="3000" title="2015 IIHF World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3004" end="3010" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357311" start="3042" end="3058" title="Triple Gold Club" label="Triple Gold Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143398" start="3182" end="3201" title="2016 World Cup of Hockey" label="World Cup of Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q125134058" start="3305" end="3333" title="2025 4 Nations Face-Off" label="inaugural 4 Nations Face-Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875689" start="3375" end="3399" title="Grace Maternity Hospital" label="Grace Maternity Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="3403" end="3423" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599003" start="3497" end="3510" title="jersey number" label="jersey number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982406" start="3623" end="3635" title="Cole Harbour, Nova Scotia" label="Cole Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="3697" end="3707" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032428" start="3727" end="3750" title="Verdun Junior Canadiens" label="Verdun Junior Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="3758" end="3791" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q974282" start="3833" end="3853" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup (QMJHL)" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999334" start="3877" end="3894" title="1985 Memorial Cup" label="1985 Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="3934" end="3952" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q599962" start="3956" end="3960" title="1984 NHL entry draft" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q440395" start="4024" end="4037" title="Steve Yzerman" label="Steve Yzerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875679" start="4374" end="4405" title="Astral Drive Junior High School" label="Astral Drive Junior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490730" start="4623" end="4649" title="Shattuck-Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="Shattuck-Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q177861" start="4653" end="4673" title="Faribault, Minnesota" label="Faribault, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268664" start="4743" end="4759" title="Rimouski Océanic" label="Rimouski Océanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666136" start="4789" end="4817" title="Harrison Trimble High School" label="Harrison Trimble High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q457334" start="4821" end="4828" title="Moncton" label="Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="4830" end="4843" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869192" start="4926" end="4938" title="minor hockey" label="minor hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599683" start="5440" end="5459" title="2002 Air Canada Cup" label="2002 Air Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240616" start="5739" end="5770" title="Maritime Junior A Hockey League" label="Maritime Junior A Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848027" start="5778" end="5792" title="Truro Bearcats" label="Truro Bearcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="5938" end="5941" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="5955" end="5975" title="Hockey Day in Canada" label="Hockey Day in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490730" start="6404" end="6457" title="Shattuck-Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="Shattuck-Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Boarding School, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268664" start="6733" end="6749" title="Rimouski Océanic" label="Rimouski Océanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="6757" end="6790" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166725" start="6928" end="6942" title="Darryl Sittler" label="Darryl Sittler"/>
<link wikidata="Q847451" start="7263" end="7285" title="Canadian Hockey League" label="Canadian Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q902961" start="7427" end="7447" title="Jean Béliveau Trophy" label="Jean Béliveau Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943348" start="7574" end="7603" title="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy" label="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841035" start="7833" end="7849" title="Michel Bergeron Trophy" label="Offensive Rookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q904103" start="7851" end="7867" title="Telus Cup – Offensive" label="Offensive Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q226075" start="7872" end="7895" title="Paul Dumont Trophy" label="Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q733803" start="8060" end="8081" title="Shawinigan Cataractes" label="Shawinigan Cataractes"/>
<link wikidata="Q682845" start="8132" end="8148" title="Moncton Wildcats" label="Moncton Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035826" start="8268" end="8292" title="World Hockey Association (proposed)" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797914" start="9077" end="9091" title="2004–05 QMJHL season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165226" start="9315" end="9327" title="Dany Roussin" label="Dany Roussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892506" start="9332" end="9352" title="Marc-Antoine Pouliot" label="Marc-Antoine Pouliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q902934" start="9664" end="9689" title="Jean Rougeau Trophy" label="best record in the league"/>
<link wikidata="Q974282" start="9815" end="9835" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup (QMJHL)" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571070" start="9878" end="9896" title="Halifax Mooseheads" label="Halifax Mooseheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q943304" start="10008" end="10026" title="Guy Lafleur Trophy" label="Guy Lafleur Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162644" start="10107" end="10124" title="2005 Memorial Cup" label="2005 Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q532549" start="10186" end="10200" title="London Knights" label="London Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q523072" start="10330" end="10349" title="Ed Chynoweth Trophy" label="Ed Chynoweth Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="10460" end="10471" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902988" start="10488" end="10519" title="Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy" label="Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="10604" end="10624" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q840582" start="10648" end="10655" title="Retired number" label="retired"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378413" start="10934" end="10961" title="NHL Central Scouting Bureau" label="NHL Central Scouting Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q841976" start="11054" end="11071" title="Mike Bossy Trophy" label="Mike Bossy Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="11161" end="11180" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="11210" end="11224" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="labour lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q377382" start="11251" end="11269" title="2004–05 NHL season" label="2004–05 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="11724" end="11741" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q715591" start="11823" end="11834" title="Mark Recchi" label="Mark Recchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576650" start="11945" end="11959" title="Hannu Toivonen" label="Hannu Toivonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="11967" end="11980" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="12079" end="12087" title="overtime (ice hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="12138" end="12151" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="12152" end="12165" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="12213" end="12232" title="irregular heartbeat" label="irregular heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q321947" start="12341" end="12350" title="Ed Olczyk" label="Ed Olczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q326943" start="12377" end="12392" title="Michel Therrien" label="Michel Therrien"/>
<link wikidata="Q592524" start="12575" end="12585" title="Don Cherry" label="Don Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q553238" start="13001" end="13015" title="Sergei Gonchar" label="Sergei Gonchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q394023" start="13017" end="13031" title="Žigmund Pálffy" label="Žigmund Pálffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="13107" end="13125" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q434899" start="13632" end="13644" title="Joe Thornton" label="Joe Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q440283" start="13649" end="13661" title="Dany Heatley" label="Dany Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="13710" end="13729" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="13741" end="13745" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q311374" start="13765" end="13783" title="Alexander Ovechkin" label="Alexander Ovechkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="13908" end="13930" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q304395" start="14397" end="14409" title="Kelly Hrudey" label="Kelly Hrudey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="14429" end="14442" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="14711" end="14720" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="14748" end="14767" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="15072" end="15079" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="15215" end="15219" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="15314" end="15329" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="15584" end="15597" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q447270" start="15612" end="15624" title="Jordan Staal" label="Jordan Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599125" start="15818" end="15822" title="2001 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="15836" end="15851" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="15902" end="15921" title="Stanley Cup playoff" label="Stanley Cup playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="16054" end="16065" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="16204" end="16216" title="Captain (ice hockey)" label="team captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="17127" end="17147" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="17156" end="17179" title="Lester B. Pearson Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17439" end="17469" title="NHL All-Star team#2000s" label="NHL&amp;#x27;s first All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="17756" end="17773" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="subsequent season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537957" start="17793" end="17814" title="Gordie Howe hat trick" label="Gordie Howe hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="17852" end="17865" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q504655" start="18093" end="18107" title="Andrew Ference" label="Andrew Ference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418168" start="18199" end="18213" title="Winter Classic" label="Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="18332" end="18346" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="18499" end="18518" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q244126" start="18547" end="18565" title="2008 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2008 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q477750" start="18705" end="18715" title="Max Talbot" label="Max Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="18981" end="18999" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="19210" end="19223" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="19382" end="19401" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q311374" start="19409" end="19427" title="Alexander Ovechkin" label="Alexander Ovechkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312642" start="19615" end="19627" title="Marián Hossa" label="Marián Hossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="19637" end="19654" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q756394" start="19778" end="19795" title="Atlantic Division (NHL)" label="Atlantic Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="19850" end="19868" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968232" start="19949" end="19962" title="2008 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2008 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="19974" end="19989" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="20055" end="20071" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463305" start="20076" end="20085" title="Flyers–Penguins rivalry" label="archrival"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="20086" end="20105" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006542" start="20152" end="20163" title="2008 Stanley Cup Finals" label="final round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="20189" end="20193" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="20207" end="20224" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="20369" end="20379" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="20632" end="20643" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q447340" start="20651" end="20668" title="Henrik Zetterberg" label="Henrik Zetterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="20750" end="20766" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="20842" end="20861" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="21489" end="21504" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008308" start="21519" end="21532" title="2009 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2009 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133502" start="21550" end="21572" title="Prince of Wales Trophy" label="Prince of Wales Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="22278" end="22297" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049079" start="22790" end="22808" title="2009 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="22845" end="22856" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074887" start="23079" end="23089" title="Mike Grant" label="Mike Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556896" start="23097" end="23101" title="1895 AHAC season" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q340001" start="23102" end="23120" title="Montreal Victorias" label="Montreal Victorias"/>
<link wikidata="Q117294" start="23382" end="23395" title="Johan Franzén" label="Johan Franzén"/>
<link wikidata="Q948695" start="23457" end="23468" title="Kris Draper" label="Kris Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q434200" start="23606" end="23622" title="Nicklas Lidström" label="Nicklas Lidström"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="24358" end="24372" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="24386" end="24405" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q520397" start="24413" end="24427" title="Steven Stamkos" label="Steven Stamkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="24495" end="24516" title="Rocket Richard Trophy" label="Rocket Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="24592" end="24611" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q311374" start="24631" end="24649" title="Alexander Ovechkin" label="Alexander Ovechkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="24693" end="24710" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="24724" end="24736" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="24817" end="24837" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="24842" end="24859" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Ted Lindsay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550433" start="24876" end="24905" title="Mark Messier Leadership Award" label="Mark Messier Leadership Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619766" start="25428" end="25441" title="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2010 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="25457" end="25475" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237181" start="25710" end="25722" title="Mellon Arena" label="Mellon Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="25865" end="25878" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q595460" start="25926" end="25946" title="Consol Energy Center" label="Consol Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="26117" end="26131" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="26213" end="26226" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="26271" end="26289" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="26344" end="26353" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="26528" end="26542" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q739705" start="26570" end="26585" title="Mikka Kiprusoff" label="Mikka Kiprusoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q244702" start="26732" end="26745" title="2011 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2011 All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="26768" end="26781" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="26783" end="26800" title="Marc-André Fleury" label="Marc-André Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376409" start="26805" end="26816" title="Kris Letang" label="Kris Letang"/>
<link wikidata="Q553283" start="26925" end="26937" title="Jeff Skinner" label="Jeff Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q949482" start="26950" end="26962" title="Paul Stastny" label="Paul Stastny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638678" start="27019" end="27042" title="2011 NHL Winter Classic" label="2011 NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q743581" start="27186" end="27198" title="Dave Steckel" label="Dave Steckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q728924" start="27203" end="27216" title="Victor Hedman" label="Victor Hedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="27258" end="27268" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="27343" end="27356" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="27590" end="27603" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912826" start="27615" end="27623" title="torn ACL" label="torn ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241072" start="27628" end="27631" title="medial collateral ligament" label="MCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624072" start="28143" end="28157" title="2011–12 Pittsburgh Penguins season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="28561" end="28574" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q944189" start="28582" end="28594" title="David Krejčí" label="David Krejčí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077443" start="28880" end="28892" title="Chris Kunitz" label="Chris Kunitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q569331" start="28897" end="28910" title="Pascal Dupuis" label="Pascal Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="28936" end="28952" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896131" start="29077" end="29081" title="University of Pittsburgh Medical Center" label="UPMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q658096" start="29086" end="29110" title="Chiropractic neurology" label="chiropractic neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148168" start="29111" end="29122" title="Frederick Carrick" label="Ted Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067889" start="29197" end="29210" title="2012 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2012 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="29381" end="29400" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341638" start="29821" end="29834" title="Jakub Voráček" label="Jakub Voráček"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="30724" end="30738" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="30790" end="30813" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="locking out the players"/>
<link wikidata="Q961806" start="30859" end="30879" title="NHL collective bargaining agreement" label="collective agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="30978" end="31026" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q929783" start="32172" end="32184" title="Brooks Orpik" label="Brooks Orpik"/>
<link wikidata="Q715426" start="32752" end="32768" title="Martin St. Louis" label="Martin St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="33336" end="33351" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q960553" start="33716" end="33727" title="Tuukka Rask" label="Tuukka Rask"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="34375" end="34395" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="34400" end="34430" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="34489" end="34496" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="34766" end="34781" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="35006" end="35027" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="35055" end="35068" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="35552" end="35573" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q352117" start="35949" end="35958" title="Ray Shero" label="Ray Shero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689207" start="35979" end="35993" title="Jim Rutherford" label="Jim Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159017" start="36099" end="36109" title="Dan Bylsma" label="Dan Bylsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306104" start="36159" end="36172" title="Mike Johnston (ice hockey)" label="Mike Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="36218" end="36232" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q537353" start="36374" end="36386" title="John Tavares" label="John Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="36423" end="36435" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="36455" end="36465" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="36550" end="36569" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="36692" end="36703" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="37042" end="37065" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="37119" end="37132" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="37217" end="37233" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q723395" start="37533" end="37544" title="Phil Kessel" label="Phil Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="37956" end="37975" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349268" start="38479" end="38501" title="2016 NHL All-Star Game" label="2016 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933555" start="38533" end="38546" title="Mike Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="Mike Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="38925" end="38941" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="39214" end="39227" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2016 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="39384" end="39398" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636351" start="39562" end="39574" title="Two-way player" label="two-way game"/>
<link wikidata="Q920331" start="39645" end="39658" title="Scotty Bowman" label="Scotty Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="39713" end="39734" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="39818" end="39831" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="40245" end="40263" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q335876" start="40271" end="40283" title="Patrick Kane" label="Patrick Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846850" start="41093" end="41111" title="Andrei Vasilevskiy" label="Andrei Vasilevskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190374" start="41579" end="41597" title="2016 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="41610" end="41625" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863701" start="41669" end="41698" title="2015 Stanley Cup Finals" label="second consecutive appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="42102" end="42120" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="42190" end="42204" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="42475" end="42488" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q668581" start="42498" end="42514" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 points" label="1,000 NHL points"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016602" start="42661" end="42678" title="2017 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q440237" start="43071" end="43082" title="Stan Mikita" label="Stan Mikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="43087" end="43100" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q358519" start="43182" end="43193" title="Gordie Howe" label="Gordie Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="43423" end="43438" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="43458" end="43472" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051437" start="43487" end="43500" title="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2017 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q929135" start="43905" end="43918" title="Matt Niskanen" label="Matt Niskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637940" start="44118" end="44128" title="Bryan Rust" label="Bryan Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="44405" end="44424" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995070" start="44432" end="44438" title="2017 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593116" start="44928" end="44953" title="1997–98 Detroit Red Wings" label="1997–98 Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q826579" start="45157" end="45170" title="Bernie Parent" label="Bernie Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="45188" end="45201" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="45331" end="45345" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160613" start="45562" end="45572" title="Jake Allen (ice hockey)" label="Jake Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="45580" end="45595" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q27902006" start="45758" end="45771" title="Jake Guentzel" label="Jake Guentzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50912481" start="45848" end="45869" title="2018 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2018 playoff campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463305" start="45945" end="45967" title="Flyers–Penguins rivalry" label="Battle of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45987" end="46004" title="Hat-trick#Variations" label="natural hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="46323" end="46337" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q928121" start="46747" end="46763" title="Evgeny Kuznetsov" label="Evgeny Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q440395" start="46929" end="46942" title="Steve Yzerman" label="Steve Yzerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="47086" end="47100" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816158" start="47223" end="47240" title="2019 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="47491" end="47509" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="47514" end="47534" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="47547" end="47561" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="47577" end="47590" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="47780" end="47798" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="47918" end="47934" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="48240" end="48255" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q861211" start="48263" end="48281" title="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="48314" end="48333" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693680" start="48341" end="48356" title="Nikita Kucherov" label="Nikita Kucherov"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="48562" end="48576" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="48791" end="48799" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="48810" end="48824" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="49017" end="49034" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Ted Lindsay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="49067" end="49082" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="49102" end="49116" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="49252" end="49270" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q106589794" start="49537" end="49550" title="2021 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2021 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="49702" end="49721" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="49971" end="49990" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="50135" end="50149" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q111476467" start="50296" end="50309" title="2022 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2022 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="50322" end="50338" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="50350" end="50363" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376409" start="50368" end="50379" title="Kris Letang" label="Kris Letang"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="50646" end="50657" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="50961" end="50982" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133586" start="51067" end="51079" title="Jacob Trouba" label="Jacob Trouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933555" start="51265" end="51278" title="Mike Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="Mike Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236799" start="51400" end="51413" title="Tristan Jarry" label="Tristan Jarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731789" start="51425" end="51439" title="Rickard Rakell" label="Rickard Rakell"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="51525" end="51539" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="51847" end="51860" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="51947" end="51961" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q27902006" start="52238" end="52251" title="Jake Guentzel" label="Jake Guentzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="52296" end="52310" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="52452" end="52469" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="52767" end="52783" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="52792" end="52810" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="52880" end="52898" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605507" start="53133" end="53140" title="2005–06 Pittsburgh Penguins season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345138" start="53485" end="53496" title="Ron Hextall" label="Ron Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q364739" start="53609" end="53620" title="Brian Burke (ice hockey)" label="Brian Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324524" start="53681" end="53700" title="Fenway Sports Group" label="Fenway Sports Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="53796" end="53810" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="53943" end="53958" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="54287" end="54303" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="54421" end="54434" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q929159" start="54501" end="54514" title="Erik Karlsson" label="Erik Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063980" start="55197" end="55211" title="Karel Vejmelka" label="Karel Vejmelka"/>
<link wikidata="Q125520712" start="55219" end="55235" title="Utah Hockey Club" label="Utah Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622622" start="55450" end="55456" title="Hockey Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601922" start="55464" end="55490" title="2003 U-18 Junior World Cup" label="2003 U-18 Junior World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029519" start="55526" end="55539" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national under-18 ice hockey team" label="under-18 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201778" start="55705" end="55719" title="Czech Republic men&amp;#x27;s national under-18 ice hockey team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754117" start="55823" end="55849" title="IIHF World Junior Championship" label="World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687105" start="55855" end="55875" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Canada under-20 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q722244" start="56006" end="56021" title="Jay Bouwmeester" label="Jay Bouwmeester"/>
<link wikidata="Q537476" start="56023" end="56035" title="Jason Spezza" label="Jason Spezza"/>
<link wikidata="Q960614" start="56037" end="56049" title="Eric Lindros" label="Eric Lindros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317089" start="56086" end="56117" title="2004 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2004 World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q675341" start="56261" end="56272" title="Switzerland men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327084" start="56320" end="56338" title="2012 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2012 World Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q620356" start="56344" end="56361" title="Aleksander Barkov" label="Aleksander Barkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418038" start="56365" end="56372" title="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090382" start="56581" end="56612" title="2005 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2005 World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11783173" start="56902" end="56930" title="2006 IIHF World Championship" label="2006 IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="56937" end="56954" title="alternate captain" label="alternate captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="56959" end="56965" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="57082" end="57100" title="Ice Hockey World Championships" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q823040" start="57183" end="57190" title="Finland national men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q740203" start="57372" end="57376" title="Ice hockey at the 2006 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q644408" start="57472" end="57492" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q688758" start="57598" end="57609" title="Switzerland national men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q845895" start="57675" end="57681" title="Russia national men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q384831" start="57686" end="57694" title="Slovakia national men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="57791" end="57804" title="United States national men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57812" end="57827" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament#Gold medal game" label="gold medal game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619766" start="58085" end="58110" title="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155130" start="58176" end="58204" title="2010 IIHF World Championship" label="2010 IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672792" start="58253" end="58273" title="Ice hockey at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="58294" end="58306" title="captain (ice hockey)" label="team captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q913643" start="58434" end="58440" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q745747" start="58606" end="58610" title="2007 Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey World Championships" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357311" start="58759" end="58775" title="Triple Gold Club" label="Triple Gold Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622622" start="58922" end="58935" title="Hockey Canada" label="Hockey Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143398" start="58965" end="58989" title="2016 World Cup of Hockey" label="2016 World Cup of Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="59136" end="59145" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="59150" end="59163" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="59195" end="59213" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="59215" end="59235" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q646123" start="59280" end="59292" title="Mike Babcock" label="Mike Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q93945822" start="59570" end="59595" title="IIHF All-Time Teams" label="IIHF All-Time Canada Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q42913815" start="59715" end="59733" title="Canada at the 2022 Winter Olympics" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q60823602" start="59742" end="59762" title="Ice hockey at the 2022 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="59774" end="59788" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q860744" start="59793" end="59809" title="Alex Pietrangelo" label="Alex Pietrangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109739412" start="59915" end="59930" title="Omicron variant" label="Omicron variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="60732" end="60737" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="60793" end="60802" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="61192" end="61205" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306078" start="61676" end="61689" title="Backhand shot (ice hockey)" label="backhand shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q19358484" start="61728" end="61753" title="The Players&amp;#x27; Tribune" label="The Players&amp;#x27; Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="61774" end="61788" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="61796" end="61813" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="62335" end="62344" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="62409" end="62422" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q358519" start="62638" end="62649" title="Gordie Howe" label="Gordie Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="62811" end="62824" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933555" start="63459" end="63472" title="Mike Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="Mike Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="63652" end="63663" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28665614" start="63693" end="63717" title="100 Greatest NHL Players" label="100 Greatest NHL Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q77625" start="63749" end="63759" title="Fox Sports" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q617903" start="63860" end="63863" title="The Sports Network" label="TSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="63937" end="63957" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="63978" end="63990" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="64117" end="64126" title="Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064237" start="64597" end="64627" title="Nova Scotia Sport Hall of Fame" label="Nova Scotia Sport Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="64683" end="64695" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q509625" start="64819" end="64835" title="franchise player" label="franchise player"/>
<link wikidata="Q595460" start="64940" end="64951" title="PPG Paints Arena" label="a new arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="65028" end="65035" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237697" start="65239" end="65254" title="David Morehouse" label="David Morehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376984" start="65653" end="65664" title="Matt Cullen" label="Matt Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614777" start="66047" end="66058" title="Jack Hughes" label="Jack Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="66066" end="66083" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="66497" end="66507" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="66527" end="66535" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="66836" end="66864" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="67012" end="67029" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="67109" end="67116" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421504" start="67152" end="67184" title="Pittsburgh International Airport" label="Pittsburgh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="67329" end="67346" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875571" start="67461" end="67481" title="Hockey Fights Cancer" label="Hockey Fights Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q739144" start="67692" end="67708" title="Brendan Shanahan" label="Brendan Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940083" start="67833" end="67838" title="hockey stick" label="stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995099" start="67843" end="67848" title="hockey glove" label="glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="67924" end="67930" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="67958" end="67962" title="CAD$" label="CAD$"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="68095" end="68103" title="shipment" label="shipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58818" start="68118" end="68166" title="International Ice Hockey Federation Hall of Fame" label="International Ice Hockey Federation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="68170" end="68186" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="68229" end="68236" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q478615" start="68267" end="68277" title="hockey bag" label="hockey bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q536741" start="68339" end="68355" title="Patrice Bergeron" label="Patrice Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68363" end="68368" title=":wikt:stall" label="stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070054" start="68401" end="68412" title="locker room" label="locker room"/>
<link wikidata="Q29613811" start="68824" end="68835" title="Greg Powers" label="Greg Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187224" start="68952" end="68975" title="Sewickley, Pennsylvania" label="Sewickley, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838712" start="69107" end="69117" title="Grand Lake (Nova Scotia)" label="Grand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="69388" end="69394" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="69435" end="69439" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q175106" start="69441" end="69452" title="Tim Hortons" label="Tim Hortons"/>
<link wikidata="Q304992" start="69458" end="69466" title="Gatorade" label="Gatorade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="69580" end="69591" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="69639" end="69644" title="Postage stamp" label="stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="69667" end="69680" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q553249" start="69682" end="69693" title="Guy Lafleur" label="Guy Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166725" start="69695" end="69709" title="Darryl Sittler" label="Darryl Sittler"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="69711" end="69723" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q440395" start="69729" end="69742" title="Steve Yzerman" label="Steve Yzerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="69773" end="69783" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058029" start="70256" end="70300" title="Northeastern Huskies women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Northeastern Huskies women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="70323" end="70346" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="70350" end="70356" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136874" start="70403" end="70429" title="St. Cloud State University" label="St. Cloud State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587640" start="70450" end="70497" title="St. Cloud State Huskies women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="St. Cloud State Huskies women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="72211" end="72222" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q460592" start="72484" end="72519" title="List of Pittsburgh Penguins players" label="List of Pittsburgh Penguins players"/>
<link wikidata="Q471610" start="72522" end="72562" title="List of NHL players with 50 goal seasons" label="List of NHL players with 50 goal seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q471605" start="72565" end="72607" title="List of NHL players with 100-point seasons" label="List of NHL players with 100-point seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q668581" start="72610" end="72647" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 points" label="List of NHL players with 1,000 points"/>
<link wikidata="Q721120" start="72650" end="72693" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 games played" label="List of NHL players with 1,000 games played"/>
<link wikidata="Q783410" start="72696" end="72730" title="List of NHL players with 500 goals" label="List of NHL players with 500 goals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780056" wikidata="Q7722470" url="?curid=780056" title="The Children's Hour (play)">
<text>The Children&#x27;s Hour is a 1934 American play by Lillian Hellman. It is a drama set in an all-girls boarding school run by two women, Karen Wright and Martha Dobie. An angry student, Mary Tilford, runs away from the school and, to avoid being sent back, tells her grandmother that the two headmistresses are having a lesbian affair. The accusation proceeds to destroy the women&#x27;s careers, relationships, and lives.

The play was first staged on Broadway at the Maxine Elliott Theatre in 1934, produced and directed by Herman Shumlin. In 1936, it was presented in Paris and at London&#x27;s Gate Theatre Studio.

== Synopsis ==
Two women, Karen Wright and Martha Dobie, have worked hard to build a girls&#x27; boarding school in a refurbished farmhouse. They run and teach at the school with the somewhat unwelcome help of Lily Mortar, Martha&#x27;s aunt. One pupil, Mary Tilford, is mischievous, disobedient, and untruthful, and often leads the other girls into trouble.
One day, Mary feigns illness and is being examined by Dr. Joe Cardin, a physician who is Mary&#x27;s cousin and also Karen&#x27;s fiancé. Martha asks Lily whether she would like to go back to traveling to the places she misses, now that they can afford it. Lily becomes angry and starts shouting about how, whenever Joe is around, Martha becomes irritable, unreasonable, and jealous, taking her jealousy of Joe out on her. Two of Mary&#x27;s schoolmates, Peggy Rogers and Evelyn Munn, who were listening at the door trying to discover Mary&#x27;s condition, overhear Lily&#x27;s outburst.

Mary is found healthy and is sent to her room. She squeezes the information out of Peggy and Evelyn. Mary plans to ask her indulgent grandmother, Amelia Tilford – who also helped Karen and Martha in setting up the school and enrolling pupils – to allow her not to return. When Amelia refuses, Mary cleverly twists what the girls have overheard. With the help of several well-crafted lies and a book that the girls have been reading in secret, Mary convinces her grandmother that Karen and Martha are having a lesbian affair. On hearing this, Amelia Tilford begins contacting the parents of Mary&#x27;s classmates. Shortly afterwards, most of Mary&#x27;s schoolmates have been pulled out of school. Rosalie Wells, a student whose mother is abroad, stays with Mary.

Seeing that Rosalie is vulnerable, Mary blackmails her into corroborating everything she says. When Karen and Martha realize why all their pupils were pulled out of their school in a single night, they go to Mrs. Tilford&#x27;s residence to confront her. Amelia tells Mary to repeat her story. When Karen points out an inconsistency, Mary pretends to have been covering for Rosalie, who reluctantly corroborates Mary&#x27;s story for fear of being exposed herself. Resolving to take Amelia to court, Martha and Karen leave.

Seven months later, after Martha and Karen have lost the case, everyone still believes the allegation that they were lovers. When Lily returns from abroad, the women are angry with her for not being available to testify to their innocence. Meanwhile, Joe, who has remained loyal throughout, has found a job in a distant location. He tries to convince Karen and Martha to come with him and start over. As Martha goes to cook dinner, Joe continues his attempts to persuade Karen, who now believes that she has ruined his life and destroyed everything she and Martha had worked so hard to achieve.

At Karen&#x27;s insistence, Joe reluctantly asks her whether she and Martha had ever been lovers. When Karen says that they were not, he readily believes her. Nevertheless, Karen decides that she and Joe must part. She says things can never be the same between them after all that they have been through. She asks Joe to leave; he refuses, but agrees to leave if Karen will think things through first. When Martha returns and learns from Karen what has happened, she is consumed with guilt. Her discovery that she might indeed have feelings for Karen overwhelms and terrifies her. Before Martha tells Karen how she feels, Karen tells Martha that she would like to relocate in the morning and wants her to come with her. Martha says it&#x27;s impossible for them to live comfortably again and eventually admits her feelings for Karen. Karen responds dismissively, saying that they never felt this way for each other. Martha continues, but Karen tells Martha that she is tired and they can talk about it in the morning. As Karen sits in her room, she hears a shot. Martha has killed herself. Shortly after, Amelia Tilford arrives to beg Karen&#x27;s forgiveness, since Mary&#x27;s lies have now been uncovered. Karen explains to her that it is too late: Mary&#x27;s lies, together with the community&#x27;s willingness to believe and spread malicious gossip, have destroyed three innocent lives.

== History ==

After graduating from New York University, Hellman was a play reader in the office of theatrical producer Herman Shumlin. In May 1934, she asked Shumlin to read a play of her own—the sixth draft of &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot;. He read it as she waited. After he read the first act Shumlin said, &quot;Swell&quot;. After reading the second act he said, &quot;I hope it keeps up&quot;. After reading the third act he said, &quot;I&#x27;ll produce it.&quot;

Shumlin and Hellman worked through the details of the production together over the next months. Shumlin felt the title of the play was misleading and wanted Hellman to change it, but Hellman loved it and refused. Hellman recalled being rudely treated by Lee Shubert, then-owner of the Maxine Elliott Theatre, at a rehearsal. Shumlin faced Shubert down and barked, &quot;That girl, as you call her, is the author of the play.&quot;

Hellman had written &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; as an exercise, to teach herself how to write a play after writing one unsuccessful play with Louis Kronenberger. Believing that she would do better to find a subject based in fact, Dashiell Hammett suggested the idea for the play to Hellman after he read a book titled &quot;Bad Companions&quot; (1930), a true-crime anthology by William Roughead. It related an incident that took place in 1810 at a school in Edinburgh, Scotland. A student named Jane Cumming accused her schoolmistresses, Jane Pirie and Marianne Woods, of having an affair in the presence of their pupils. Dame Cumming Gordon, the accuser&#x27;s influential grandmother, advised her friends to remove their daughters from the boarding school. Within days the school was deserted and the two women had lost their livelihood. Pirie and Woods sued and eventually won, both in court and on appeal, but given the damage done to their lives, their victory was considered hollow.

== Production ==
Produced and directed by Herman Shumlin, &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; opened November 20, 1934, at the Maxine Elliott Theatre in New York City. The settings by Aline Bernstein were executed by Sointu Syrjala. The three-act drama closed in July 1936 after 691 performances.

=== Cast ===

* Eugenia Rawls as Peggy Rogers
* Aline McDermott as Mrs. Lily Mortar
* Elizabeth Seckel as Evelyn Munn
* Lynne Fisher as Helen Burton
* Jacqueline Rusling as Lois Fisher
* Barbara Leeds as Catherine
* Barbara Beals as Rosalie Wells
* Florence McGee as Mary Tilford
* Katherine Emery as Karen Wright
* Anne Revere as Martha Dobie
* Robert Keith as Dr. Joseph Cardin
* Edmonia Nolley as Agatha
* Katherine Emmet as Mrs. Amelia Tilford
* Jack Tyler as A Grocery Boy

The financial and critical success of the New York production encouraged Shumlin to present &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; in other cities. In December 1935, authorities in Boston declared that the play did not meet the standards of the Watch and Ward Society and that it could not be performed there the following month as scheduled. Shumlin filed a $250,000 suit for damages, but in February 1936 a Federal judge refused to prevent the city from interfering in the presentation of the play. In January 1936, a municipal censorship ordinance was used to decline granting a performance permit for &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; in Chicago.

&quot;Les Innocentes&quot;, André Bernheim&#x27;s French-language translation of &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot;, was first presented April 21, 1936, at the Théâtre des Arts in Paris. Although the Lord Chamberlain banned the public performance of &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; in Great Britain in March 1935, the play was presented in its entirety on November 12, 1936, at a private performance at the Gate Theatre Studio in London, managed by Norman Marshall.

===Characters===
Philip M. Armato, an assistant professor of Northern Illinois University, argued that while members of the public perceived Karen and Martha as overall good characters, he felt they overlooked the two treating Mary Tilford and Lily Mortar without mercy, before the spreading of the rumors. He argued that when Karen forgives Amelia Tilford, this breaks a cycle of vengeance that occurs between those characters.

Tanfer Amin Tunc wrote that because Mary Tilford spread the rumor to deliberately attack the teachers, many reviewers had perceived Mary as &quot;a corrupt and immoral child or adolescent&quot;.

== Reception ==

Screenwriter and playwright Paddy Chayefsky considered &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; to be one of the most carefully structured plays ever written, and learned play structure in his youth by copying in longhand the entire script.

Some readers and critics perceived the work as a &quot;melodrama&quot; with each character being a completely good one or a completely bad one, with a 1942 preface talking about &quot;goodness&quot; and &quot;badness&quot; used as evidence; Hellman responded in a 1965 interview that none of her characters were completely good or bad and that the preface was misinterpreted.

=== Accolades ===
&quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; was in serious consideration for the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for 1934–35. The award was presented instead to Zoë Akins&#x27; play &quot;The Old Maid&quot;. Accused of rejecting Hellman&#x27;s play because of its controversial subject—one of the Pulitzer judges had refused to see it—the selection committee replied that &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; was not eligible for the award because it was based on a court case and was therefore not an original drama. Critics responded that since &quot;The Old Maid&quot; was based on a novella by Edith Wharton, it also should have been deemed ineligible. Angered by the Pulitzer Prize decision, the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle began awarding its own annual prize for drama the following year.

Hellman&#x27;s play was inspired by the 1810 true story of two Scottish school teachers, Miss Marianne Woods and Miss Jane Pirie, whose lives were destroyed when one of their students accused them of engaging in a sexual relationship, but in the Scottish case, they eventually won their suit, although that did not change the devastation wrought on their lives. At the time of the play&#x27;s premiere (1934) the mention of homosexuality on stage was illegal in New York State, but authorities chose to overlook its subject matter when the Broadway production was acclaimed by the critics.

== Revivals ==

Lillian Hellman directed a Broadway revival of &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot;, produced by Kermit Bloomgarden and presented December 18, 1952 – May 30, 1953, at the Coronet Theatre. The cast included Kim Hunter as Karen Wright, Patricia Neal as Martha Dobie, Iris Mann as Mary Tilford, and Katherine Emmet reprising her original role as Mrs. Amelia Tilford. The revised stage production was construed as an implied criticism of the House Un-American Activities Committee.

In 2008, Sarah Frankcom directed a production at the Royal Exchange in Manchester. It starred Maxine Peake (who won a MEN Award) as Karen Wright, Charlotte Emmerson as Martha Dobie, Kate O&#x27;Flynn (who won a TMA Award) as Mary Tilford and Milo Twomey as Dr Joseph Cardin.

A revival starring Keira Knightley and Elisabeth Moss, directed by Ian Rickson, was presented at London&#x27;s Harold Pinter Theatre January 22 – May 7, 2011.

== Adaptations ==

In 1936, the play was made into a film directed by William Wyler. However, because of the Production Code, the story was adapted into a heterosexual love triangle, the controversial name of the play was changed, and the movie was eventually released as &quot;These Three&quot;. Hellman reportedly worked on the screenplay, keeping virtually all of the play&#x27;s original dialogue, and was satisfied with the result, saying the play&#x27;s central theme of gossip was unaffected by the changes.

In 1961, the play was adapted, with its lesbian theme intact, for the film &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot;, also directed by Wyler and starring Audrey Hepburn, Shirley MacLaine, and James Garner. In the UK, New Zealand, and Australia it was released under the title &quot;The Loudest Whisper&quot;.

In 1971, the play was produced for the radio by the BBC in its Saturday Night Theatre series starring Jill Bennett and Prunella Scales.

In 1994, the play was again produced for the radio by the BBC in its Monday Play series, starring Clare Holman, Buffy Davis, Miriam Margolyes and Margaret Robertson.

In October 2021, it was reported that Anonymous Content would be adapting the play into a television series.

== Casting ==

== References ==
* 

===Notes===
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Full Text of &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; by Hellman – from &quot;Plays of the Year&quot;: Volume 5 (1952)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="52" end="67" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="103" end="118" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="320" end="327" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795966" start="469" end="491" title="Maxine Elliott Theatre" label="Maxine Elliott Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134091" start="526" end="540" title="Herman Shumlin" label="Herman Shumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527003" start="598" end="617" title="Gate Theatre Studio" label="Gate Theatre Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134091" start="4971" end="4985" title="Herman Shumlin" label="Herman Shumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351968" start="5584" end="5595" title="Lee Shubert" label="Lee Shubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687573" start="5913" end="5931" title="Louis Kronenberger" label="Louis Kronenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="6001" end="6017" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541116" start="6126" end="6136" title="True crime" label="true-crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017796" start="6150" end="6166" title="William Roughead" label="William Roughead"/>
<link wikidata="Q63456829" start="6267" end="6279" title="Jane Cumming" label="Jane Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529954" start="6310" end="6320" title="Jane Pirie" label="Jane Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954443" start="6325" end="6339" title="Marianne Woods" label="Marianne Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795966" start="6890" end="6912" title="Maxine Elliott Theatre" label="Maxine Elliott Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726756" start="6947" end="6962" title="Aline Bernstein" label="Aline Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407923" start="7077" end="7090" title="Eugenia Rawls" label="Eugenia Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q113053467" start="7109" end="7124" title="Aline McDermott" label="Aline McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301135" start="7343" end="7358" title="Katherine Emery" label="Katherine Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q239770" start="7377" end="7388" title="Anne Revere" label="Anne Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385393" start="7407" end="7419" title="Robert Keith (actor)" label="Robert Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q62053956" start="7470" end="7485" title="Katherine Emmet" label="Katherine Emmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973092" start="7783" end="7805" title="Watch and Ward Society" label="Watch and Ward Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527480" start="8355" end="8371" title="Théâtre Hébertot" label="Théâtre des Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355456" start="8395" end="8411" title="Lord Chamberlain" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777548" start="8412" end="8418" title="Theatres Act 1843" label="banned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527003" start="8607" end="8626" title="Gate Theatre Studio" label="Gate Theatre Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052582" start="8649" end="8664" title="Norman Marshall (theatre director)" label="Norman Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="8728" end="8756" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180251" start="9338" end="9353" title="Paddy Chayefsky" label="Paddy Chayefsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="9603" end="9612" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="10017" end="10041" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q227109" start="10090" end="10099" title="Zoë Akins" label="Zoë Akins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754868" start="10117" end="10129" title="The Old Maid (play)" label="The Old Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="10630" end="10665" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10696" end="10711" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle#New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award" label="prize for drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="10796" end="10804" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954443" start="10827" end="10841" title="Marianne Woods" label="Marianne Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529954" start="10851" end="10861" title="Jane Pirie" label="Jane Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="11157" end="11170" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="11195" end="11209" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11273" end="11281" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394049" start="11437" end="11455" title="Kermit Bloomgarden" label="Kermit Bloomgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407593" start="11511" end="11526" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill Theatre" label="Coronet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q59824" start="11546" end="11556" title="Kim Hunter" label="Kim Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191027" start="11574" end="11587" title="Patricia Neal" label="Patricia Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="11778" end="11816" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422310" start="11828" end="11842" title="Sarah Frankcom" label="Sarah Frankcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="11872" end="11886" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="11890" end="11900" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853137" start="11913" end="11925" title="Maxine Peake" label="Maxine Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747398" start="11937" end="11946" title="Manchester Evening News Theatre Awards" label="MEN Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23713460" start="12001" end="12018" title="Kate O&amp;#x27;Flynn" label="Kate O&amp;#x27;Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670654" start="12030" end="12039" title="TMA Awards" label="TMA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="12114" end="12129" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q233466" start="12134" end="12148" title="Elisabeth Moss" label="Elisabeth Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982714" start="12162" end="12173" title="Ian Rickson" label="Ian Rickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="12206" end="12227" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Harold Pinter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51495" start="12325" end="12338" title="William Wyler" label="William Wyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="12364" end="12379" title="Production Code" label="Production Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q174559" start="12533" end="12544" title="These Three" label="These Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q466014" start="12852" end="12876" title="The Children&amp;#x27;s Hour (1961 film)" label="The Children&amp;#x27;s Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="12920" end="12934" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="12936" end="12952" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108510" start="12958" end="12970" title="James Garner" label="James Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q567633" start="13418" end="13435" title="Anonymous Content" label="Anonymous Content"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780057" wikidata="Q7644226" url="?curid=780057" title="Superstate">
<text>A superstate is defined as &quot;a large and powerful state formed when several smaller countries unite&quot;, or &quot;A large and powerful state formed from a federation or union of nations&quot;, or &quot;a hybrid form of polity that combines features of
ancient empires and modern states.&quot;
This is distinct from the concept of superpower, although these are sometimes seen together.

== History ==
In the early 20th century, &quot;superstate&quot; had a similar definition as today&#x27;s supranational organisations. In a 1927 article by Edward A. Harriman on the League of Nations, a superstate was defined as merely &quot;an organisation, of which a state is a member, which is superior to the member themselves&quot;, in that &quot;[a] complete superstate has legislative, executive and judicial organs to make, to execute and to interpret its laws&quot;. According to this definition, Harriman saw the League of Nations as a &quot;rudimentary superstate&quot;, and the United States of America as &quot;an example of a complete and perfect superstate&quot;.

In &quot;World Order of Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh,&quot; first published in 1938, Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Baháʼí Faith, described the anticipated world government of that religion as the &quot;world’s future super-state&quot; with the Baháʼí Faith as the &quot;State Religion of an independent and Sovereign Power.&quot;

In the 1970s, academic literature used the term &quot;superstate&quot; to indicate a particularly rich and powerful state, in a similar fashion to the term superpower. In this context, the term was applied to Japan, as contemporary academics suggested that Japan could displace the U.S. as the world&#x27;s sole superpower, becoming the world&#x27;s foremost economic power in the (then) near future because of its economic growth in recent decades. The prediction did not come true.

In contemporary political debate, especially the one centred on the European Union, the term &quot;superstate&quot; is used to indicate a development in which the Union develops from its current &quot;de facto&quot; status as a confederation to become a fully-fledged federation, known as the United States of Europe.
For instance, Glyn Morgan contrasts the perspective of a &quot;European superstate&quot; to the ones of &quot;a Europe of nation-states&quot; and of &quot;a post-sovereign European polity&quot;. In her definition, a &quot;European superstate is nothing more than a sovereign state - a tried and tested type of polity that predominates in the modern world - operating on a European wide scale&quot;, i.e., &quot;a unitary European state&quot;. Especially after the European debt crisis, economic literature started to discuss the role of European union as a European superstate. In particular, they compared the emergence of a debt union to the federal structure of Germany. 

The term was famously used by Margaret Thatcher in her 1988 Bruges speech, when she decried the perspective of &quot;a European super-state exercising a new dominance from Brussels&quot;, and has since entered the eurosceptic lexicon.
Tony Blair argued in 2000 that he welcomed an EU as a &quot;superpower, not a superstate&quot;.

In a 2022 study, Alasdair Roberts argues that superstates should be construed as hybrid forms of political organization: &quot;Every superstate carries the burdens of statehood, that is, the duties of intensive governance and respect for human rights that are carried by all modern states. But superstates also carry the burdens of empire, principally the burden of holding together a large and diverse population spread across a vast territory. Superstates are distinguished from ordinary states by problems of governance that are intensified by scale, diversity, and complexity&quot;. In this view, a superstate need not be highly centralized, just as some empires were not highly centralized. Thus is it possible to describe the European Union as a superstate without conceding that is a &quot;centralized, unitary leviathan&quot;. 
==Fictional superstates==
*Atlantic Federation (Gundam anime metaseries)
*The Alliance for Democracy in &quot;The Domination&quot;, which originated as a military alliance before being unified into a single nation.
*Earth Alliance in:
** &quot;Babylon 5&quot;
** &quot;The History of Galaxy&quot; novel series
*Eastasia, Eurasia and Oceania in &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;
*Federation of the Americas from &quot;Call of Duty: Ghosts&quot;
* Gundam in the Cosmic Era timeline of &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam SEED&quot;
*Interstellar Alliance (Babylon 5)
*Fleet of Worlds
*Galactic Empire (Star Wars)
*Galactic Empire (Isaac Asimov universe)
*Galactic Republic
*Imperium of Mankind
*Mega-City One
*Meccania
*United Federation of Planets
*The Dominion (&quot;Star Trek&quot;)
*The World State
*Unified Earth Government from Halo
*United States of Africa
*United States of Europe
*United Nations (Of Earth) from The Expanse
*The Outer Planets Alliance (OPA) from The Expanse
*Tamrielic Empire (Septim Dynasty) from The Elder Scrolls

==See also==
*China
*Imperial Federation
*India
*List of countries and dependencies by area
*Organization of American States
*Soviet Union
*United States

== Notes ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7644226" start="2" end="12" title="Superstate" label="superstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="54" end="59" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="161" end="171" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="336" end="346" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335818" start="498" end="524" title="supranational organisation" label="supranational organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="574" end="591" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="983" end="1007" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="1082" end="1118" title="World Order of Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="World Order of Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="1151" end="1165" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="1171" end="1179" title="Guardian (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="1187" end="1199" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="1559" end="1569" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1612" end="1617" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849456" start="1660" end="1725" title="Japan as a potential superpower" label="Japan could displace the U.S. as the world&amp;#x27;s sole superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400813" start="1762" end="1776" title="economic power" label="economic power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059474" start="1814" end="1851" title="Japanese economic miracle" label="its economic growth in recent decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="1868" end="1885" title="Lost Decades" label="did not come true"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1956" end="1970" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="2089" end="2097" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="2116" end="2129" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="2156" end="2166" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="2181" end="2204" title="European Federation" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2220" end="2231" title="Glyn Morgan (academic)" label="Glyn Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="2912" end="2929" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978669" start="2942" end="2955" title="Bruges Group (United Kingdom)" label="Bruges speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="3096" end="3107" title="euroscepticism" label="eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="3117" end="3127" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708439" start="3231" end="3247" title="Alasdair Roberts (academic)" label="Alasdair Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="4098" end="4104" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410919" start="4160" end="4174" title="The Domination" label="The Domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q897238" start="4294" end="4303" title="Earth Alliance (Babylon 5)" label="Babylon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752002" start="4361" end="4390" title="Nations of Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Eastasia, Eurasia and Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="4400" end="4420" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4466" end="4486" title="Call of Duty: Ghosts" label="Call of Duty: Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="4495" end="4501" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q696206" start="4538" end="4561" title="Mobile Suit Gundam SEED" label="Mobile Suit Gundam SEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458444" start="4604" end="4619" title="Fleet of Worlds" label="Fleet of Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="4621" end="4648" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="4650" end="4689" title="Galactic Empire (Isaac Asimov)" label="Galactic Empire (Isaac Asimov universe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="4691" end="4708" title="Galactic Republic" label="Galactic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="4710" end="4729" title="Imperium (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Imperium of Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="4731" end="4744" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804420" start="4746" end="4754" title="Meccania" label="Meccania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110" start="4756" end="4784" title="United Federation of Planets" label="United Federation of Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187824" start="4786" end="4798" title="Dominion (Star Trek)" label="The Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4800" end="4821" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="&amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="4824" end="4839" title="World state in Brave New World" label="The World State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="4871" end="4875" title="Halo (franchise)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991472" start="4877" end="4900" title="United States of Africa" label="United States of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="4902" end="4925" title="European Federation" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389644" start="4958" end="4969" title="The Expanse (TV series)" label="The Expanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389644" start="5009" end="5020" title="The Expanse (TV series)" label="The Expanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q466530" start="5061" end="5078" title="The Elder Scrolls" label="The Elder Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5094" end="5099" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149417" start="5101" end="5120" title="Imperial Federation" label="Imperial Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5122" end="5127" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="5129" end="5171" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="List of countries and dependencies by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="5173" end="5204" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5206" end="5218" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5220" end="5233" title="United States" label="United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780058" wikidata="Q1184425" url="?curid=780058" title="Dellen">
<text>Dellen is a lake system in the province of Hälsingland, Sweden. It consists of two lakes, &quot;Northern Dellen&quot; and &quot;Southern Dellen&quot;, appreciated among fly-fishermen for their population of brown trout.

Southern Dellen has a surface area of 52 km2 and a water volume of 1,226 million m3.
Northern Dellen has an area of 82 km2 and a water volume of 1,489 million m3.

The two lakes are only separated by a short channel, and it is therefore disputed whether they should be counted as one or two lakes. The two lakes together have a total area of 130 km2, which would be the 18th largest Swedish lake.

The vaguely circular lake system was formed by an impact crater 89 million years ago, placing the impact in the Late Cretaceous. The resulting impact crater measures about 19 kilometers in diameter. It has resulted in the area containing the rock Dellenite (a rock intermediate in composition between Rhyolite and Dacite), which has become the provincial rock.

Asteroid 7704 Dellen was named after it.

An installation of the Sweden Solar System representing Pluto and Charon lies near the southern lake; the pillars holding the model objects are made of dellenite.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Dellen Information and map Dellenbygden.nu; in Swedish only</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1184425" start="0" end="6" title="Dellen" label="Dellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193556" start="31" end="39" title="provinces of Sweden" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="43" end="54" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="169" end="182" title="Fly fishing" label="fly-fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="207" end="218" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q393373" start="604" end="616" title="Lakes of Sweden" label="Swedish lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="669" end="682" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="731" end="746" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="866" end="875" title="Dellenite" label="Dellenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="920" end="928" title="Rhyolite" label="Rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466481" start="933" end="939" title="Dacite" label="Dacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="981" end="989" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600420" start="990" end="1001" title="7704 Dellen" label="7704 Dellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094828" start="1046" end="1065" title="Sweden Solar System" label="Sweden Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="1079" end="1084" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604" start="1089" end="1095" title="Charon (moon)" label="Charon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780059" wikidata="Q5263551" url="?curid=780059" title="Des Plaines crater">
<text>The Des Plaines crater or Des Plaines disturbance is recognized as an impact crater in Cook County, Illinois, United States. It is located beneath the eastern part of the city of Des Plaines, which is a suburb of Chicago.

The Des Plaines crater is in diameter and covers an area of approximately . The age of the crater is unknown but is thought to be between 280 million years and 2 million years (Permian or younger). The crater is buried beneath 75 to 200 feet (23–60 m) of glacial till and can only be seen as a series of faults and deformations in well logs and seismic surveys. Faulting in the structure has produced as much as of vertical displacement. Subsurface strata of Cambrian through Pennsylvanian age has been faulted and tilted by the event. The anomalous area was first noted by water well drillers in 1893, who noted an absence of water in a deep well. Prior to being recognized as an impact structure, the feature was referred to as a &quot;cryptoexplosion structure&quot; or &quot;cryptovolcanic structure&quot;, as were several others in the Midwestern United States. The upfaulted central portion and the presence of shatter cone structures support the impact origin.

==References==
==External links==
*Aerial Exploration of the Des Plaines Impact Structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5263551" start="4" end="22" title="Des Plaines crater" label="Des Plaines crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263551" start="26" end="49" title="Des Plaines crater" label="Des Plaines disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="70" end="83" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="87" end="98" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="100" end="108" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q386961" start="179" end="190" title="Des Plaines, Illinois" label="Des Plaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="213" end="220" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="400" end="407" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="478" end="490" title="glacial till" label="glacial till"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="527" end="533" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672013" start="538" end="550" title="Deformation (engineering)" label="deformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383566" start="554" end="562" title="well log" label="well log"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="568" end="583" title="Reflection seismology" label="seismic surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922828" start="638" end="659" title="vertical displacement" label="vertical displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="672" end="678" title="Stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="682" end="690" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="699" end="712" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190917" start="961" end="976" title="cryptoexplosion" label="cryptoexplosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="1064" end="1088" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="1140" end="1152" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780061" wikidata="Q1233169" url="?curid=780061" title="Dobele crater">
<text>Dobele crater is an impact crater in Latvia under the town of Dobele. The crater is not exposed at the surface. It is in diameter and estimated to be 290 ± 35 million years old (Cisuralian epoch of the Permian period).

== References ==

:: Masaitis, V.L. (1999), Impact structures of northeastern Eurasia: the territories of Russia and adjacent countries, Meteoritics &amp; Planetary Science, v. 34, p. 691-711

== Further reading ==
* A. Abels. J. Plado Lehtinen. 2002 The Impact Cratering Record of Fennoscandia - A Close Look at the DatabaseSpringer, Berlin, Federal Republic of Germany (DEU)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1233169" start="0" end="13" title="Dobele crater" label="Dobele crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="20" end="33" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="37" end="43" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q729447" start="62" end="68" title="Dobele" label="Dobele"/>
<link wikidata="Q642169" start="178" end="188" title="Cisuralian" label="Cisuralian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="202" end="209" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925280" start="357" end="392" title="Meteoritics &amp;amp; Planetary Science" label="Meteoritics &amp;amp; Planetary Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780063" wikidata="Q1276759" url="?curid=780063" title="Eagle Butte crater">
<text>Eagle Butte is an impact crater in Alberta, Canada, named for a rural area west of the Cypress Hills.

It is 10 km in diameter and the age is estimated to be less than 65 million years (Paleocene or earlier). The crater is not exposed at the surface.

==References==

==External links==
*Aerial Exploration of the Eagle Butte impact structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1276759" start="0" end="11" title="Eagle Butte crater" label="Eagle Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="18" end="31" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="35" end="42" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325035" start="64" end="74" title="Eagle Butte, Alberta" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148229" start="87" end="100" title="Cypress Hills (Canada)" label="Cypress Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="186" end="195" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780065" wikidata="Q3827080" url="?curid=780065" title="Elbow crater">
<text>Elbow is a meteorite crater just north of the village of Riverhurst in Saskatchewan, Canada.

The crater is in diameter with an age estimated to be 395 ± 25 million years (during the Devonian Period). The crater is buried beneath younger sediments and is not exposed at the surface.

== See also ==
* List of impact structures in North America
* Geology of Saskatchewan

== References ==
== External links ==
*Aerial exploration of the Elbow crater</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3827080" start="0" end="5" title="Elbow crater" label="Elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="11" end="20" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="21" end="27" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204139" start="57" end="67" title="Riverhurst" label="Riverhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="71" end="83" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="183" end="191" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414405" start="301" end="343" title="List of impact structures in North America" label="List of impact structures in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535395" start="346" end="369" title="Geology of Saskatchewan" label="Geology of Saskatchewan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780066" wikidata="Q2367130" url="?curid=780066" title="Chovot HaLevavot">
<text>Chovot HaLevavot or The Duties of the Hearts (; ), is the primary work of the Jewish scholar Bahya ibn Paquda, a rabbi believed to have lived in the Taifa of Zaragoza in al-Andalus in the eleventh century.
It was written in Judeo-Arabic in the Hebrew alphabet circa 1080 under the title &quot;Book of Direction to the Duties of the Heart&quot; (), sometimes titled &quot;Guide to the Duties of the Heart&quot;, and translated into Hebrew by Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon during 1161–80 under the title &quot;Torat Chovot HaLevavot&quot;. There was another contemporary translation by Joseph Kimhi, but its complete text did not endure time. In 1973, Yosef Qafih published his Hebrew translation from the original Arabic, the latter appearing aside his Hebrew translation.
== Organization and influences ==
The &quot;Duties of the Heart&quot; is divided into ten sections termed &quot;gates&quot; () corresponding to the ten fundamental principles which, according to Bahya&#x27;s view, constitute human spiritual life. This treatise on the inner spiritual life makes numerous references to both Biblical and Talmudic texts.
==Contents and message==
The essence of all spirituality is the recognition of God as the one Maker and designer of all things; Bahya makes the &quot;Sha&#x27;ar HaYihud&quot; (Gate of the Divine Unity) the first and foremost section. Taking the Jewish Declaration, &quot;Hear, O Israel: the Lord is our God, the Lord is One,&quot; as a starting point, the author emphasizes the fact that for religious life it is not so much a matter of the intellect to know God as it is a matter of the heart to own and to love Him.
Bahya held that it is not sufficient to accept this belief without thinking, as the child does, or because the fathers have taught so, as do the blind believers in tradition, who have no opinion of their own and are led by others. Nor should the belief in God be such as might in any way be liable to be understood in a human anthropomorphic sense, but it should rest on conviction, which is the result of the most comprehensive knowledge and research. Far from demanding unquestioning belief, the Torah appeals to reason and knowledge as proof of God&#x27;s existence. Therefore, it is a duty incumbent upon everyone to make God an object of speculative reason and knowledge to arrive at true faith.
Instead of intending to give a compendium of metaphysics, Bahya furnishes a system of religious philosophy with merit in this first gate. Unfamiliar with Avicenna&#x27;s works, which replaced Neoplatonic mysticism with clear Aristotelian thought, Bahya, like many Arab philosophers before him, bases his arguments upon Creation. He starts from the following three premises:
# Nothing creates itself since the act of creating necessitates its existence (see also Saadia, &quot;Emunot,&quot; i. 2)
# the causes of things are necessarily limited in number and lead to the presumption of a first cause which is necessarily self-existent, having neither beginning nor end, because everything that has an end must have a beginning
# all composite beings have a beginning; and a cause must necessarily be created.
The world is beautifully arranged and furnished like a great house, of which the sky forms the ceiling, the earth the floor, the stars the lamps. Man is the proprietor, to whom the three kingdoms—the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral—are submitted for use, each composed of the four elements. Nor does the celestial sphere, composed of a fifth element—&quot;Quinta Essentia,&quot; according to Aristotle, and of fire, according to others—make an exception. These four elements are composed of matter and form, substance and accidental qualities, such as warmth and cold, state of motion and rest, and so forth.
Consequently, by combining many forces, the universe must have creative power as its cause. Nor can the existence of the world be due to mere chance. Where there is purpose manifested, there must have been wisdom at work. Ink spilled accidentally upon a sheet of paper can not produce legible writing.
=== Unity of God ===
Bahya then proceeds, following chiefly Saadia Gaon and the &quot;Mutakallimin&quot; (&quot;Kalamists&quot;) to prove the unity of God (Arabic &quot;tawhid&quot;) by showing:
# All classes, causes, and principles of things lead back to one principal cause.
# The harmony of all things in nature, the interdependence of all creatures, the wondrous plan and wisdom displayed in the structure of the greatest and smallest of animal beings, from the elephant to the ant, all point to one great designer—the physico-theological argument of Aristotle.
# There is no reason for assuming more than one Creator since the world manifests but one plan and order everywhere. Without sufficient cause, no one would ascribe a letter in the same style and handwriting to more than one writer.
# The assumption of many creators would necessitate either a plurality of identical beings which, having nothing to distinguish them, could not but be the same—that is, God—or of different beings which, having various qualities and lacking some qualities which others possess, can no longer be infinite and perfect, and therefore must themselves be created, not self-existent.
# Every plurality, being a combination of units, presupposes an original unity; hence, even those that assume a plurality of gods must logically admit the prior existence of a Divine Unity—a Neoplatonic argument borrowed by Baḥya from the Brothers of Purity.
# The Creator can not share accidents and substances with the creatures. Assuming a plurality, an accident and not a substance would lower God, the Creator, to the level of creatures.
# The assumption of two creators would necessitate insufficiency of either of them or interference of one with the power of the other; and as the limitation deprives the Creator of His power, unity alone establishes Divine omnipotence.
Bahya then endeavoured to define God as the absolute unity by distinguishing God&#x27;s unity from all other possible unities. Bahya&#x27;s work in this regard prompted Yemen&#x27;s 12th-century Jewish philosopher, Natan&#x27;el al-Fayyumi, to compile a work that counters some of the basic arguments espoused by ibn Paquda, and where al-Fayummi argues a more profound unity of God than that expressed by ibn Paquda. See Divine simplicity.

===Attributes of God===

Adopting this Neoplatonic idea of God as the one who can only be felt by the longing Soul but not grasped by reason, Bahya finds it superfluous to prove the incorporeality of God. The question with him is, how can one know a being so far beyond our mental comprehension that we can not even define Him? In answering this, Bahya distinguishes between two different kinds of attributes: namely, essential attributes and such as are derived from activity.
Three attributes of God are essential, though one derives them from Creation:
# God&#x27;s existence; since a non-existent being can not create things
# God&#x27;s unity
# God&#x27;s eternity since the last cause of all things is necessarily one and everlasting.
Bahya holds that these three attributes are one and inseparable from the nature of God; in fact, they are only negative attributes: God can not be non-existent, or a non-eternal or a non-unit, or else He is not God.
The second class of attributes, derived from activity, is most frequently applied to God in the Bible and equally applies to the creatures and the Creator. These anthropomorphisms, however, whether they speak of God as having human form or as displaying a manlike activity, are used in the Bible only to impart knowledge of God to men who would otherwise not comprehend Him in homely language.
At the same time, the intelligent thinker will gradually divest the Creator of every quality that renders Him manlike or similar to any creature. The true essence of God is inaccessible to our understanding, and the Bible offers the name of God as a substitute, making it the object of human reverence and the center of ancestral tradition.
Just because the wisest of men learn to know only their inability to name God adequately, the appellation &quot;God of the Fathers&quot; will strike with peculiar force all people alike. All attempts to express in terms of praise all the qualities of God will necessarily fail.
Man&#x27;s inability to know God parallels his inability to know his Soul, whose existence is manifested in every one of his acts. Just as each of the five senses has its natural limitations—the sound that is heard by the ear, for instance, not being perceptible to the eye—so human reason has limits regarding the comprehension of God. Insistence on knowing the sun beyond what is possible to the human eye causes blindness in man; so does the insistence on knowing Him who is unknowable, not only through the study of His work but through attempts to ascertain His essence, bewilder and confound the mind, to impair man&#x27;s reason.
To reflect on the greatness and goodness of God, as manifested throughout Creation, is consequently the highest duty of man; and to this is devoted the second section of the book, entitled &quot;Sha&#x27;ar ha-Behinah&quot; (Gate of Reflection).

=== His natural philosophy ===
Bahya points out a sevenfold manifestation of creative wisdom in:
# The combination of the elements of which the earth forms the center, with water and air surrounding it, and fire placed above
# the perfection of man as the microcosm
# The physiology and intellectual faculties of man
# the order of the animal kingdom
# that of the plant kingdom
# the sciences, arts, and industries of man; and
# the divine revelation as well as the moral and social welfare of all the nations.
Bahya held that man should think about his wondrous formation to recognize the wisdom of his Maker.
Bahya then surveys the then-understood physiology and psychology of humanity, showing the wisdom displayed in the construction of each organ and of each faculty and disposition of the Soul, as well as in such contrasts as memory and forgetfulness—the latter being as necessary for human peace and enjoyment as the former for his intellectual progress.
In nature, likewise, the consideration of the sublimity of the heavens and the motion of all things, the interchange of light and darkness, the variety of colour in the realm of Creation, the awe with which the sight of living man inspires the brute, the wonderful fertility of each grain of corn in the soil, the large supply of those elements that are essential to organic life, such as air and water, and the lesser frequency of those things that form the objects of industry and commerce in the shape of nourishment and clothing—all these and similar observations tend to fill man&#x27;s Soul with gratitude and praise for the providential love and wisdom of the Creator.

=== Worship of God ===
In this view, such understanding necessarily leads man to worship God, to which the third section, &quot;Sha&#x27;ar Avodat Elohim&quot; (Gate of Divine Worship), is devoted. Every benefit received by man, says Bahya, will evoke his thankfulness in the same measure as intentions of doing good prompt it, though a portion of self-love be mingled with it, as is the case with what the parent does for his child, which is but part of himself, and upon which his hope for the future is built; still more so with what the master does for his slave, who is his property.
Also, charity bestowed by the rich upon the poor is more or less prompted by commiseration, the sight of misfortune causing pain of which the act of charity relieves the giver; likewise, does all helpfulness originate in that feeling of fellowship, which is the consciousness of mutual need. However, God&#x27;s benefits rest upon love without considering self. On the other hand, no creature is so dependent upon helpful love and mercy as humanity from the cradle to the grave.
=== Pedagogical value of halakha ===
Worship of God in obedience to halakha, Jewish law, is certainly of unmistakable value since it asserts the higher claims of human life against the lower desires awakened and fostered by the animal man. Yet it is not the highest mode of worship, as it may be prompted by fear of divine punishment or a desire for reward, or it may be altogether formal, external, and void of that spirit which steels the Soul against every temptation and trial.
Still, Jewish law is necessary as a guide for man, says Bahya, since man tends to lead only a sensual life and indulge in worldly passions. There is another tendency to despise the world of the senses altogether and to devote oneself only to the life of the spirit. In his view, both paths are abnormal and injurious: one is destructive to society, and the other is destructive to human life in both directions. Jewish law, therefore, shows the correct mode of serving God by following &quot;a middle way,&quot; like remote from sensuality and contempt of the world.
The mode of worship prescribed by the Law has, therefore, mainly a pedagogical value, asserts Bahya. It educates the whole people, the immature and the mature intellects, for the true service of God, which must be that of the heart.
A lengthy dialogue follows between the Soul and the Intellect on Worship and the relation of Free Will to Divine Predestination; Bahya insists on human reason as the supreme ruler of action and inclination, constituting the power of self-determination as man&#x27;s privilege.
Another subject of the dialogue is the physiology and psychology of man, with special regard to the contrasts of joy and grief, fear and hope, fortitude and cowardice, shamefulness and rudeness, anger and mildness, compassion and disrespect, pride and modesty, love and hatred, generosity and miserliness, idleness and industry.
=== Divine providence ===
Trust in God forms the title and the subject of the fourth &quot;gate&quot;, &quot;Sha&#x27;ar HaBitachon.&quot; Greater than the magical power of the alchemist who creates treasures of gold by his art is the power of trust in God, says Bahya; for he alone who confides in God is independent and satisfied with what he has, and enjoys rest and peace without envying anyone. Yet only God, whose wisdom and goodness comprise all times and all circumstances, can be implicitly confided in, or God provides for all His creatures out of true love and with the full knowledge of what is good for each.
Particularly, does God provide for man in a manner that unfolds his faculties more and more by new wants and cares, trials and hardships that test and strengthen his powers of body and Soul? Confidence in God, however, should not prevent man from seeking the means of livelihood by pursuing a trade, nor must it lead him to expose his life to perils. Particularly, suicide is a crime often resulting from a lack of confidence in an all-wise Providence.
Likewise, is it folly to put too much trust in wealth and those who own great fortunes? All that the world offers will disappoint man in the end; for this reason, the Saints and the Prophets of old often fled their family circles and comfortable homes to lead a life of seclusion devoted to God only.
=== Immortality of the Soul ===
Bahya here dwells at length on the hope of immortality, which, in contradistinction to the popular belief in bodily resurrection, he finds intentionally alluded to only here and there in the Scriptures.
For Bahya, the belief in immortality is purely spiritual, as expressed in Zech. iii. 7, &quot;I give thee places among these that stand by.&quot;
=== Hypocrisy and skepticism ===
Sincerity of purpose is the theme treated in the fifth &quot;gate&quot;, called &quot;Yihud ha-Ma&#x27;aseh&quot; (Consecration of Action to God); literally, &quot;Unification of Action.&quot;
According to Bahya, nothing is more repulsive to the pious Soul than the hypocrite. Bahya regarded skepticism as the chief means of seducing people to Hypocrisy and all other sins. At first, says Bahya, the seducer will cast into man&#x27;s heart doubt concerning immortality to offer a welcome excuse for sensualism, and, should he fail, he will awaken doubt concerning God and divine worship or revelation. Not succeeding therein, he will endeavour to show the lack of justice in this world and deny the existence of an afterlife; and, finally, he will deny the value of every thought that does not redound to bodily welfare. Therefore, man must exercise continual vigilance regarding the purity of his actions.
=== Humility ===
The sixth &quot;gate,&quot; &quot;Sha&#x27;ar HaKeni&#x27;ah,&quot; deals with humility. Humility manifests in gentle conduct toward fellow humans, whether of equal standing or superior, but especially in one&#x27;s attitude toward God. Humility springs from a consideration of the low origin of man, the vicissitudes of life, and one&#x27;s failings and shortcomings compared with the duties of man and the greatness of God so that all pride, even regarding one&#x27;s merits, is banished.
Pride in outward possessions is incompatible with humility and must be suppressed; pride is still more so derived from the humiliation of others. However, pride stimulates nobler ambitions, such as the pride of acquiring knowledge or achieving good: this is compatible with humility and may enhance it.
=== Repentance ===
The practical tendency of the book is particularly shown in the seventh section, &quot;Shaar HaTeshuvah&quot;, &quot;the Gate of Repentance&quot;. The majority, even of the pious, Bahya says, are not those who have been free from sins but have once sinned and felt regret. As there are sins, both omission and commission, man&#x27;s repentance should be directed to stimulate good action where such had been neglected or to train him to abstain from evil desires that had led to evil actions.

Repentance consists in:
# the full consciousness of the shameful act and profound regret for having committed it;
# a determination of change of conduct;
# a candid confession of the sin, and an earnest supplication to God asking His pardon;
# in a perfect change of heart.
True repentance shows itself in awe of God&#x27;s justice, in contrition of Soul, in tears in outward signs of grief — such as moderation of sensual enjoyment and display, and foregoing pleasures otherwise legitimate preceding humble, prayerful spirit and an earnest contemplation of the Soul&#x27;s future.
Most essential is the discontinuance of sinful habits, because the longer they are adhered to, the more difficult they are to end.
Procrastination hinders repentance, which waits for a tomorrow that may never come. After having quoted the sayings of the rabbis, to the effect that the sinner who repents may rank higher than he who has never sinned, Bahya quotes the words of one of the masters to his disciples: &quot;Were you altogether free from sin, I should be afraid of what is far greater than sin — that is, pride and hypocrisy.&quot;

=== Seeing God ===

The following &quot;gate&quot;, entitled &quot;Shaar Heshbon HaNefesh&quot;, &quot;Gate of Self-Examination&quot;, contains an appeal to take as serious view as possible of life, its obligations and opportunities for the Soul&#x27;s perfection to attain to a state of purity in which is unfolded the higher faculty of the Soul, which beholds the deeper mysteries of God, the sublime wisdom and beauty of a higher world inaccessible to other men.
Bahya devotes &quot;Shaar HaPerishut&quot;, &quot;Gate of Seclusion from the World&quot;, to the relation of true religiousness to asceticism. According to Bahya, some abstinence is necessary to curb man&#x27;s passion and turn the Soul toward its higher destiny. Still, human life requires cultivating a world which God has formed to be inhabited, and the perpetuation of the race. As such, asceticism can only be the virtue of a few who stand forth as exemplars.
=== An ascetic life ===
There are different modes of seclusion from the world. Some want to lead a life devoted to the higher world, flee this world altogether, and live as hermits, contrary to the design of the Creator. Others retire from the world&#x27;s turmoil and live secluded in their homes. A third class, which comes nearest to the precepts of Jewish law, participates in the world&#x27;s struggles and pursuits, but leads a life of abstinence and moderation, regarding this world as a preparation for a higher one.
According to Bahya, the object of religious practise is the exercise of self-control, curbing passion, and placing at the service of the Most High of all personal possessions and all the organs of life.
=== Love of God ===
The aim of ethical self-discipline is the love of God, which forms the contents of the tenth and last section of the work, &quot;Shaar Ahavat Elohim&quot;, &quot;The Gate of the Love of God&quot;. This is explained as the soul&#x27;s longing, amid all the attractions and enjoyments that bind it to the earth, for the fountain of its life, in which it finds joy and peace, even though the greatest pains and suffering are imposed on it. Those who are imbued with this love find every sacrifice they are asked to make for their God easy, and no selfish motive mars the purity of their love.
Bahya is not so one-sided as to recommend the practise of the recluse, who has at heart only the welfare of his Soul. A man may be as holy as an angel, yet he will not equal in merit the one that leads his fellow to righteousness and to love of God.
== Translations ==
Besides the Hebrew translations mentioned above, &quot;Chovot HaLevavot&quot; has been translated into several languages.
=== Judaeo-Spanish ===
* &quot;Chovot HaLevavot&quot;, translated into Judaeo-Spanish by Zaddik ben Joseph Formon before the end of the sixteenth century, was printed at Constantinople, and republished several times (Amsterdam, 1610 by David Pardo in Latin characters; Venice, 1713 in Hebrew characters; Vienna, 1822 by Isaac Bellagrade). Julius Fürst (&quot;Bibliotheca Judaica&quot; i. 78, iii. 67) attributes the translation to Joseph Pardo, rabbi of Amsterdam.
=== Latin ===
* Jacob Roman of Constantinople intended to publish the Arabic text with a Latin translation in 1643.

=== Portuguese ===
* Amsterdam, 1670, by Samuel b. Isaac Abbas.

=== German ===
* Amsterdam, 1716, by Isaac b. Moses .
* Fürth, 1765, by Samuel Posen.
* Breslau, 1836.
* Vienna, 1854, by Mendel Baumgarten.
* Vienna, 1856, by Mendel E. Stern.

=== Italian ===
* An Italian translation was published in 1847.
=== English ===
* Hyamson, Moses. &quot;Duties of the Heart&quot;. Feldheim Publishers: Jerusalem — New York, 1970 (2-volume edition). Originally published in 5 volumes (1925-1947). Translation from Judah ibn Tibbon&#x27;s Hebrew translation.
* Mansoor, Menahem. &quot;The Book of Direction to the Duties of the Heart&quot;. The Littman Library of Jewish Civilization. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1973. Translation from the Arabic.
* Haberman, Daniel. &quot;Duties of the Heart&quot;. Feldheim Publishers: Jerusalem — New York, 1996 (2-volume set). Translation based on Yehudah ibn Tibbon&#x27;s Hebrew translation, though with consultation of Kafih (Hebrew) and Mansoor (English) translations from the Arabic.
* Gateoftrust.org - English translation of Duties of the Heart.

== References ==

== External links ==
* Hyamson&#x27;s English translation: Volume 2 of 5 (New York, 1941) (with treatises 2 &amp; 3), hebrewbooks.org
* Fulltext (Hebrew), daat.ac.il
* Free English Translation of Gates 1-10</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="78" end="84" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="93" end="109" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Bahya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="113" end="118" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061" start="149" end="166" title="Taifa of Zaragoza" label="Taifa of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="170" end="180" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37733" start="224" end="236" title="Judeo-Arabic languages" label="Judeo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="244" end="259" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q745336" start="441" end="466" title="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon" label="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371519" start="580" end="592" title="Joseph Kimhi" label="Joseph Kimhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911194" start="646" end="657" title="Yosef Qafih" label="Yosef Qafih"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1091" end="1099" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="1104" end="1110" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="1392" end="1406" title="Shema Yisrael" label="Hear, O Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="2494" end="2502" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="2565" end="2585" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="4125" end="4136" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="4177" end="4182" title="Kalam" label="Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="4234" end="4240" title="tawhid" label="tawhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968384" start="6134" end="6158" title="Natan&amp;#x27;el al-Fayyumi" label="Natan&amp;#x27;el al-Fayyumi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6340" end="6357" title="Divine simplicity#In Jewish thought" label="Divine simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202433" start="6399" end="6415" title="Platonism in Islamic philosophy" label="Neoplatonic idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933919" start="9470" end="9479" title="Microcosm-macrocosm analogy in Jewish philosophy" label="microcosm"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="11991" end="11998" title="halakha" label="halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="21689" end="21703" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575412" start="21854" end="21865" title="David Pardo (Dutch rabbi, born at Salonica)" label="David Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q72153" start="21957" end="21969" title="Julius Fürst" label="Julius Fürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915821" start="22525" end="22539" title="Moses Hyamson" label="Hyamson, Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911194" start="23159" end="23164" title="Yosef Qafih" label="Kafih"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="23455" end="23461" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780072" wikidata="Q5458295" url="?curid=780072" title="Flaxman crater">
<text>Flaxman is a meteorite impact site in South Australia, Australia.

It is up to 10 km long, though probably shorter, and is very narrow. Quartz rocks in the valley are affected by impact pressures and these deformation features are thought to be due to a ricochet event from a nearby impact at the Crawford crater, part of a proposed wider multiple impact. The impact date for the Flaxman site is as for Crawford, both estimated to be greater than 35 million years (probably Eocene). The affected rocks are exposed at the surface.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Alley, A. F., Geological Survey of Southern Australia Bulletin, v.54, p. 151-218. 1995
* Haines, P. W., Impact Cratering and Distal Ejecta: The Australian Record. Australian Journal of Earth Sciences 52, P. 481 - 507. 2005
* Haines, P. W., Therriault, A.M. and Kelley, S.P., Evidence for a mid-Cenozoic (?), low angle multiple impacts in south Australia. Meteoritics and Planetary Science, v.34, supplement, p. 49. 1999</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5458295" start="0" end="7" title="Flaxman crater" label="Flaxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="13" end="22" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="38" end="53" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650248" start="297" end="312" title="Crawford crater" label="Crawford crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="474" end="480" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780074" wikidata="Q7331277" url="?curid=780074" title="Rick Campanelli">
<text>Richard Adam Matthew Campanelli (born January 5, 1970) is a Canadian television and radio personality known for his work as a VJ and host for MuchMusic and for co-hosting &quot;ET Canada&quot;. He joined CIDC-FM in November 2021, and was co-host of the morning show until December 2022, when he left the station.

In 2024, he joined CHFI-FM in Toronto as an afternoon host.

==Life and career==
Campanelli is a native of Hamilton, Ontario, and grew up in a working class Italian-Canadian family. He is the youngest of four siblings in a Roman Catholic family. 

Campanelli attended school in St. Catharines. He attended Brock University, earning a degree in physical education.

Campanelli was introduced to the MuchMusic viewers as the winner of MuchMusic&#x27;s 1994 MuchTemp contest. Originally he was nicknamed &quot;The Temp&quot; (or, famously, &quot;Rick the Temp&quot;). Campanelli has since been labeled &quot;The Franchise&quot; for his long tenure and high popularity while on MuchMusic. In addition to being a video jockey, he also co-hosted &quot;Much on Demand&quot;, &quot;The MuchMusic Countdown&quot; and &quot;The MuchMusic Radio Countdown&quot;.

Campanelli&#x27;s final appearance on MuchMusic was August 26, 2005, on &quot;MuchOnDemand&quot;. He was subsequently announced as one of the reporters for &quot;ET Canada&quot;, a new Canadian licensee of &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;, which was launched on September 12, 2005.

In early 2007, Campanelli hosted the &quot;Canada&#x27;s Case Game&quot; segments on Global&#x27;s &quot;Deal or No Deal Canada&quot;, during that series&#x27; first limited run.

Campanelli is involved with several charitable organizations including World Vision Canada, Tuberous Sclerosis, Big Brothers/Big Sisters, McMaster Children&#x27;s Hospital, and Kids Help Phone. On May 27, 2009, he hosted the Youth and Philanthropy Initiative in Toronto.

In February 2016, Toronto radio station CFNY-FM announced that Campanelli would join the station as co-host with Fred Kennedy and Melanie Mariani of the station&#x27;s morning show, beginning June 27. Later that year, he made a cameo appearance in the music video for James Barker Band&#x27;s &quot;Just Sayin&#x27;&quot;.

In July 2017, it was announced that Campanelli would depart as co-host of &quot;ET Canada&quot; after 12 years when his contract ended in summer 2017. He appeared on &quot;ET Canada&quot; through August 2017.

In 2021, it was announced that Campanelli would join his former MuchMusic colleague Monika Deol to co-host 90&#x27;s Nostalgia, a five-city Canadian concert tour featuring such artists as Aqua and Eiffel 65. Campanelli discussed this role during a visit to the Toronto Mike&#x27;d Podcast.

In 2023, Campanelli competed on the first season of &quot;The Traitors Canada&quot;, where he played as a Faithful. He was banished by his fellow castmates in the fifth episode.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7331277" start="0" end="31" title="Rick Campanelli" label="Richard Adam Matthew Campanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="126" end="128" title="VJ (media personality)" label="VJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="142" end="151" title="MuchMusic" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380473" start="177" end="186" title="ET Canada" label="ET Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011614" start="204" end="211" title="CIDC-FM" label="CIDC-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011121" start="333" end="340" title="CHFI-FM" label="CHFI-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="344" end="351" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="421" end="438" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="537" end="551" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q923624" start="620" end="636" title="Brock University" label="Brock University"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="658" end="676" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="747" end="756" title="MuchMusic" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930936" start="769" end="777" title="MuchTemp" label="MuchTemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="1022" end="1034" title="VJ (media personality)" label="video jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16162915" start="1060" end="1074" title="Much on Demand" label="Much on Demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176832" start="1088" end="1111" title="Countdown (MuchMusic program)" label="The MuchMusic Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380473" start="1328" end="1337" title="ET Canada" label="ET Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="1378" end="1399" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="1535" end="1541" title="Global Television Network" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245883" start="1555" end="1577" title="Deal or No Deal Canada" label="Deal or No Deal Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226820" start="1701" end="1720" title="World Vision Canada" label="World Vision Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905381" start="1742" end="1766" title="Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada" label="Big Brothers/Big Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802304" start="1768" end="1801" title="McMaster Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="McMaster Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178110" start="1807" end="1822" title="Kids Help Phone" label="Kids Help Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059286" start="1855" end="1888" title="Youth and Philanthropy Initiative" label="Youth and Philanthropy Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1892" end="1899" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010744" start="1942" end="1949" title="CFNY-FM" label="CFNY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025326" start="2170" end="2187" title="James Barker Band" label="James Barker Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548241" start="2201" end="2217" title="Just Sayin&amp;#x27;" label="Just Sayin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900174" start="2520" end="2531" title="Monika Deol" label="Monika Deol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213388" start="2624" end="2628" title="Aqua (band)" label="Aqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q240403" start="2633" end="2642" title="Eiffel 65" label="Eiffel 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955564" start="2785" end="2804" title="The Traitors Canada" label="The Traitors Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780075" wikidata="Q1435105" url="?curid=780075" title="Foelsche crater">
<text>Foelsche is a partly buried impact structure (or astrobleme), the eroded remnant of a former impact crater. It is situated about 85 km southeast of Borroloola in the Northern Territory, Australia, and named after the nearby Foelsche River. Although little of it is exposed at the surface, and no crater shaped topography is evident, the circular nature of the feature is obvious on aeromagnetic images, a factor that led to its discovery.

== Description ==
The impact occurred into flat-lying Mesoproterozoic sedimentary rocks of the McArthur Basin and most of the crater is covered by a semi-circular hill of flat-lying Neoproterozoic sedimentary rock. The only exposure of the crater itself are scattered outcrops of deformed sandstone and breccia around the northern edge of the overlying hill, which are inferred to be remnants of the crater rim. The rim is about 6 km in diameter. Evidence indicating an impact origin for the feature includes an abundance of shocked quartz grains in the sedimentary rocks overlying the crater; these are assumed to have been eroded from the floor of the crater. The prominent circular aeromagnetic anomaly which marks the hidden crater is believed to have been caused by the disruption of a horizontal layer of magnetic rock (igneous sill) by the impact event.

The age of Foelsche is not well constrained, but it must be younger than the Mesoproterozoic target rocks and older than the Neoproterozoic rocks that partly fill the crater; it has been argued that the age is most likely Neoproterozoic because it appears that the crater was covered by sediments soon after the impact event.

==See also==

*List of impact craters in Australia

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* McMahon, K. H., Australian geophysical Pty Ltd report for AP2233 &quot;Calvert Hills&quot;. Northern Territory Department of Mines and Energy, Open File company report, 70/5, Darwin, Australia, pp. 130. 1970</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1435105" start="0" end="8" title="Foelsche crater" label="Foelsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="28" end="44" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="49" end="59" title="astrobleme" label="astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="93" end="106" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q17925" start="148" end="158" title="Borroloola" label="Borroloola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="166" end="184" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="186" end="195" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="238" title="Foelsche River" label="Foelsche River"/>
<link wikidata="Q381526" start="382" end="401" title="Aeromagnetic survey" label="aeromagnetic images"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="494" end="509" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="510" end="526" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914959" start="535" end="549" title="McArthur Basin" label="McArthur Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="622" end="636" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="729" end="738" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="743" end="750" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="965" end="979" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="1266" end="1273" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q830230" start="1274" end="1278" title="Sill (geology)" label="sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="1379" end="1394" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="1427" end="1441" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q782241" start="1644" end="1679" title="List of impact craters in Australia" label="List of impact craters in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780077" wikidata="Q3696694" url="?curid=780077" title="Flynn Creek crater">
<text>Flynn Creek crater is an impact crater situated in Jackson County, Tennessee, approximately 8 km south of Gainesboro. 

== Description ==
The impact crater was formed approximately 360 million years ago as a shallow, saucer-shaped crater, in diameter and about deep. A large central hill, highly deformed rim strata, and a breccia lens in thickness were produced during formation. Over of flat lying Middle and Upper Paleozoic limestone and dolomite were brecciated and mixed to a depth of , and at least half of the breccia was ejected from the crater. The remaining breccia contains fragments ranging in size from small grains to megabreccia blocks long. Undisturbed strata lie below the original crater floor.

In the middle of the crater, a sequence of steeply-dipping, folded, faulted, and brecciated Middle Ordovician limestone and dolomite has been uplifted to form a large central hill. Rock of the Knox group in the central uplift are raised above their normal position and locally contain shatter cones.

In the rim surrounding the crater, Ordovician limestone has been uplifted and is moderately to tightly folded into doubly plunging anticlines and synclines that have axes concentric to the crater walls. In parts of the rim, folds have resulted in radial shortening as great as 35%. Faulting is common in the rim strata and is usually concentric to the crater walls.

In the southeastern rim, a large thrust block forms the crater wall and has been moved out from the crater and uplifted about . The thrust block partly overrides a tilted rim graben that has down-dropped about and moved toward the crater. Overlying this graben is a layer of breccia which is apparently the remains of an ejecta blanket that once surrounded the crater.

Post-crater erosion removed the ejecta, except for the overlying graben, and lowered the regional ground surface less than . Within a few million years of the cratering event the entire structure was covered with shale deposits from the Late Devonian Chattanooga Sea, creating one of the best-preserved ancient impact structures presently known. Subsequent erosion along Flynn Creek drainage has exposed a large extent of the structure. Karst development in the immediate area has created numerous caves associated with impact features, including the only cave known to occur in the central uplift of an impact structure, Hawkins Impact Cave.

==Other facts==

*~20 m max pre-impact relief
* ~15 m max depth of water at time of impact
* ~40 m avg breccia thickness
* ~140 m avg breccia depth below crater floor
* ~35% max radial shortening of rim strata
* ~90-190 m range for bolide diameter 
* roughly polygonal shape
* lateral zone of disturbance averages 1000 m in extent from crater wall
* lowermost size limit for complex craters with central uplifts
* 1700 m of sediments overlying crystalline basement in area
* conodonts found in immediate crater infill indicate marine environment 
* central uplift is composed of strata which have been structurally uplifted 300 m above normal position
* 11.2–72 km/s velocity range for terrestrial impacting bodies
* 25 km/s total vaporization of stony bolides

== References ==

==External links==
*United States Geological Survey drilling exploration https://www.usgs.gov/centers/astrogeology-science-center/science/flynn-creek-crater-sample-collection
*Exploration of the Flynn Creek crater</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3696694" start="0" end="18" title="Flynn Creek crater" label="Flynn Creek crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="25" end="38" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q490306" start="51" end="76" title="Jackson County, Tennessee" label="Jackson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057053" start="106" end="116" title="Gainesboro, Tennessee" label="Gainesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="309" end="315" title="Stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="323" end="330" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="417" end="426" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="427" end="436" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="441" end="449" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="774" end="780" title="fold (geology)" label="folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="782" end="789" title="fault (geology)" label="faulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="813" end="823" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="999" end="1011" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="1146" end="1155" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="1161" end="1169" title="syncline" label="syncline"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="1557" end="1563" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350112" start="1703" end="1717" title="ejecta blanket" label="ejecta blanket"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="1994" end="2002" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="2189" end="2194" title="Karst" label="Karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="2628" end="2634" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="2871" end="2880" title="Conodont" label="conodonts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780080" wikidata="Q1161813" url="?curid=780080" title="President of the United Nations General Assembly">
<text>The president of the United Nations General Assembly is a position voted by representatives in the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) on a yearly basis. The president is the chair and presiding officer of the General Assembly.

== Election ==
The session of the assembly is scheduled for every year starting in September—any special, or emergency special, assemblies over the next year will be headed by the president of the UNGA.

The presidency rotates annually between the five geographic groups: African, Asia-Pacific, Eastern European, Latin American and Caribbean, and Western European and other States.

Because of their powerful stature globally, some of the largest, most powerful countries have never held the presidency, including the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and Japan.

A few countries had a national elected as president of UNGA twice: Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, Hungary and Nigeria; all the other member states had a national holding this office once (not counting additional special and emergency special sessions of UNGA and also not considering that the then separate West Germany and East Germany held the presidency once each during the Cold War).
In addition to the president, a slate of 21 vice-presidents are elected for each General Assembly session. The vice-presidents have the same powers and duties as the president, and the president may designate one of them to cover his absence from any meeting or part thereof.

== List of presidents ==
===Abbreviations===
; Pre-1966
* COS: Commonwealth Seat
* EAS: Eastern European and Asian Seat
* LAS: Latin American Seat
* MES: Middle Eastern Seat
* WES: Western European Seat

; Since 1966
* Africa: African Group
* Asia-Pacific: Asian Group, since 2011 the Asia-Pacific Group
* EEG: Eastern European Group
* GRULAC: Latin American and Caribbean Group
* WEOG: Western European and Others Group

==See also==
* President of the United Nations Security Council
* President of the United Nations Economic and Social Council
* Vice-President of the United Nations General Assembly

==References==
==External links==

* UN: List of UN General Assembly presidents
* UN General Assembly President Election Reform.
* UNelections.org.
* Elections and appointments (2020-2021)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1161813" start="4" end="52" title="President of the United Nations General Assembly" label="president of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="99" end="130" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="429" end="433" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UNGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535468" start="485" end="502" title="United Nations Regional Groups" label="geographic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079362" start="504" end="511" title="African Group" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078190" start="513" end="525" title="Asia-Pacific Group" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330133" start="527" end="543" title="Eastern European Group" label="Eastern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346327" start="545" end="573" title="Latin American and Caribbean Group" label="Latin American and Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117820" start="579" end="612" title="Western European and Others Group" label="Western European and other States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="755" end="811" title="permanent members of the United Nations Security Council" label="permanent members of the United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157904" start="816" end="821" title="Japan and the United Nations" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="891" end="900" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="902" end="907" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="909" end="916" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="918" end="925" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="930" end="937" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1127" end="1139" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1144" end="1156" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1198" end="1206" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954120" start="1239" end="1268" title="United Nations General Committee" label="a slate of 21 vice-presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1549" end="1561" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1574" end="1588" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1595" end="1599" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1613" end="1626" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1640" end="1651" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="1667" end="1681" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079362" start="1713" end="1726" title="African Group" label="African Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078190" start="1743" end="1754" title="Asia-Pacific Group" label="Asian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078190" start="1771" end="1789" title="Asia-Pacific Group" label="Asia-Pacific Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330133" start="1797" end="1819" title="Eastern European Group" label="Eastern European Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346327" start="1830" end="1864" title="Latin American and Caribbean Group" label="Latin American and Caribbean Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117820" start="1873" end="1906" title="Western European and Others Group" label="Western European and Others Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352360" start="1923" end="1971" title="President of the United Nations Security Council" label="President of the United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q29511440" start="1974" end="2033" title="President of the United Nations Economic and Social Council" label="President of the United Nations Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954120" start="2036" end="2089" title="Vice-President of the United Nations General Assembly" label="Vice-President of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780081" wikidata="Q2915400" url="?curid=780081" title="Encyclopædia Metropolitana">
<text>The Encyclopædia Metropolitana was an encyclopedic work published in London, from 1817 to 1845, by part publication. In all it came to quarto, 30 vols., having been issued in 59 parts (22,426 pages, 565 plates).

==Origins==

Initially the project was part of transitional arrangements in 1817 under which Samuel Taylor Coleridge moved publisher, from John Mathew Gutch to Rest Fenner, working with the Rev. Thomas Curtis. Coleridge was offered the role of editor; he wrote the Introduction, which appeared in January 1818, brought out to compete with the fifth edition of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; which had appeared in 1817 in 20 volumes. Fenner, however, dropped the publication after five part-volumes.

The &quot;Encyclopædia Metropolitana&quot; was revived in 1820 by the intervention of Bishop William Howley, concerned also to compete with the &quot;Britannica&quot;, in this case to counter its secular tendency. Howley brought in William Rowe Lyall to take charge. Lyall in turn appointed Edward Smedley as editor. Smedley was succeeded in 1836 by Hugh James Rose.

A rival production was the &quot;London Encyclopædia&quot; (22 volumes beginning in 1825 and completed within a few years) of the publisher Thomas Tegg. Tegg used Thomas Curtis from the original Coleridge project as editor, and proclaimed the fact on the title page. As he explained in the 1829 preface to his work, Tegg had been obstructed by legal moves from the side of the &quot;Metropolitana&quot;, but went ahead anyway, pleading that compilations such as encyclopedias needed different rules of copyright.

==Plan of the work==
It professed to give sciences and systematic arts entire and in their natural sequence. Coleridge&#x27;s Introduction was a treatise on method, with fundamental approach to emphasize the relations of ideas:
 Method, therefore, becomes natural to the mind which has been accustomed to contemplate not things only, or for their own sake alone, but likewise and chiefly the relations of things, either their relations to each other, or to the observer, or to the state and apprehension of the hearers. To enumerate and analyze these relations, with the conditions under which alone they are discoverable, is to teach the science of method.
Later critics said of the actual plan that, being the proposal of Coleridge, it had at least enough of a poetical character to be eminently impractical (&quot;Quarterly Review&quot;, cxiii, 379); but the treatises by Archbishop Richard Whately, Sir John Herschel, Professors Peter Barlow, George Peacock, Augustus De Morgan, and others, were considered excellent.

==Divisions==
It is in four divisions, with only the last division being presented in an alphabetical structure:
*I. Pure Sciences, 2 vols., 1,813 pages, 16 plates, 28 treatises, includes grammar, law and theology;
*II. Mixed and Applied Sciences, 6 vols., 5,391 pages, 437 plates, 42 treatises, including fine arts, useful arts, natural history and its application, the medical sciences;
** v.8 (i.e. Mixed Sciences v.6)
*III. History and biography, 5 vols., 4,458 pages, 7 maps, containing biography (135 essays) chronologically arranged (to Thomas Aquinas in vol. 3), and interspersed with (210) chapters on history (to 1815), as the most philosophical, interesting and natural form (but modern lives were so many that the plan broke down, and a division of biography, to be in 2 vols., was announced but not published);
** v.11 (i.e. History and Biography v.3)
** v.12 (i.e. History and Biography v.4)
*IV. Miscellaneous and lexicographical, 13 vols., 10,338 pages, 105 plates, including geography, a dictionary of English and descriptive natural history. An English lexicon, in parts, was supplied by Charles Richardson, from 1818.
** v.16 (i.e. Miscellaneous v.3)
** v.18 (i.e. Miscellaneous v.5)
** v.23 (i.e. Miscellaneous v.10)

The plates were issued in three volumes. An index volume, 364 pages, contained about 9,000 articles.

A re-issue in 38 vols. quarto, was announced in 1849. Of a second edition 42 vols. 8vo, 14,744 pages, belonging to divisions i. to iii., were published in 1849–1858.

==References==
==External links==
* Internet Archive. Full access: view and download all volumes.
* Hathitrust. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="99" end="115" title="part publication" label="part publication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="135" end="141" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="306" end="329" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247146" start="352" end="369" title="John Mathew Gutch" label="John Mathew Gutch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="384" title="Rest Fenner" label="Rest Fenner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="606" title="History of the Encyclopædia Britannica#5th edition" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q844561" start="815" end="829" title="William Howley" label="William Howley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014800" start="954" end="972" title="William Rowe Lyall" label="William Rowe Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345351" start="1013" end="1027" title="Edward Smedley" label="Edward Smedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931266" start="1072" end="1087" title="Hugh James Rose" label="Hugh James Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067757" start="1123" end="1142" title="London Encyclopaedia (1825)" label="London Encyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794394" start="1230" end="1241" title="Thomas Tegg" label="Thomas Tegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="2421" end="2437" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997652" start="2490" end="2505" title="Richard Whately" label="Richard Whately"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="2511" end="2524" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q390352" start="2537" end="2549" title="Peter Barlow (mathematician)" label="Peter Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394690" start="2551" end="2565" title="George Peacock (mathematician)" label="George Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q208448" start="2567" end="2585" title="Augustus De Morgan" label="Augustus De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="2933" end="2942" title="fine arts" label="fine arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901790" start="2944" end="2955" title="useful arts" label="useful arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="2957" end="2972" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2998" end="3014" title="medical sciences" label="medical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="3171" end="3185" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="3619" end="3628" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210346" start="3632" end="3653" title="Dictionary of the english language" label="dictionary of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082036" start="3733" end="3751" title="Charles Richardson (lexicographer)" label="Charles Richardson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780084" wikidata="Q521725" url="?curid=780084" title="Carlo Filangieri">
<text>Carlo Filangieri (May 10, 1784 – October 9, 1867), prince of Satriano, was a Neapolitan soldier and statesman. He was the son of Gaetano Filangieri, a celebrated philosopher and jurist, and father of Gaetano Filangieri, prince of Satriano, an art historian and collector.

==Biography==
Born at Cava de&#x27; Tirreni, near Salerno, at the age of fifteen Filangieri decided on a military career, and having obtained an introduction to Napoleon Bonaparte, then first consul, was admitted to the Military Academy at Paris. In 1803, he received a commission in an infantry regiment, and took part in the campaign of 1805 under General Davout, first in the Low Countries, and later at Ulm, Mariazell and Austerlitz, where he fought with distinction, was wounded several times and promoted.

He returned to Naples as captain on Masséna&#x27;s staff to fight the Bourbons and the Austrians in 1806, and subsequently went to Spain, where he followed Joseph Bonaparte in his retreat from Madrid. After having slain General François Franceschi-Losio in a duel he was sent back to Naples; there he served under Joachim Murat with the rank of general, and fought against the Anglo-Sicilian forces in Calabria and at Messina. On the fall of Napoleon, he took part in Murat&#x27;s campaign against Eugène de Beauharnais, and later in that against Austria, and was severely wounded at the battle of the Panaro (1815).

On the restoration of the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV (I), Filangieri retained his rank and command, but found the army utterly disorganized and impregnated with Carbonarism. In the disturbances of 1820, he adhered to the Constitutionalist party, and fought under General Pepe against the Austrians. On the re-establishment of the autocracy, he was dismissed from the service, and retired to Calabria where he had inherited the princely title and estates of Satriano.

In 1831, he was recalled by Ferdinand II and entrusted with various military reforms. On the outbreak of the troubles of 1848, Filangieri advised the king to grant the constitution, which he did in February 1848, but when the Sicilians formally seceded from the Neapolitan kingdom Filangieri was given the command of an armed force with which to reduce the island to obedience. On September 3, he landed near Messina, and after very severe fighting captured the city. He then advanced southwards, besieged and took Catania, where his troops committed many atrocities, and by May 1849, he had conquered the whole of Sicily, though not without much bloodshed.

He remained in Sicily as governor (the exact Italian title was Luogotenente generale dei reali domini al di là del Faro, meaning Lieutenant-general of the royal domains beyond the Lighthouse) until 1855, when he retired into private life, as he could not carry out the reforms he desired owing to the hostility of Giovanni Cassisi, the minister for Sicily. On the death of Ferdinand II (May 22, 1859) the new king Francis II appointed Filangieri premier and minister of war. He promoted good relations with France, then lighting with Piedmont against the Austrians in Lombardy, and strongly urged on the king the necessity of an alliance with Piedmont and a constitution as the only means whereby the dynasty might be saved. These proposals being rejected, Filangieri resigned office.

In May 1860, Francis at last promulgated the constitution, but it was too late, for Garibaldi was in Sicily and Naples was seething with rebellion. On the advice of Liborio Romano, the new prefect of police, Filangieri was ordered to leave Naples. He went to Marseilles with his wife and subsequently to Florence, where at the instance of General La Marmora he undertook to write an account of the Italian army. Although he adhered to the new government he refused to accept any dignity at its hands, and died at his villa of San Giorgio a Cremano near Naples on 9 October 1867.

According to Luigi Villari in the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Eleventh Edition, Filangieri was a very distinguished soldier, and a man of great ability; although he changed sides several times, he became really attached to the Bourbon dynasty, which he hoped to save by freeing it from its reactionary tendencies and infusing a new spirit into it. His conduct in Sicily was severe and harsh, but he was not without feelings of humanity, and he was an honest man and a good administrator.

His biography was written by his daughter Teresa Filangieri Fieschi Ravaschieri, &quot;Il generale Carlo Filangieri&quot; (Milan, 1902), an interesting, although somewhat too laudatory volume based on the general&#x27;s own unpublished memoirs; for the Sicilian expedition see V. Finocchiaro, &quot;La rivoluzione siciliana del 1848-49 e la spedizione del generale Filangieri&quot; (Catania, 1906, with bibliography), in which Filangieri is highly criticised.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q521725" start="0" end="16" title="Carlo Filangieri" label="Carlo Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q53694" start="61" end="69" title="Satriano (Calabria)" label="Satriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="77" end="87" title="Naples" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q979054" start="129" end="147" title="Gaetano Filangieri" label="Gaetano Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="162" end="173" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="178" end="184" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558335" start="200" end="238" title="Gaetano Filangieri, prince of Satriano" label="Gaetano Filangieri, prince of Satriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q19272" start="295" end="316" title="Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni" label="Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="323" end="330" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="434" end="452" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="513" end="518" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q158778" start="623" end="637" title="Louis Nicolas Davout" label="General Davout"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="652" end="665" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q159072" start="680" end="683" title="battle of Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q952479" start="685" end="694" title="Battle of Mariazell" label="Mariazell"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="699" end="709" title="battle of Austerlitz" label="Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q242609" start="822" end="829" title="André Masséna" label="Masséna"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="856" end="864" title="Bourbons" label="Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="917" end="922" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="942" end="958" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="979" end="985" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084648" start="1014" end="1039" title="François Franceschi-Losio" label="François Franceschi-Losio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="1045" end="1049" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="1100" end="1113" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="1188" end="1196" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="1204" end="1211" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155545" start="1284" end="1305" title="Eugène de Beauharnais" label="Eugène de Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404199" start="1374" end="1394" title="battle of the Panaro" label="battle of the Panaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="1430" end="1459" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="Bourbon king Ferdinand IV (I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q749325" start="1564" end="1573" title="Carbonari" label="Carbonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q204375" start="1666" end="1678" title="Guglielmo Pepe" label="General Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q332717" start="1899" end="1911" title="Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="2280" end="2287" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="2386" end="2393" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840799" start="2593" end="2649" title="Luogotenente" label="Luogotenente generale dei reali domini al di là del Faro"/>
<link wikidata="Q206223" start="2944" end="2954" title="Francis II of the Two Sicilies" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="3064" end="3072" title="Piedmont (Italy)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="3098" end="3106" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3620" end="3628" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q471272" start="3655" end="3673" title="Alfonso Ferrero la Marmora" label="General La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q72497" start="3842" end="3863" title="San Giorgio a Cremano" label="San Giorgio a Cremano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999394" start="3909" end="3922" title="Luigi Villari" label="Luigi Villari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="3930" end="3982" title="Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition" label="&amp;quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&amp;quot; Eleventh Edition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780087" wikidata="Q7544042" url="?curid=780087" title="Smart fluid">
<text>A smart fluid is a fluid whose properties (e.g. viscosity) can be changed by applying an electric field or a magnetic field.

The most developed smart fluids today are fluids whose viscosity increases when a magnetic field is applied. Small magnetic dipoles are suspended in a non-magnetic fluid, and the applied magnetic field causes these small magnets to line up and form strings that increase the viscosity. These magnetorheological or MR fluids have been used in the suspension of the 2002 model of the Cadillac Seville STS automobile and more recently, in the suspension of the second-generation Audi TT. Depending on road conditions, the fluid&#x27;s damping viscosity can be adjusted. This is more expensive than traditional systems, but it provides better (faster) control. Similar systems are being explored to reduce vibration in washing machines, air conditioning compressors, rockets and satellites, and one has even been installed in Japan&#x27;s National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation in Tokyo as an earthquake shock absorber. 

Some haptic devices whose resistance to touch can be controlled are also based on these MR fluids.

Another major type of smart fluid are electrorheological or ER fluids, whose resistance to flow can be quickly and dramatically altered by an applied electric field (note, the yield stress point is altered rather than the viscosity). Besides fast acting clutches, brakes, shock absorbers and hydraulic valves, other, more esoteric, applications such as bulletproof vests have been proposed for these fluids.

Other smart fluids change their surface tension in the presence of an electric field. This has been used to produce very small controllable lenses: a drop of this fluid, captured in a small cylinder and surrounded by oil, serves as a lens whose shape can be changed by applying an electric field.

==Background==
The properties of smart fluids have been known for around sixty years, but were subject to only sporadic investigations up until the 1990s, when they were suddenly the subject of renewed interest, notably culminating with the use of an MR fluid on the suspension of the 2002 model of the Cadillac Seville STS automobile and more recently, on the suspension of the second-generation Audi TT. Other applications include brakes and seismic dampers, which are used in buildings in seismically-active zones to damp the oscillations occurring in an earthquake. Since then it appears that interest has waned a little, possibly due to the existence of various limitations of smart fluids which have yet to be overcome.

==See also==
*Continuum mechanics
*Electrorheological fluid
*Ferrofluid
*Fluid mechanics
*Magnetorheological fluid
*Rheology
*Smart glass
*Smart metal

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7544042" start="2" end="13" title="Smart fluid" label="smart fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="19" end="24" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="48" end="57" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="89" end="103" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="109" end="123" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q902419" start="418" end="436" title="Magnetorheological fluid" label="magnetorheological"/>
<link wikidata="Q272870" start="472" end="482" title="suspension (vehicle)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291844" start="658" end="675" title="Viscous damping" label="damping viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="828" end="837" title="oscillation" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="841" end="856" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="859" end="887" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning compressors"/>
<link wikidata="Q656957" start="961" end="1011" title="National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation" label="National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="1015" end="1020" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="1027" end="1037" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="1038" end="1052" title="shock absorber" label="shock absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="1061" end="1067" title="Haptic technology" label="haptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327550" start="1194" end="1212" title="Electrorheological fluid" label="electrorheological"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="1332" end="1344" title="yield stress" label="yield stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="1378" end="1387" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194302" start="1410" end="1416" title="clutch" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="1420" end="1426" title="brakes" label="brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="1428" end="1443" title="shock absorbers" label="shock absorbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280487" start="1448" end="1464" title="hydraulic manifold" label="hydraulic valves"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="1597" end="1612" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="1705" end="1711" title="Lens (optics)" label="lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025247" start="2166" end="2182" title="Cadillac Seville" label="Cadillac Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q531690" start="2260" end="2267" title="Audi TT" label="Audi TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q193463" start="2604" end="2623" title="Continuum mechanics" label="Continuum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327550" start="2625" end="2649" title="Electrorheological fluid" label="Electrorheological fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q727023" start="2651" end="2661" title="Ferrofluid" label="Ferrofluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="2663" end="2678" title="Fluid mechanics" label="Fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q902419" start="2680" end="2704" title="Magnetorheological fluid" label="Magnetorheological fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q271707" start="2706" end="2714" title="Rheology" label="Rheology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29159" start="2716" end="2727" title="Smart glass" label="Smart glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q898455" start="2729" end="2740" title="Smart metal" label="Smart metal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780092" wikidata="Q164971" url="?curid=780092" title="Gardnos crater">
<text>Gardnos crater (&quot;Gardnos krateret&quot;) is a meteorite impact crater in Nesbyen municipality in Buskerud, Norway. It is located inside Meteorite Park (&quot;Meteorittparken&quot;) at Gardnos north of the town of Nesbyen.
Gardnos crater is in diameter, and was created when a meteorite with an estimated diameter of struck 500 million years ago. At first this site was believed to be a volcanic crater, but in 1990 two geologists, Johan Naterstad and Johannes A. Dons, confirmed that it was in fact formed by meteorite impact.
The original bedrock in the area was fractured and a powder of crushed rocks was forced into all the fractures. This is the origin of the peculiar rock in this area. It is possible to drive into the centre of the crater, which makes the Gardnos crater one of the world&#x27;s most accessible meteorite craters. There are two trails through the surrounding natural region, with information signs describing the unique geology of the area.

== References ==
== External links ==
*Meteorittparken website
*Earth Impact Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164971" start="0" end="14" title="Gardnos crater" label="Gardnos crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="51" end="60" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="61" end="74" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q483986" start="78" end="98" title="Nesbyen (municipality)" label="Nesbyen municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50618" start="102" end="110" title="Buskerud" label="Buskerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="112" end="118" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723773" start="218" end="225" title="Nesbyen" label="Nesbyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970725" start="888" end="902" title="natural region" label="natural region"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780098" wikidata="Q5566721" url="?curid=780098" title="Glasford crater">
<text>The Glasford crater, also known as the Glasford Disturbance, Glasford Structure, and Glasford Cryptoexplosion Structure, is a buried impact crater in southern Peoria County, Illinois, in the United States. It is one of two known meteor craters in Illinois.

It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be less than 430 million years (Silurian or younger). It was formed in a marine environment in the Late Ordovician period. The meteorite is estimated between 50 and 90 million tons and likely originated in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter.

The Glasford crater was discovered by the Central Illinois Light Company (formerly CILCO, now Ameren) while drilling wells for underground natural gas storage. It is not visible from the surface, as it is covered by agricultural farmland. The present day location is near the intersection of Cowser and Kingston Mines roads. It was identified in 1963 as a probable impact structure. In the 1980s, scientists identified shatter cones. Geologists estimate the meteor released a large amount of energy, roughly equivalent to 20,000 nuclear bombs, 460 million tons of TNT, or two to three times the energy of the Mount St. Helens eruption.

According to research by geologist Charles Monson, the Glasford crater may be connected to the Great Ordovician Meteor Shower. Dr. Birger Schmitz&#x27;s study suggests that the dust from the meteor impact may have impacted Earth&#x27;s climate and contributed to the mid-Ordovician Ice Age.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5566721" start="4" end="19" title="Glasford crater" label="Glasford crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566721" start="39" end="79" title="Glasford crater" label="Glasford Disturbance, Glasford Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566721" start="85" end="119" title="Glasford crater" label="Glasford Cryptoexplosion Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566721" start="119" end="120" title="Glasford crater" label=","/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="133" end="146" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q113079" start="159" end="172" title="Peoria County, Illinois" label="Peoria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="174" end="182" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="191" end="204" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="336" end="344" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="403" end="418" title="Ordovician" label="Late Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q462984" start="597" end="627" title="Ameren" label="Central Illinois Light Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="694" end="705" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="974" end="986" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1084" end="1097" title="Nuclear weapon" label="nuclear bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="1119" end="1122" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="1164" end="1189" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100912" start="1287" end="1317" title="Ordovician meteor event" label="Great Ordovician Meteor Shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753650" start="1474" end="1481" title="Andean-Saharan glaciation" label="Ice Age"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780100" wikidata="Q1533447" url="?curid=780100" title="Goat Paddock crater">
<text>Goat Paddock is a 5 km-diameter near-circular bowl-shaped depression in a range of gently dipping Proterozoic sandstone in the Kimberley Region of northern Western Australia, 106 km west-southwest of Halls Creek. It is interpreted as an ancient meteorite impact crater, the evidence including breccia containing melted rocks, silica glass, shatter cones and shocked quartz. Drilling shows that the crater is filled with about 200 m of ancient lake sediments containing Early Eocene pollen, this age thus giving a minimum estimate for the age of the crater itself. The crater is not perfectly circular, but slightly elongated in a north–south direction, suggesting that the projectile struck at low angle from either the north or south.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Milton, D. J., Ferguson, J. and Fudali,R.F., Goat Paddock impact crater, Western Australia (abstract). Meteoritics, v. 15, p. 333. 1980</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1533447" start="0" end="12" title="Goat Paddock crater" label="Goat Paddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="98" end="109" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="110" end="119" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q672805" start="127" end="143" title="Kimberley (Western Australia)" label="Kimberley Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="156" end="173" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q992686" start="200" end="211" title="Halls Creek, Western Australia" label="Halls Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="245" end="254" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="255" end="268" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="293" end="300" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="340" end="352" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="358" end="372" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="475" end="481" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780101" wikidata="Q919318" url="?curid=780101" title="Gosses Bluff impact structure">
<text>Gosses Bluff (or Gosse&#x27;s Bluff) is thought to be the eroded remnant of an impact crater. Known as Tnorala to the Western Arrernte people of the surrounding region, it is located in the southern Northern Territory, near the centre of Australia, about west of Alice Springs and about to the northeast of Uluru (Ayers Rock). It was named by Ernest Giles in 1872 after Australian explorer William Gosse&#x27;s brother Henry, who was a member of William&#x27;s expedition.

== Formation ==
The original crater is thought to have been formed by the impact of an asteroid or comet approximately 142.5 ± 0.8 million years ago, in the earliest Cretaceous, very close to the Jurassic - Cretaceous boundary. The original crater rim has been estimated at in diameter, but this has been eroded away. The diameter, high crater-like feature, now exposed, is interpreted as the eroded relic of the crater&#x27;s central uplift. The impact origin of this topographic feature was first proposed in the 1960s, the strongest evidence coming from the abundance of shatter cones. In the past the crater has been the target of petroleum exploration, and two abandoned exploration wells lie near its centre.

== Cultural significance ==
The site is known as Tnorala to the Aboriginal people of the Western Arrernte language group, and is a sacred place. It is now located in the Tnorala Conservation Reserve. A Western Arrernte story attributes its origins to a cosmic impact: in the Dreamtime, a group of celestial women were dancing as stars in the Milky Way. One of the women grew tired and placed her baby in a wooden basket, or turna (also known as a coolamon). As the women continued dancing, the basket fell and plunged into the earth. The baby fell to the earth and forced the rocks upward, forming the circular mountain range. The baby&#x27;s parents, the evening and morning star, continue to search for their baby to this day. The turna can be seen in the sky as the constellation Corona Australis.

== In popular culture ==

Gosses Bluff is the inspiration for the impact crater located in the fictional Mia Tukurta National Park in the novel and Amazon Prime series &quot;The Lost Flowers of Alice Hart&quot;.

== See also ==
* List of impact craters in Australia

== References ==
== External links ==

* Tnorala (Gosse Bluff) Conservation Reserve
* Nice photo of Gosse Bluff ©Yann Arthus-Bertrand &#x27;Earth from above with Fujifilm and UNESCO&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919318" start="0" end="12" title="Gosses Bluff impact structure" label="Gosses Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q919318" start="17" end="35" title="Gosses Bluff impact structure" label="Gosse&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="79" end="92" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q919318" start="103" end="110" title="Gosses Bluff impact structure" label="Tnorala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767941" start="118" end="134" title="Western Arrernte" label="Western Arrernte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="199" end="217" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17872" start="263" end="276" title="Alice Springs" label="Alice Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q33910" start="307" end="312" title="Uluru" label="Uluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q226071" start="343" end="355" title="Ernest Giles" label="Ernest Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937440" start="390" end="403" title="William Gosse (explorer)" label="William Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="561" end="569" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="573" end="578" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="640" end="650" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="670" end="678" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="681" end="691" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="1048" end="1060" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1254" end="1271" title="Aboriginal Australian" label="Aboriginal people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767941" start="1279" end="1295" title="Western Arrernte" label="Western Arrernte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668381" start="1321" end="1333" title="Aboriginal sacred site" label="sacred place"/>
<link wikidata="Q155881" start="1465" end="1474" title="Dreamtime" label="Dreamtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1532" end="1541" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129683" start="1637" end="1645" title="Coolamon (vessel)" label="coolamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="1858" end="1870" title="Venus" label="morning star"/>
<link wikidata="Q10413" start="1973" end="1989" title="Corona Australis" label="Corona Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086634" start="2140" end="2152" title="Amazon Prime" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517911" start="2166" end="2196" title="The Lost Flowers of Alice Hart" label="The Lost Flowers of Alice Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q782241" start="2222" end="2257" title="List of impact craters in Australia" label="List of impact craters in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780103" wikidata="Q5589980" url="?curid=780103" title="Gow crater">
<text>Gow is an impact crater in Saskatchewan, Canada. It is 5 km (3 mi) in diameter and the age is estimated to be less than 250 million years (Triassic or later). The crater contains a classic crater lake (Gow Lake) with an island (Calder Island) formed by the central uplift. It is the smallest known crater in Canada with an uplift structure.

The crater is unique in that it is the only preserved example of a transitional impact structure on earth. This is characterized by a crater having relatively smooth walls and a floor partly or completely covered by debris slumped from the crater walls. The only other example existing is in Australia however is it extremely deteriorated. Due to this, the rock forming the crater bed is a unique form of breccia existing nowhere else on earth. This rock was formed when existing rock was liquified during the meteor impact. 

The larger Deep Bay crater, of Cretaceous age, is approximately east of Gow crater. The Carswell impact structure, also of Cretaceous age, is to the northwest of Gow.

== Gow Lake ==
Gow Lake — the lake that fills the crater — has a surface area of and a shoreline that is long. Fish commonly found in the lake include burbot, lake trout, lake whitefish, northern pike, and walleye.

The lake, and by extension, the crater, were named after James Richard Gow. He was killed in action during World War II on 25 April 1945.

== See also ==
* List of impact structures in North America
* List of lakes of Saskatchewan
* Geology of Saskatchewan

== References ==
== External links ==
*Aerial Exploration of the Gow impact crater</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5589980" start="0" end="3" title="Gow crater" label="Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="10" end="23" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="27" end="39" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="139" end="147" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11726988" start="189" end="200" title="Impact crater lake" label="crater lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="747" end="754" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250083" start="880" end="895" title="Deep Bay crater" label="Deep Bay crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="900" end="910" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q941759" start="957" end="982" title="Carswell impact structure" label="Carswell impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q144700" start="1188" end="1194" title="burbot" label="burbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q469946" start="1196" end="1206" title="lake trout" label="lake trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q110577" start="1208" end="1222" title="lake whitefish" label="lake whitefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="1224" end="1237" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="1243" end="1250" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1360" end="1372" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414405" start="1409" end="1451" title="List of impact structures in North America" label="List of impact structures in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624875" start="1454" end="1483" title="List of lakes of Saskatchewan" label="List of lakes of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535395" start="1486" end="1509" title="Geology of Saskatchewan" label="Geology of Saskatchewan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780104" wikidata="Q1540530" url="?curid=780104" title="Goyder crater">
<text>Goyder is an impact structure (or astrobleme), the eroded remnant of a former impact crater. It is situated in Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory, Australia, and was named after the nearby Goyder River. The impact occurred into Mesoproterozoic sedimentary rocks of the McArthur Basin. The deformed area is exposed at the surface and marked by a 3 km diameter ring of fractured and faulted sandstone, which is interpreted as the eroded relic of a central uplift (material that rebounded within the crater to once form a central peak); the original crater rim, long since removed by erosion, being estimated at approximately 9–12 km diameter. Evidence for an impact origin includes the presence of shatter cones and shocked quartz in outcrops of deformed sandstone at the center of the site.

== Age ==
The time of impact cannot be accurately constrained, however, it probably happened more recently than 1325 Ma (middle Mesoproterozoic), which is the age of igneous rocks that are inferred to have been uplifted by the impact based on aeromagnetic evidence, and significantly older than Cretaceous. The site is very remote and difficult to access.

==See also==

*List of impact craters in Australia

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1540530" start="0" end="6" title="Goyder crater" label="Goyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="13" end="29" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="34" end="44" title="astrobleme" label="astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="78" end="91" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q329884" start="111" end="122" title="Arnhem Land" label="Arnhem Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="130" end="148" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="150" end="159" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891375" start="192" end="204" title="Goyder River" label="Goyder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="231" end="246" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="247" end="258" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914959" start="272" end="286" title="McArthur Basin" label="McArthur Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156574" start="449" end="463" title="central uplift" label="central uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="699" end="711" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="717" end="731" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="911" end="913" title="Mega-annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="922" end="937" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="960" end="967" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q381526" start="1037" end="1049" title="Aeromagnetic survey" label="aeromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="1089" end="1099" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q782241" start="1166" end="1201" title="List of impact craters in Australia" label="List of impact craters in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780110" wikidata="Q958381" url="?curid=780110" title="Granby crater">
<text>Granby is an impact crater in Östergötland, Sweden, located to the southeast of Vadstena. It is estimated to have formed about 470 million years ago (Middle Ordovician). The crater is in diameter and is not exposed at the surface.

== See also ==
*Impact craters of Sweden

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q958381" start="0" end="6" title="Granby crater" label="Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="13" end="26" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q214829" start="30" end="42" title="Östergötland" label="Östergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="44" end="50" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q265682" start="80" end="88" title="Vadstena" label="Vadstena"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="157" end="167" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063228" start="248" end="272" title="Impact craters of Sweden" label="Impact craters of Sweden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780111" wikidata="Q4758104" url="?curid=780111" title="Andrew Natsios">
<text>Andrew S. Natsios (born September 22, 1949) is an American public servant and Republican politician originally from Massachusetts, who served in a number of positions in the administrations of Governor Paul Cellucci and President George W. Bush.

After serving as a Massachusetts state representative and chairman of the Massachusetts Republican Party, Natsios served as secretary of administration and finance and chairman of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority in the Cellucci administration. Then, Natsios served under George W. Bush as administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and special envoy to Sudan. Natsios also served as vice president of the evangelical Christian humanitarian organization World Vision U.S. He currently teaches as executive professor at the George H.W Bush School of Government and Public Service at Texas A&amp;M University and serves as director for the Scowcroft Institute of International Affairs.

==Education==
Natsios was born in Philadelphia to Basil and Eta Natsios, Americans of Greek descent. He received his BA in history from Georgetown University in 1971 and his MPP from the Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University in 1979.

==Career==
===Twentieth century===
Natsios served in the Massachusetts House of Representatives from 1975 to 1987, focusing on public finance and municipal government. During this time, he co-authored Proposition 2½ (a property tax cutting law) and State Zoning Law Chapter 808. He was also chairman of the Town of Holliston By-Law Study Committee and Treasurer for the Industrial Development Commission. In 1986, Natsios introduced legislation to repeal the Massachusetts Teachers&#x27; Oath, a product of the 1930s that remained state law even after the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court invalidated the law in 1967. The legislation passed without opposition. He was named Legislator of the Year by the Massachusetts Municipal Association in 1978, and by the Massachusetts Association of School Committees and Citizen for Limited Taxation in 1986.

Natsios was also the Chairman of the Massachusetts Republican State Committee for seven years. He directed the rebuilding of the party&#x27;s institutional capacity, and implemented a strategy of focusing on races for the state legislature. The state party&#x27;s income increased significantly during this period, as did the services they offered to candidates, and the number of Republicans in the legislative delegation increased by 17%.

A 23-year veteran of the United States Army Reserve, Natsios was commissioned second lieutenant at Georgetown University (ROTC) in 1971. He was a civil affairs officer and served in the Gulf War in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait City, and on the Joint Staff of the Pentagon in 1993, where he worked on Somalia and Bosnia. He retired in 1995 with the rank of lieutenant colonel.

He directed the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance at the U.S. Agency for International Development from 1989 to 1991 during the George H.W Bush administration. Additionally, he served as assistant administrator for the Bureau for Food and Humanitarian Assistance, which is now the Bureau of Democracy, Conflict and Humanitarian Assistance, from 1991 to January 1993.

Under Natsios, OFDA focused its attention on civil wars and famines, which research had found were responsible for more than twice the number of deaths than from natural disasters. The first Disaster Assistance Response Teams (DART) were developed under Natsios&#x27;s predecessor, Julia Taft, but were first deployed under Natsios&#x27; orders. The first version of the Field Operations Guide For Disaster Assessment and Response (FOG) was issued under his auspices.

Natsios was assistance administrator during the 1991–1992 Somali famine and played a major role in humanitarian aid in response to it. USAID&#x27;s relief strategy consisted of several key elements: sale of food to Somali merchants to lower food prices; providing free food at feeding stations in urban areas; providing free dry food in bulk in rural areas; enhancing security; decentralization and distributing food in a number of different areas to stop mass population movements.

From 1993 to 1998, Natsios served as vice president of international programs for World Vision.

Natsios was one of the first people to blow the whistle on the North Korean famine, writing in a &quot;Washington Post&quot; op-ed in early 1997, &quot;The evidence is incontestible.&quot; He travelled to North Korea in June 1997 with World Vision, and was involved in relief efforts as the leader of the Emergency Relief Committee of InterAction, a consortium of American NGOs. Natsios later published a book on the crisis entitled &quot;The Great North Korean Famine&quot;.

From March 1999 to April 2000, he served as secretary for administration and finance for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In 2001, Natsios took over as chairman and CEO of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority and CEO of Boston&#x27;s Central Artery Project (the Big Dig) after a cost overrun scandal. Once in command, he replaced eight senior figures, including the project manager, commissioned a new audit, and developed strategies to tackle the cost overruns, including putting the $151 million from land sales to Harvard University towards paying for future unexpected costs. He also contributed to the designs for surface restoration for once the project was completed.

===Twenty-first century===
In May 2001, Natsios was sworn in as the administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). While serving as administrator, he also served as special humanitarian assistance coordinator for Sudan and coordinator for international disaster assistance.

Natsios articulated his approach to foreign aid in an article he wrote during his time as administrator, entitled &quot;The Nine Principles of Reconstruction and Development.&quot; These principles, he wrote, &quot;distill fundamental lessons&quot; and &quot;bring greater clarity to the operative principles that inform the mission of USAID.&quot; The nine principles are ownership (build on local leadership and commitment); capacity building (strengthen local institutions and transfer technical skills); sustainability; selectivity (allocate resources based on need, local commitment, and foreign policy interests); assessment (conduct research and adapt best practices for local conditions); results (have clearly defined, measurable, and strategically focused objectives); partnership; flexibility; and accountability.

Early in his term as administrator, Natsios set up the Office of Conflict Mitigation and Management, and directed that conflict provisions be added to country strategies. This was crucial, given that sixty percent of the countries with USAID mission had been involved in civil wars or major conflicts in the preceding five years. In addition, Natsios led the creation of USAID&#x27;s Fragile State Strategy, which, as he stated in its introduction, directed USAID &quot;to focus our efforts on those countries where will be able to have the greatest impact.&quot;

The Office of Military Affairs, now the Office of Office of Civilian-Military Cooperation, was also created during his term as administrator, to serve as the primary point of contact with the Department of Defense and allow for personnel exchange and policy development.

Natsios also worked to advance USAID&#x27;s commitment to inclusive development by passing a policy directive that mandated that requests for funding explain how they will instead work to ensure that people with disabilities are included and not discriminated against. Another policy directive also required that all USAID-funded new construction and major renovations be accessible for people with disabilities. A Disability Coordinator position and an External Advisory Committee were also both created during his term.

Under Natsios, the agency initiated a relief program in Darfur in September 2003, nearly half a year before any action began at the U.N. Sam Brownback, then Senator from Kansas, credits Natsios as the person &quot;who hit the button on Darfur.&quot; In order to show the scale of the Janjawiid militia damage, Natsios ordered before and after satellite photos taken of villages in Darfur. He also commissioned a report on the expected death rates in Darfur, should the humanitarian response be insufficient or delayed. His warnings led to President Bush&#x27;s use of political pressure on to Sudanese leader to try to stop the violence, as well as billions of dollars of aid being sent to Sudan.

His position on funding for antiretrovirals in Sub-Saharan Africa remains an enduring part of his career at USAID and was emblematic of the position of the US government of the time. In a statement prepared for the House Foreign Affairs Committee in June 2001, he responded to a proposal for an increase in antiretroviral funding as suggested by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan:If we had [antiretrovirals] today we could not distribute them. We could not administer the program because we do not have the doctors, we do not have the roads, we do not have the cold chain. This sounds small and some people, if you have traveled to rural Africa you know this, this is not a criticism, just a different world. People do not know what watches and clocks are. They do not use Western means for telling time.In an interview with the Fletcher Forum of World Affairs in 2003, he discussed how his thinking had changed, partly due to the impact of public pressure. &quot;We are trying [a retroviral program in Ghana], and if it works, we are going to extend it. Anything we can do to reduce the spread of the disease, and keep people alive, we are going to do.

As administrator, Natsios oversaw the creation and implementation of the first Global Development Alliances (GDAs)—partnerships between USAID and the private sector. In the first fifteen years of operation, more than 1,500 GDAs—involving over 3,500 partner organizations and valued at more than $20 billion – were created. Natsios also helped launch major presidential initiatives, including PEPFAR and the President&#x27;s Malaria Initiative (PMI).

After visiting a project site of a USAID designed and funded program, but seeing no mention of USAID, Natsios reported that he was motivated to start a branding campaign, and ensure that credit was being appropriately given. The USAID logo was put on USAID-funded projects, and a media campaign was also implemented, increasing America&#x27;s approval rating in foreign countries. Natsios also oversaw the redesign of the USAID logo, which was updated to include the tagline &quot;From the American People&quot; so as to emphasize the contributions of the American taxpayer.

Natsios advocated for changes to the United States&#x27; food aid system that would allow food to be purchased locally. This would be cheaper—and faster—than shipping in American-grown grain. Speaking at a food aid conference in Kansas City in 2005, he said &quot;The fact that U.S. farmers and shippers are able to benefit from Food for Peace program is an important but secondary benefit. The primary objective is to save lives.&quot; Pressures from agricultural groups, shipping companies and humanitarian groups involved in distributing food aid prevented the reforms from passing.

He resigned from USAID on January 14, 2006. Shortly after, President Bush appointed him special envoy for Darfur. As special envoy, Natsios played a key role in managing relations between the United States and Sudan, including about implementing the North/South Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and helping humanitarian aid reach those in need. He retired as special envoy in 2007 when Rich Williamson was appointed as the new special envoy to Sudan.

In an April 2003 interview with Ted Koppel, Natsios suggested that the total cost of rebuilding Iraq would not exceed $1.7 billion to U.S. taxpayers. Actual figures have proven to be considerably higher.

From 2006 to 2012, Natsios taught as a Distinguished Professor in the Practice of Diplomacy and served as an Advisor on International Development at Georgetown University&#x27;s Walsh School of Foreign Service.

Natsios teaches courses on international development and famine theory at Texas A&amp;M&#x27;s George H. W. Bush School of Government and Public Service and serves as the director of the Scowcroft Institute of International Affairs.

Natsios was a Jennings Randolph Senior Fellow at the United States Institute of Peace from 1998 to 1999 and a Senior Fellow at the Hudson Institute from 2008 to the present.

==Boards==
Natsios is a board member of the American Academy of Diplomacy and an archon of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Order of St. Andrew. He is also the emeritus co-chairman for the Committee for Human Rights in North Korea, which is a research center center on human rights.

==Publications==
Andrew Natsios has authored numerous articles on foreign policy and humanitarian emergencies, as well as three books: &quot;Sudan, South Sudan, and Darfur: What Everyone Needs to Know&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2012), &quot;The Great North Korean Famine&quot; (U.S. Institute for Peace, 2001), and &quot;U.S. Foreign Policy and the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse&quot; (Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1997). He is also the co-editor, along with former White House chief of staff Andrew Card, of a book entitled &quot;Transforming Our World: President George H.W Bush and American Foreign Policy&quot;.

Natsios has also contributed to thirteen books, written over 40 articles for publications such as &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, and the &quot;Washington Quarterly&quot;. Natsios was also featured in the US Army War College&#x27;s quarterly publication, &quot;Parameters, in&quot; 2005, with his article &quot;The Nine Principles of Reconstruction and Development&quot;.

==Personal life==
A native of Holliston, Massachusetts, Natsios and his wife, Elizabeth, have three children and two grandchildren. He and his wife reside in College Station, TX.

He is a practicing Antiochian Orthodox Christian.

==References==
==External links==
* George H. W. Bush School bio
* Official Website of the United States Agency for International Development
* Natsios and the Big Dig


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4758104" start="0" end="17" title="Andrew Natsios" label="Andrew S. Natsios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="59" end="73" title="public servant" label="public servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="78" end="88" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q718335" start="202" end="215" title="Paul Cellucci" label="Paul Cellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="230" end="244" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="266" end="300" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784337" start="321" end="351" title="Massachusetts Republican Party" label="Massachusetts Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="523" end="537" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="562" end="612" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="642" end="647" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="742" end="758" title="World Vision International" label="World Vision U.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1007" end="1019" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1090" end="1092" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="1109" end="1130" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907898" start="1147" end="1150" title="Master of Public Administration" label="MPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="1160" end="1182" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1186" end="1204" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="1272" end="1310" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250404" start="1416" end="1430" title="Proposition 2½" label="Proposition 2½"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="1530" end="1539" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109886" start="1674" end="1707" title="Massachusetts Teachers&amp;#x27; Oath" label="Massachusetts Teachers&amp;#x27; Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="1771" end="1807" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784337" start="2106" end="2146" title="Massachusetts Republican Party" label="Massachusetts Republican State Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="2536" end="2562" title="United States Army Reserve" label="United States Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="2589" end="2606" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="2610" end="2631" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2697" end="2705" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="2709" end="2715" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="2731" end="2742" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="2770" end="2782" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2811" end="2818" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="2823" end="2829" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="2867" end="2885" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="2949" end="2990" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="U.S. Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="3787" end="3793" title="Somalia" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="4295" end="4307" title="World Vision" label="World Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="4373" end="4385" title="North Korea" label="North Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="4413" end="4428" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4896" end="4909" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="4965" end="4997" title="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority" label="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q858785" start="5051" end="5058" title="Big Dig" label="Big Dig"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="5554" end="5604" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="8016" end="8022" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q317618" start="8097" end="8110" title="Sam Brownback" label="Sam Brownback"/>
<link wikidata="Q592197" start="9217" end="9227" title="cold chain" label="cold chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="11442" end="11447" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="11531" end="11537" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="12229" end="12250" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128047" start="12258" end="12289" title="Walsh School of Foreign Service" label="Walsh School of Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="12366" end="12379" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484897" start="12579" end="12611" title="United States Institute of Peace" label="United States Institute of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915369" start="12657" end="12673" title="Hudson Institute" label="Hudson Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742880" start="12745" end="12774" title="American Academy of Diplomacy" label="American Academy of Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="12827" end="12850" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126563" start="12852" end="12871" title="Order of St. Andrew" label="Order of St. Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229702" start="12917" end="12958" title="U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea" label="Committee for Human Rights in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="13220" end="13243" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484897" start="13295" end="13319" title="U.S. Institute for Peace" label="U.S. Institute for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="13405" end="13451" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q504029" start="13531" end="13542" title="Andrew Card" label="Andrew Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="13759" end="13774" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="13788" end="13811" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="13825" end="13844" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="14125" end="14149" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="14253" end="14272" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station, TX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780116" wikidata="Q345811" url="?curid=780116" title="Him">
<text>Him or HIM may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
===Film and television===
* &quot;Him&quot; (&quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;), a TV episode
* &quot;Him&quot; (1974 film), a gay pornographic film
* &quot;Him&quot; (2025 film), an upcoming American sports horror film
* Him (&quot;The Powerpuff Girls&quot;), a villain in the TV series
* Him (&quot;Wonder Showzen&quot; character)
* &quot;How It&#x27;s Made&quot;, a television program, Canada
* &quot;Him&quot; (TV series), a drama

===Music===
* HIM (Finnish band), a Finnish gothic rock band
* HiM (American band), an American post-rock group
* HIM, a Japanese band known for singing &quot;Heaven&quot; for the YAT Anshin! Uchū Ryokō anime
* The Him, a Dutch DJ duo and electronic music production team
* &quot;Him&quot; (album), a 2006 album by Michael Sweet
* &quot;Him&quot; (Rupert Holmes song), a 1980 song
* &quot;Him&quot; (Sarah Brightman song), a 1983 song
* HIM International Music, a Taiwanese record label established in 1999
* &quot;Him&quot;, a song by James Marriott from &quot;No Left Brain&quot;
* &quot;Him&quot;, a song by Lily Allen from &quot;It&#x27;s Not Me, It&#x27;s You&quot;
* &quot;HIM&quot;, a song by Sam Smith from &quot;The Thrill of It All&quot;
* &quot;HIM&quot;, a song by Tokio Hotel from &quot;2001&quot;

===Other uses in arts and entertainment===
* &quot;Him&quot; (Cummings play), a 1927 play by E. E. Cummings
* &quot;Him&quot; (Walken play), a 1995 play about Elvis Presley written by Christopher Walken
* Him, an alternative name for Adam Warlock in the Marvel Comics universes
*&quot;Him&quot;, a 2015 book by Sarina Bowen and Elle Kennedy, the first book in the series of the same name

==Other uses==
* Him, the objective form of the English-language pronoun he
* Health information management practice
* Heritage International Ministries, a hotel and convention center in Fort Mill, South Carolina
* Hingurakgoda Airport (IATA code), an airport in Hingurakgoda, Sri Lanka
* His Imperial Majesty or Her Imperial Majesty, imperial styles
* Hot Ionized Medium, a component of the interstellar medium
* Guard Corps (Haganah), a pre-Israel Jewish paramilitary organization
* Molde University College (Høgskolen i Molde), Norway
* Scanning helium ion microscope, an imaging technology

==See also==
*Hima (disambiguation)
*Hymn (disambiguation)
*Hiim, a Norwegian surname</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q345811" start="0" end="3" title="Him" label="Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q345811" start="7" end="10" title="Him" label="HIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075078" start="80" end="134" title="Him (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237665" start="151" end="178" title="Him (1974 film)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (1974 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130410549" start="206" end="233" title="Him (2025 film)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (2025 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="314" title="List of The Powerpuff Girls characters#HIM" label="Him (&amp;quot;The Powerpuff Girls&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736647" start="345" end="387" title="Him (Wonder Showzen character)" label="Him (&amp;quot;Wonder Showzen&amp;quot; character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088263" start="396" end="414" title="How It&amp;#x27;s Made" label="How It&amp;#x27;s Made"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224988" start="453" end="480" title="Him (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23479" start="505" end="523" title="HIM (Finnish band)" label="HIM (Finnish band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750307" start="554" end="573" title="HiM (American band)" label="HiM (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402664" start="671" end="693" title="YAT Anshin! Uchū Ryokō" label="YAT Anshin! Uchū Ryokō"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635286" start="702" end="709" title="The Him" label="The Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764799" start="765" end="788" title="Him (album)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764810" start="822" end="858" title="Him (Rupert Holmes song)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (Rupert Holmes song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937103" start="874" end="912" title="Him (Sarah Brightman song)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (Sarah Brightman song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q711447" start="928" end="951" title="HIM International Music" label="HIM International Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q105758249" start="1027" end="1041" title="James Marriott (musician)" label="James Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416620" start="1124" end="1155" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You" label="It&amp;#x27;s Not Me, It&amp;#x27;s You"/>
<link wikidata="Q42218057" start="1212" end="1232" title="The Thrill of It All (Sam Smith album)" label="The Thrill of It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q115816261" start="1291" end="1295" title="2001 (Tokio Hotel album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418562" start="1348" end="1379" title="Him (Cummings play)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (Cummings play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149241" start="1413" end="1442" title="Him (Walken play)" label="&amp;quot;Him&amp;quot; (Walken play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735229" start="1537" end="1549" title="Adam Warlock" label="Adam Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364664" start="1631" end="1643" title="Elle Kennedy" label="Elle Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196074" start="1765" end="1767" title="he (pronoun)" label="he"/>
<link wikidata="Q125620541" start="1770" end="1799" title="Health information management" label="Health information management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738901" start="1811" end="1844" title="Heritage International Ministries" label="Heritage International Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339694" start="1907" end="1927" title="Hingurakgoda Airport" label="Hingurakgoda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006744" start="1981" end="2001" title="His Imperial Majesty" label="His Imperial Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006744" start="2005" end="2025" title="Her Imperial Majesty" label="Her Imperial Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="2084" end="2103" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613970" start="2106" end="2127" title="Guard Corps (Haganah)" label="Guard Corps (Haganah)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465973" start="2177" end="2201" title="Molde University College" label="Molde University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q55236" start="2232" end="2262" title="Scanning helium ion microscope" label="Scanning helium ion microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764832" start="2301" end="2322" title="Hima (disambiguation)" label="Hima (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295455" start="2324" end="2345" title="Hymn (disambiguation)" label="Hymn (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30132518" start="2347" end="2351" title="Hiim" label="Hiim"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780117" wikidata="Q7700891" url="?curid=780117" title="Tenth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly">
<text>The tenth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly centred on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict: the ongoing occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The session was first convened in 1997 under the president of the General Assembly, Razali Ismail of Malaysia. This occurred when the Security Council failed to make a decision on the issue at two different meetings. The session is currently ongoing as of October 26, 2023.

An emergency special session (ESS) is an unscheduled meeting of the United Nations General Assembly to make urgent, but non-binding decisions or recommendations regarding a particular issue. They are rare—a fact reflected in there having been only eleven convened in the history of the United Nations, as of April 2022.

Most emergency special sessions span a single sitting—the tenth is the first ESS to have been resumed more than once (the seventh emergency special session was resumed exactly once). Indeed, more than ten separate &#x27;meetings&#x27; have been held by the Assembly, whilst sitting in the tenth ESS, since 2000. The fact that the tenth has spanned so many sittings can be seen as an indicator of the importance of the issue in international politics. It has, so far, seen over 30 meetings held (see UN documents A/ES-10/PV.1 to A/ES-10/PV.31), nearly every year from 1997 through 2009. The most recent is currently ongoing as of October 26, 2023.

The mechanism of the emergency special session was created in 1950 by the General Assembly&#x27;s adoption of its &#x27;Uniting for Peace&#x27; resolution, which made the necessary changes to the Assembly&#x27;s &#x27;Rules of Procedure&#x27; at that time. The resolution likewise declared that:
... if the Security Council, because of lack of unanimity of the permanent members, fails to exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in any case where there appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression, the General Assembly shall consider the matter immediately with a view to making appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures, including in the case of a breach of the peace or act of aggression the use of armed force when necessary, to maintain or restore international peace and security. If not in session at the time, the General Assembly may meet in emergency special session within twenty-four hours of the request therefor. Such emergency special session shall be called if requested by the Security Council on the vote of any seven members, or by a majority of the Members of the United Nations...
==See also==
* Emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly
* Israel and the United Nations
* United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/21
* United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/22
* United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/23

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7700891" start="4" end="74" title="Tenth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly" label="tenth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="90" end="118" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="150" end="159" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="168" end="178" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161813" start="229" end="262" title="President of the United Nations General Assembly" label="president of the General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q659879" start="264" end="277" title="Razali Ismail" label="Razali Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="281" end="289" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="314" end="330" title="Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618808" start="458" end="489" title="List of emergency special sessions of the United Nations General Assembly" label="emergency special session (ESS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="523" end="554" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="741" end="755" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934515" start="898" end="931" title="Seventh emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly" label="seventh emergency special session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330924" start="1538" end="1567" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 377" label="&amp;#x27;Uniting for Peace&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618808" start="2648" end="2712" title="Emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly" label="Emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258221" start="2715" end="2744" title="Israel and the United Nations" label="Israel and the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123218433" start="2747" end="2798" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/21" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/21"/>
<link wikidata="Q123819269" start="2801" end="2852" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/22" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/22"/>
<link wikidata="Q125882510" start="2855" end="2906" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/23" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/23"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780123" wikidata="Q1557855" url="?curid=780123" title="Gweni-Fada crater">
<text>Gweni-Fada is a meteorite crater in the Ennedi Plateau, Chad.

The Gweni Fada structure was first noted on the map NE 34 X Fada of the IGN (National Geographic Institute France) and aerial photographs in the 1950s of IGN by Alain Beauvilain (Paris X- Nanterre University). In April 1995, at the initiative of CNAR (National Center to Help Research of Chad) a team of French geologists (Pierre Vincent, University of Clermont-Ferrand, Alain and Najia Beauvilain, CNAR Chad) visited the site and reported evidence of shock metamorphism within rock samples they had collected inside the structure.

Centered at 17°25′N and 21°45′E, being slightly wider in the NW-SE direction (cf. topographic map), the asymmetric structure is deeply eroded. A broad depression (ø 12 km) forms a crescent around two thirds of the inner complex zone. On the northern side, an elevated outer ring of outward-dipping sandstones surrounds the depression. 
In its south, the external depression is absent. The inner zone (ø 10 km) consists of a rugged terrain with hills several hundred meters in height. The latter may be remnants of the central uplift (see topographic map).

The age is estimated to be less than 345 million years (Carboniferous). It is older than that of Aorounga because its coverage of impactite has disappeared as a result of erosion.

== See also ==
* List of impact craters in Africa
** Aorounga crater

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Becq-Giraudon, J. -F., Rouzeau, O., Goachet, E. and Solages, S., Meteoritic impact origin of the annular depression of Aorounga, Chad (Africa). C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, t. 315, série II, p. 83-88. 1992.
* Koeberl, C., African meteorite impact craters: Characteristics and geological importance. Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 18, pp. 263–295. 1994.
* Koeberl, C., Reimold, W. U., Cooper, G., Cowan, D. and Vincent, P. M., Aorounga and Gweni Fada impact structures, Chad: Remote sensing, petrography, and geochemistry of target rocks. Meteoritics &amp; Planetary Science, 40, No 9/10 P. 1455 - 1471. 2005.
* Koeberl, C., Reimold, W.U., Vincent, P. M., Brandt, D., Aorounga and Gweni Fada Impact Structures, Chad, Central Africa : Petrology and Geochemistry of Target Rocks. LPSC XXIX, Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX, (CD-ROM). 1998.
* McHone J.F., Greeley, R., More impact and impact-like structures on the SIR-C radar; Europe, Africa, and Arabian Peninsula (abstract). Lunar and Planetary Science XXVIII, pp. 915–916. 1997.
* Miallier, D., Sanzelle, S., Falgueres, C., Fain, J., Pilleyre, Th. And Vincent, P.M., TL and ESR of quartz from the astrobleme of Aorounga (Sahara of Chad), Quaternary Science Reviews, Vol 16 (3-5), pp. 265–274. 1997.
* Ocampo, A. C., Pope, K. O., Shuttle Imaging Radar (SIR-C) Images Reveal Multiple Impact Craters at Aorounga, Northern Chad, 27th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 1996.
* Vincent, P. M., Beauvilain, A., Boudeulle, M. and Moutaye, A.H., The astrobleme of Aorounga (Sahara of Tchad): Preliminary structural data (abstract). European Science Foundation, Third International Workshop. Shock Wave Behaviour of Solids in Nature and Experiments, Limoges, France. 1994.

== External links ==
* Description and exclusive pictures of Gweni-Fada crater in the field by Alain Beauvilain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1557855" start="0" end="10" title="Gweni-Fada crater" label="Gweni-Fada"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="16" end="25" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="26" end="32" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343339" start="40" end="54" title="Ennedi Plateau" label="Ennedi Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665102" start="135" end="177" title="Institut national de l&amp;#x27;information géographique et forestière" label="IGN (National Geographic Institute France)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="240" title="Alain Beauvilain" label="Alain Beauvilain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1209" end="1222" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q615987" start="1250" end="1258" title="Aorounga crater" label="Aorounga"/>
<link wikidata="Q511743" start="1351" end="1383" title="List of impact craters in Africa" label="List of impact craters in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q615987" start="1387" end="1402" title="Aorounga crater" label="Aorounga crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780136" wikidata="Q1591544" url="?curid=780136" title="Haviland Crater">
<text>The Haviland Crater, also called the Brenham Crater, is a meteorite crater (astrobleme) in Kiowa County, Kansas.

The oval crater is in diameter, making it one of the smallest impact craters in the world. Its age is estimated to be less than 1000 years. It has been explored with ground-penetrating radar.

==Meteorite==

Over 15,000 pounds (7,000 kilograms) of pallasite meteorites have been recovered from the Brenham fall.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1591544" start="4" end="19" title="Haviland Crater" label="Haviland Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591544" start="37" end="51" title="Haviland Crater" label="Brenham Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="58" end="67" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="68" end="74" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="76" end="86" title="astrobleme" label="astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q379663" start="91" end="111" title="Kiowa County, Kansas" label="Kiowa County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q503560" start="280" end="304" title="ground-penetrating radar" label="ground-penetrating radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067440" start="362" end="371" title="pallasite" label="pallasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096315" start="412" end="419" title="Brenham (meteorite)" label="Brenham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780137" wikidata="Q677273" url="?curid=780137" title="Piranha Bytes">
<text>Piranha Bytes GmbH was a German video game developer based in Essen. It was best known for their &quot;Gothic&quot; and &quot;Risen&quot; series of role-playing video games.

Piranha Bytes was founded in Bochum in 1997 and bought by Phenomedia in 1999. When Phenomedia filed for insolvency in May 2002, the Piranha Bytes management bought out the studio. THQ Nordic, as part of Embracer Group, then acquired the company in May 2019.

Piranha Bytes was reported to be in the process of closing since December 2023. It was closed sometime in June 2024 due to Embracer Group failing to find a new owner for the company, according to a former employee; the company declined to make a public statement on their closure.

== History ==
Alex Brüggemann, , Stefan Nyul and founded Piranha Bytes in Bochum in 1997, incorporating it as Piranha Bytes Software GmbH. In 1999, the company became a wholly owned subsidiary of the German publisher Phenomedia. Piranha Bytes&#x27; first game, &quot;Gothic&quot;, was released in 2001. Shortly thereafter, Brüggemann left the company to work on smaller game projects, eventually designing &quot;The Settlers: Rise of an Empire&quot;. He died on 19 January 2013 after suffering from cancer for three years.

Following a financial scandal at Phenomedia, the parent company filed for insolvency in May 2002. Piranha Bytes&#x27; management performed a management buyout, concluded in September that year, and transferred the studio&#x27;s trademarks and intellectual property, including the rights to the &quot;Gothic&quot; series, to Pluto 13 GmbH, a new entity that assumed &quot;Piranha Bytes&quot; as its trading name. Only one of the four original founders remained with the new incorporation. In March 2004, Piranha Bytes was among the founders of .

On 22 May 2019, THQ Nordic, as part of Embracer Group, announced that it had acquired the studio to undisclosed terms. At the time, Piranha Bytes had 31 employees in its Essen offices. Through the acquisition, the company was reincorporated as Piranha Bytes GmbH. By April 2021, with 33 employees, Piranha Bytes was among the forty largest video game companies in Germany.

In 2023, Embracer Group began implementing cost reduction measures to reduce accrued debt, including significant layoffs and studio closures. THQ Nordic reportedly began seeking a buyer for Piranha Bytes late that year. As this was unsuccessful, it began laying off all staff in December, a process ongoing as of 17 January 2024, and reduced the company to a shell. The state of the studio&#x27;s third &quot;ELEX&quot; game (codenamed &quot;WIKI6&quot;) is unknown. The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action, which financed the development with , briefly removed &quot;WIKI6&quot; from its website before reinstating it as &quot;Currywurst&quot;, stating that the financing claim had not been withdrawn, unlike that of the project cancelled at the downsized sister studio Fishlabs.

=== Closure ===
On January 22, 2024, the studio released a message on its official website, which expressed optimism about finding a partner for future projects and promised to keep the community updated. In July 2024, it was confirmed that the studio had shut down in late June after failing to find such a partner.

Some of the former employees founded the independent studio Pithead, which is being led by husband and wife Björn and Jenny Pankratz, who have been part of Piranha Bytes more or less since its inception. They have not yet announced what project this small team will work on.

== Games ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q677273" start="0" end="18" title="Piranha Bytes" label="Piranha Bytes GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="32" end="52" title="video game developer" label="video game developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="62" end="67" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088631" start="103" end="109" title="Gothic (series)" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433133" start="126" end="131" title="Risen (series)" label="Risen"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="148" end="171" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103" start="204" end="210" title="Bochum" label="Bochum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946868" start="233" end="243" title="Phenomedia" label="Phenomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757382" start="279" end="289" title="insolvency" label="insolvency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501578" start="332" end="342" title="Management buyout" label="bought out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457468" start="355" end="365" title="THQ Nordic" label="THQ Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083539" start="378" end="392" title="Embracer Group" label="Embracer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103" start="790" end="796" title="Bochum" label="Bochum"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="898" end="908" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946868" start="933" end="943" title="Phenomedia" label="Phenomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q767456" start="983" end="989" title="Gothic (video game)" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1128" end="1159" title="The Settlers: Rise of an Empire" label="The Settlers: Rise of an Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q757382" start="1314" end="1324" title="insolvency" label="insolvency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501578" start="1381" end="1398" title="management buyout" label="management buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1483" end="1504" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088631" start="1534" end="1559" title="Gothic (series)" label="&amp;quot;Gothic&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="1638" end="1650" title="trading name" label="trading name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457468" start="1802" end="1812" title="THQ Nordic" label="THQ Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083539" start="1825" end="1839" title="Embracer Group" label="Embracer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="1956" end="1961" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454688" start="2203" end="2217" title="cost reduction" label="cost reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="2519" end="2524" title="Shell corporation" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488589" start="2631" end="2687" title="Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action" label="Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420772" start="2952" end="2960" title="Fishlabs" label="Fishlabs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780140" wikidata="Q4603569" url="?curid=780140" title="2004 in the United Kingdom">
<text>Events from the year 2004 in the [[United Kingdom]].

==Incumbents==
* Monarch – Elizabeth II
* Prime Minister – Tony Blair (Labour)

==Events==
===January===
* 1 January – Papers released under the Thirty-year rule reveal that, contrary to what was believed at the time, Princess Margaret would not have lost her title nor Civil list payments had she married Group Captain Peter Townsend, a divorced War hero, in the 1950s.
* 3 January – The BBC cancels the appearance of Coca-Cola sponsorship credits in the music charts on its BBC One &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; show, after criticism from politicians and health campaigners that it would be promoting junk food and unhealthy drink products to teenagers.
* 6 January
** The coroner&#x27;s inquest into the death of Diana, Princess of Wales and her lover Dodi Al-Fayed is officially opened.
** The &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; publishes the blacked out portion of a letter wherein Diana, Princess of Wales alleged that someone was trying to kill her.
* 7 January – It is announced that a record of nearly 2,600,000 new cars were sold in the United Kingdom during 2003.
* 8 January – is christened by Elizabeth II.
* 13 January
** Labour politician Robin Cook says that the British Museum&#x27;s Parthenon Marbles should be returned to Greece.
** Serial killer Dr. Harold Shipman is found dead in his cell one day prior to his fifty-eighth birthday following his suicide by hanging.
** The Bichard Inquiry into events preceding the Soham murders formally opens.
* 14 January – A 45-year-old Sudanese man travelling from Washington Dulles International Airport to Dubai Airport is arrested &quot;en route&quot; at London&#x27;s Heathrow Airport on suspicion of carrying five bullets in his coat pocket.
* 19 January – The English Court of Appeal calls for an end to the prosecution of parents whose babies may have died of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (cot death) in cases where the only evidence is contended expert testimony.
* 21 January – The Secretary of State for Defence publishes a White paper &quot;Delivering Security in a Changing World&quot;, detailing wide-ranging reform of the country&#x27;s armed forces.
* 27 January – The vote of Scottish Labour MPs, whose constituents are unaffected by the legislation, help Prime Minister Tony Blair narrowly defeat a rebellion in his own party over the Higher Education Bill – a highly controversial bill to reform higher education funding in England, including the introduction of increased and variable tuition fees – in the House of Commons by 316 votes to 311.
* 28 January – The Hutton Inquiry into the circumstances of the death of Dr. David Kelly is published. This is taken by most of the press to be a strong condemnation of the BBC&#x27;s handling of the affair and to exonerate the government; the BBC&#x27;s Director-General, Greg Dyke, chairman of the Board of Governors, Gavyn Davies, and the journalist at the centre of the controversy, Andrew Gilligan, resign. The UK media, in general, condemns the report as a whitewash.

===February===
* 1 February – Media sources and victim support groups across Britain condemn the £11,000 payouts to the families of the two girls who were murdered at Soham in August 2002 as a &quot;pittance&quot;. The compensation was paid out by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority.
* 3 February – Foreign Secretary Jack Straw announces an independent inquiry, to be chaired by Lord Butler, to examine the reliability of intelligence on weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
* 5–6 February – A party of Chinese cockle pickers is caught by the tides at night in Morecambe Bay, Lancashire, drowning 23 people. 21 bodies are recovered.
* 6 February – The Home Office confirms that Maxine Carr, convicted with Ian Huntley concerning the Soham murders of August 2002, could be released from prison in the next few days.
* 11 February – Richard Desmond, the owner of the &quot;Daily Express&quot; and &quot;Daily Star&quot; tabloids, confirms that he has made a bid for the troubled broadsheet &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;.
* 15 February – The government are reported to have drawn up plans to break up the BBC in the wake of the Hutton inquiry.
* 19 February – Foreign Secretary Jack Straw announces that five of the nine Britons held without trial as terror suspects at the Guantanamo Bay prison camp in Cuba, along with a Danish national, are to be released.
* 21 February – Prime Minister Tony Blair comes under pressure from British human rights groups and MPs because of the government&#x27;s sweeping powers under the Anti-Terrorism Crime and Security Act, which have allowed the detention of fourteen foreign terrorist suspects in the UK at what has been described as &quot;Britain&#x27;s Guantanamo Bay&quot;.
* 24 February – The British Olympic Association prohibits European 100 metres champion Dwain Chambers from competing in the Olympic Games for life for a positive test for the designer steroid THG.
* 25 February – Katharine Gun, formerly an employee of British spy agency GCHQ, has a charge of breaching the Official Secrets Act dropped after prosecutors offer no evidence, apparently on the advice of the Attorney General for England and Wales. Gun has admitted leaking American plans to bug UN delegates to a newspaper.
* 26 February – Clare Short, former Cabinet Minister, alleges on the BBC &quot;Today&quot; radio programme that British spies regularly intercept U.N communications, including those of Kofi Annan, the U.N Secretary-General.
* 29 February – Middlesbrough F.C. win their first trophy in their 128-year history by defeating Bolton Wanderers F.C. in the Football League Cup Final.

===March===
* March – Vauxhall launches the fifth generation of its popular Astra family hatchback. It is initially just available as a five-door hatchback, with a three-door &quot;Sporthatch&quot; and a five-door estate due later in the year.
* 11 March – Support for the Conservatives and Labour is equal at 35% for the second time in nine months, raising the spectre of a hung parliament at the next general election which is expected within a year.
* 16 March – 15-year-old Scottish boy Kriss Donald is abducted, tortured and murdered by Pakistani gang in racially motivated attack in Glasgow.
* 21 March – Architect Zaha Hadid becomes the first female recipient of the Pritzker Prize.
* 28 March – The actor, author, diplomat and Chancellor of Durham University, Peter Ustinov, dies of heart failure aged 82 at a hospital in Switzerland.
* 30 March
** Operation Crevice, the arrest of a group of British Islamists, 5 of whom are subsequently convicted of conspiring to cause explosions likely to endanger life.
** The British-born American journalist Alistair Cooke dies of lung cancer at his home in New York City aged 95, only four weeks after his last broadcast of &quot;Letter from America&quot;.

===April===
* 19 April – In a change of government policy, Tony Blair announces there will be a referendum on the proposed EU Constitution.
* 28 April – Landmark office building 30 St Mary Axe (&quot;The Gherkin&quot;) in the City of London, designed by Norman Foster, opens.

===May===
* 7 May – BBC Two airs &quot;The Simpsons&quot; for the final time with &quot;Behind the Laughter&quot; being the final episode, having lost terrestrial rights to air the show to Channel 4.
* 10 May – Maxine Carr is released from prison with a new identity after serving half of her sentence for perverting the course of justice in the Soham murders case.
* 11 May – Stockline Plastics factory explosion: Nine people die in an explosion at a factory in Glasgow.
* 14 May – Piers Morgan is dismissed as editor of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; after the newspaper published fake pictures of Iraqi prisoner abuse.
* 15 May – Arsenal F.C. become the first team in history to win a Premier League undefeated. They are also the first to win a top flight title unbeaten since Preston North End in 1889.
* 19 May – Fathers 4 Justice stage a protest in the House of Commons at Prime Minister&#x27;s Questions by throwing purple powder at Tony Blair.
* 22 May – Manchester United F.C. beat Millwall 3–0 in the FA Cup final.
* 27 May – The MP for Leicester South, Jim Marshall dies, triggering a by-election.
* 31 May – Long-running children&#x27;s animated television series &quot;Peppa Pig&quot; premieres on the Nick Jr. Channel and Five.

===June===
* 2 June – José Mourinho, the Portuguese coach who led FC Porto to the UEFA Champions League title on 26 May, is named as the new manager of Chelsea F.C. on a three-year contract.
* 6 June – Sixtieth anniversary of D-Day. Last minute pressure forces First Minister of Scotland Jack McConnell to attend commemorations. Rhodri Morgan, the First Minister of Wales is criticised for not doing the same.
* 10 June
** A bumper election day takes place, dubbed &quot;Super Thursday&quot;:
*** 2004 United Kingdom local elections: Labour are dealt with significant blows, with a net loss of 464 councillors and 8 councils; while the Conservatives make a net gain of 13 councils and 288 councillors. There are mixed results for the Liberal Democrats as their vote share is down 3% and they lose 2 councils, but gain 123 councillors.
*** 2004 European Parliament election: UKIP make big gains, gaining 10 seats bringing their total up to 12, indicating an increase in Euroscepticism; while both Labour and the Conservatives perform poorly, losing 6 and 8 seats respectively.
*** 2004 London mayoral election: Ken Livingstone is re-elected as London mayor, beating Conservative rival Steven Norris in the second round of voting, albeit with a slightly reduced majority.
*** 2004 London Assembly election: Labour and the Greens make losses, both the Liberal Democrats and UKIP make gains, while the Conservatives remain almost exactly level with the previous result.
** A rebranding of the Football League sees Division One become the Football League Championship, Division Two become League One and Division Three become League Two.
* 11 June – The incumbent Ken Livingstone is announced as the winner of the election for Mayor of London.
* 14 June – Results of the 2004 European elections are announced. UK Independence Party (UKIP) are the main gainers, increasing from 3 to 12 MEPs.
* 16 June – Liverpool F.C. appoint the Spaniard Rafael Benítez as their new manager.
* 21 June – The Football League club Wimbledon, who relocated to Milton Keynes from South London last autumn, are renamed Milton Keynes Dons to reflect their new location.
* 24 June – England are knocked out of UEFA Euro 2004 in the quarter-finals by host nation Portugal on penalties, following a 2–2 draw after extra time in Lisbon.
* 29 June – Islamic terrorist Kamel Bourgass, an illegal immigrant from Algeria, is convicted of the 2003 murder of Stephen Oake and the attempted murder of two other police officers. The crimes occurred in Manchester, with Oake stabbed eight times.

===July===
* 2 July
** An openly gay cleric, Jeffrey John, is installed as the Dean of St Albans.
** A court rules that Humberside Police Authority must suspend the Chief Constable, David Westwood, in accordance with the Home Secretary (David Blunkett)&#x27;s demands.
* 2 July – Premier Inn&#x27;s former name Travel Inn changes its name into Premier Travel Inn at 2 pm with the official bed from 1987 going on holiday and the official moon from July 2004 being born.
* 6 July – The Queen unveils a memorial fountain to Diana, Princess of Wales in London.
* 8 July – Marks &amp; Spencer turn down a takeover bid by retail tycoon Philip Green.
* 12 July – Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown announces the massive loss of 100,000 civil service jobs in the UK; the savings to be put into frontline services such as Health and Education.
* 13 July
** The Public Administration Committee of the House of Commons recommends massive changes to the British Honours System including scrapping knighthoods and renaming the Order of the British Empire to the &quot;Order of British Excellence&quot;.
** The Countryside Agency publicises a new Countryside Code in advance of the &quot;Right to Roam&quot; coming into effect in September across England and Wales.
** The House of Lords makes a hostile amendment to the Constitutional Reform Bill that would retain the name of the office of Lord Chancellor.
* 14 July – The Butler Inquiry releases its report, mildly criticising the government in their use of intelligence relating to Weapons of Mass Destruction in Iraq.
* 15 July
** 2004 Leicester South by-election: Parmjit Singh Gill of the Liberal Democrats gains the seat, overturning a Labour majority of 13,243.
** 2004 Birmingham Hodge Hill by-election: Liam Byrne narrowly holds the seat for Labour, just 460 votes ahead of the Liberal Democrats&#x27;s Nicola Davies. Labour&#x27;s majority was 13,243 at the 2001 general election.
* 18 July – North Yorkshire police launch a murder hunt after 27-year-old twin sisters Claire and Diane Sanderson are found dead in a flat in Camblesforth, near Selby.
* 19 July – The government announces backing for the Crossrail project.
* 20 July – The government publishes the results of a review into Council Tax in England.
* 23 July – Tony Blair announces that Peter Mandelson is to become Britain&#x27;s new European Commissioner.

===August===
* 1 August – The University of Surrey Roehampton becomes Roehampton University.
* 9 August
** West Bromwich Albion F.C. terminate the contract of striker Lee Hughes as he is sentenced to six years in prison after being found guilty of causing death by dangerous driving, having killed a 56-year-old man in a collision near Coventry on 22 November 2003.
** Home Office Circular 46/2004 is issued giving guidance concerning the review of police injury pensions.
* 12 August – Police are investigating whether a couple, John and Joan Stirland, were victims of a revenge killing. Both were found shot dead at their home in Trusthorpe, Lincolnshire on 8 August, having fled their home in Nottingham after Mrs Stirland&#x27;s son was convicted of a gangland murder.
* 13–29 August – Great Britain participates in the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens winning a total of 9 gold, 9 silver and 12 bronze medals.
* 16 August – Boscastle flood of 2004: flash floods destroy buildings and wash cars out to sea in Cornwall.
* 28 August – Kelly Holmes wins her second gold medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics.

===September===
* 13 September – A Fathers 4 Justice campaigner dressed as Batman breaches security at Buckingham Palace.
* 15 September – Parliament is suspended after pro-hunt campaigners break into the House of Commons.

===October===
* 1 October – Tony Blair confirms he will seek a third term as Prime Minister, but rules out a possible fourth term, meaning if Labour win the next general election, he will resign before the next election after that.
* 2 October – The first parkrun, then known as Bushy Park Time Trial, takes place in Bushy Park, London.
* 7 October – British hostage Ken Bigley, of Liverpool, is beheaded by militants in Iraq.
* 9 October – Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh, designed by Enric Miralles, is opened.
* 19 October – British aid worker Margaret Hassan is taken hostage in Iraq.
* 24 October - Arsenal F.C&#x27;s 49-league game unbeaten run, the longest in the history of English football, comes to an end following a 2-0 defeat away to Manchester United.
* 26 October – Selby Coalfield production ceases.
* 29 October – Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester dies at Kensington Palace aged 102, making her the oldest British royal in history.

===November===
* 4 November – 2004 North East England devolution referendum: Voters resoundingly reject proposals to establish an elected assembly for the region, 77.93% to 22.07%.
* 5 November
** The funeral of Princess Alice takes place at St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor.
** The Earl of Shaftesbury, 66, is reported missing while on holiday in Nice, France. He is found murdered in 2005.
* 6 November – Ufton Nervet rail crash: Seven people are killed when a train is derailed by a car deliberately left on a level crossing in Berkshire.
* 15 November – Children Act clarifies most official responsibilities for children, notably bringing all local government functions for children&#x27;s welfare and education under the authority of local Directors of Children&#x27;s Services.
* 16 November
** The government announces plans to prohibit smoking in most enclosed public places (including workplaces) within the next three years.
** It is reported that Margaret Hassan is dead after her family receive a video recording supposedly showing her being killed.
* 18 November – Parliament passes the Hunting Act 2004 prohibiting fox hunting in England and Wales; the Civil Partnership Act, granting civil partnerships for same-sex couples from 2005; and the Civil Contingencies Act, providing for local arrangements for civil protection and national emergency powers.
* 20 November – Launch of the Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission, a joint United States, UK and Italian-developed spacecraft, designed to study gamma-ray bursts.
* 28 November – Wales Millennium Centre in Cardiff is opened.

===December===
* December – Ford launches the second generation of its best-selling Focus family car that was originally launched in September 1998.
* 2 December – David Bieber, a 38-year-old former United States marine, is found guilty of murdering PC Ian Broadhurst in Leeds on Boxing Day last year. He is sentenced to life imprisonment, and the trial judge recommends that he should never be released from prison. After his conviction, it is revealed that Bieber was wanted in connection with a 1995 murder in Florida. It is also revealed that he had entered the UK by using the alias Nathan Wayne Coleman – who was discovered to be a child that had died in infancy in 1968.
* 14 December – Millau Viaduct in France, designed by British architect Norman Foster, is opened.
* 15 December – David Blunkett resigns as Home Secretary after three-and-a-half years in the role.
* 20 December – Northern Bank robbery: A gang of thieves steal £26.5 million worth of currency from Northern Bank&#x27;s Donegall Square West headquarters in Belfast, one of the largest bank robberies in British history; no-one is ever found directly responsible for the crime.
* 26 December
** 150 British people are among thousands of people killed by the devastating 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami in across the South and Southeast Asia during a Christmas holiday and Boxing Day celebration.
** The Queen&#x27;s cousin-in-law, businessman Sir Angus Ogilvy, dies of cancer aged 76 in hospital at Kingston upon Thames, London.

===Full date unknown===
* Forces Children&#x27;s Trust British charity is established.

==Publications==
* Iain M. Banks&#x27; novel &quot;The Algebraist&quot;.
* Louis de Bernières&#x27; novel &quot;Birds Without Wings&quot;.
* Susannah Clarke&#x27;s novel Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell
* Alan Hollinghurst&#x27;s novel &quot;The Line of Beauty&quot;.
* Andrea Levy&#x27;s novel Small Island
* David Mitchell&#x27;s novel &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;
* Terry Pratchett&#x27;s Discworld novels &quot;A Hat Full of Sky&quot; and &quot;Going Postal&quot;.
* The Liberal Democrat tract &quot;The Orange Book: Reclaiming Liberalism&quot; edited by Paul Marshall and David Laws.

==Births==
* 11 January – James Rew, English cricketer
* 2 February – Shola Shoretire, English footballer
* 8 February – Hannah Moncur, Scottish actress
* 19 February – Millie Bobby Brown, actress and model
* 8 March – Kit Connor, actor
* 9 April – TommyInnit, internet personality
* 19 June – Millie Gibson, English actress
* 2 July – Jordan James, Welsh footballer
* 2 September – Desharne Bent-Ashmeil, British diver
* 25 September – Prince Odysseas-Kimon of Greece and Denmark
* 1 October – Jimi Gower, Malaysian footballer 
* 9 November – Mohammad Sahil Saeed, kidnap victim
* 21 November
** Jack Henderson, Scottish graphic artist and charity fundraiser
** Rico Lewis, footballer
* 21 December – Estella Taylor, daughter of Lady Helen Taylor

==Deaths==
===January===
* 3 January – Lillian Beckwith, writer (born 1916)
* 4 January
** Joan Aiken, writer (born 1924)
** Brian Gibson, film director (born 1944)
** Jeff Nuttall, actor, poet, and painter (born 1933)
* 5 January – Norman Heatley, biologist and biochemist (born 1911)
* 6 January
** John Evans, footballer (born 1929)
** Reg Smith, footballer and football manager (born 1912)
* 11 January – Mervyn Pike, Baroness Pike, politician (born 1918)
* 13 January
** Tom Hurndall, political activist (murdered) (born 1981)
** Harold Shipman, serial killer (suicide) (born 1946)
* 21 January
** Kenneth Hubbard, RAF pilot (born 1920)
** John T. Lewis, Welsh physicist (born 1932)
* 26 January
** Wilhelmina Barns-Graham, artist (born 1912)
** Hugh Jenkins, Baron Jenkins of Putney, politician (born 1908)
* 27 January
** Rikki Fulton, comedian and actor (born 1924)
** Hugh Scanlon, trade union leader (born 1913)
* 29 January
** M. M. Kaye, writer (born 1908)
** James Saunders, playwright (born 1925)
* 30 January – George Bennions, Battle of Britain Spitfire pilot (born 1913)

===February===

* 1 February –
** Ally MacLeod, former manager of the Scotland national football team (born 1931)
** Bob Stokoe, former footballer and football manager (born 1930)
* 2 February – Alan Bullock, Baron Bullock, historian (born 1914)
* 4 February – William MacQuitty, film producer (born 1905)
* 5 February
** Nicholas Evans, artist (born 1907)
** Frances Partridge, writer and last surviving member of the Bloomsbury Group (born 1900)
* 6 February – Humphry Osmond, psychiatrist (born 1917)
* 7 February – Norman Thelwell, cartoonist (born 1923)
* 12 February – Martin Booth, poet (born 1944)
* 13 February – Peter Gellhorn, pianist and conductor (born 1912)
* 18 February – Ivor Stanbrook, politician and barrister (born 1924)
* 20 February
** Fred Brown, virologist (born 1925)
** Ted Paige, physicist (born 1930)
* 22 February – Colin Eaborn, molecular biologist (born 1923)
* 23 February – Neil Ardley, jazz composer (born 1937)

===March===
* 4 March
** John McGeoch, rock guitarist (born 1955)
** Sir Malcolm Pasley, literary scholar (born 1926)
* 6 March – Sandy Glen, explorer (born 1912)
* 8 March
** Keith Hopkins, sociologist and historian (born 1934)
** Robin Hunter, actor (born 1929)
* 9 March – Tony Lee, jazz pianist (born 1934)
* 10 March – David Shoenberg, physicist (born 1911, Russian Empire)
* 13 March – Sydney Carter, poet and songwriter (born 1915)
* 15 March – John Pople, chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (born 1925)
* 18 March – Richard Marner, actor (born 1921, Soviet Union)
* 19 March – Ted Walker, poet and dramatist (born 1934)
* 22 March – David Oates, archaeologist (born 1927)
* 27 March
** Lionel Sackville-West, 6th Baron Sackville, peer and stockbroker (born 1914)
** Larry Trask, professor of linguistics (born 1944, United States)
* 28 March – Sir Peter Ustinov, actor, writer, dramatist and raconteur (born 1921)
* 30 March
** Alistair Cooke, broadcaster and writer (&quot;Letter from America&quot;) (born 1908)
** Hubert Gregg, actor and broadcaster (born 1914)
* 31 March – John Paul, colonial administrator (born 1916)

===April===
* 1 April
** Paul Atkinson, rock guitarist (born 1946)
** Arthur Halestrap, one of the last surviving British soldiers of World War I (born 1898)
* 4 April – Alwyn Williams, geologist (born 1921)
* 7 April – Robert Sangster, racehorse owner (born 1936)
* 8 April – Adrian Beers, double bass player (born 1916)
* 10 April – Ben Pimlott, historian (born 1945)
* 13 April – Caron Keating, television presenter (born 1962)
* 14 April
** Micheline Charest, television producer (born 1953)
** Robin Popplestone, computer scientist (born 1938)
* 17 April – Geraint Howells, politician (born 1925)
* 19 April
** Philip Locke, actor (born 1928)
** John Maynard Smith, biologist and geneticist (born 1920)
** Norris McWhirter, political activist and television presenter, twin brother of Ross McWhirter (born 1925)
** Ronnie Simpson, footballer and football manager (born 1930)
* 20 April – Ian Robinson, publisher (born 1934)
* 23 April – Len Vale-Onslow, motorcycle manufacturer (born 1900)
* 24 April
** Brian Manning, historian (born 1927)
* 25 April – Thom Gunn, poet (born 1929)
* 29 April – John Henniker-Major, 8th Baron Henniker, politician and diplomat (born 1916)
* 30 April – Jeffrey Alan Gray, psychiatrist (born 1934)

===May===
* 3 May
** Anthony Ainley, actor (born 1932)
** Andrew Cavendish, 11th Duke of Devonshire, peer (born 1920)
* 4 May – Erik Smith, record producer (born 1931, Germany)
* 5 May – John Cornforth, architectural historian (born 1937)
* 7 May – Douglas John Foskett, librarian (born 1918)
* 9 May – Percy M. Young, composer and musicologist (born 1912)
* 10 May – Dennis Wilshaw, footballer (born 1926)
* 11 May – Danny McLennan, footballer and coach (born 1925)
* 14 May
** Anna Lee, actress (born 1913)
** Shaun Sutton, television executive (born 1919)
* 15 May – Clint Warwick, bassist (The Moody Blues) (born 1940)
* 16 May – Peter Hill-Norton, Baron Hill-Norton, Admiral of the Fleet (born 1915)
* 20 May – Len Murray, Baron Murray of Epping Forest, trade union leader (born 1922)
* 23 May
** Sally Gilmour, ballerina (born 1921)
** Adele Leigh, opera singer (born 1928)
* 27 May
** Jim Marshall, politician (born 1941)
** Ronald Smith, pianist (born 1922)
* 29 May – Jack Rosenthal, playwright (born 1931)

===June===

* 3 June – Frances Shand Kydd, mother of Diana, Princess of Wales and grandmother of Princes William and Harry (born 1936)
* 5 June – Iona Brown, violinist and conductor (born 1941)
* 6 June – Judy Campbell, actress (born 1916)
* 7 June – Don Potter, sculptor and potter (born 1902)
* 12 June
** Stanley O&#x27;Toole, film producer (born 1939)
** Geoffrey Thompson, businessman (born 1936)
* 13 June – Stuart Hampshire, philosopher (born 1914)
* 15 June – J. Gwyn Griffiths, poet and Egyptologist (born 1911)
* 18 June – Frederick Jaeger, actor (born 1928, Germany)
* 19 June – Colin McCormack, actor (born 1941)
* 23 June – Doris Thompson, businesswoman, owner of Blackpool Pleasure Beach (born 1903)
* 26 June – Muriel Angelus, actress (born 1912)
* 27 June – Hugh B. Cave, science fiction writer (born 1910)
* 28 June – Anthony Buckeridge, writer (born 1912)

===July===

* 1 July
** Peter Barnes, playwright and screenwriter (born 1931)
** Richard May, judge (born 1938)
* 3 July – John Barron, actor (born 1920)
* 5 July – Robert Burchfield, lexicographer (&quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;) (born 1923)
* 6 July – Peter Birks, academic lawyer (born 1941)
* 14 July – Arnold Ziff, businessman and philanthropist (born 1927)
* 16 July – Frank Farmer, physicist (born 1912)
* 17 July – Pat Roach, wrestler and actor (born 1937)
* 18 July – Paul Foot, journalist and nephew of former Labour Party leader Michael Foot (born 1937)
* 21 July – Julian Ridsdale, politician (born 1915)
* 23 July – Alan Cook, physicist (born 1922)
* 28 July
** Francis Crick, scientist, discoverer of the structure of DNA (born 1916)
** Margo McLennan, actress (born 1938)

===August===

* 1 August – Laurence Stark, World War II flying ace (born 1920)
* 4 August – Robert Yewdall Jennings, judge (International Court of Justice) (born 1913)
* 7 August
** Colin Bibby, ornithologist (born 1948)
** Bernard Levin, writer and journalist (born 1928)
** Gordon Smith, footballer (born 1924)
* 12 August
** Sir Godfrey Hounsfield, electrical engineer and inventor, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (born 1919)
** Peter Woodthorpe, actor (born 1931)
* 14 August – Trevor Skeet, lawyer (born 1918, New Zealand)
* 16 August – Stephen Terrell, barrister and politician (born 1916)
* 17 August – Sheila Callender, physician (born 1914)
* 18 August – Hugh Manning, actor (born 1920)
* 20 August – Leslie Shepard, author and archivist (born 1917)
* 25 August – Donald M. Ashton, film director (born 1919)
* 30 August – Derek Johnson, athlete (born 1933)
* 31 August – Carl Wayne, singer (The Move) (born 1943)

===September===
* 1 September – Gordon Parry, Baron Parry, politician (born 1925)
* 2 September – Brian Scarlett, physicist (born 1938)
* 4 September – Caroline Pratt, equestrian (killed while racing) (born 1962)
* 7 September – Fritha Goodey, actress (suicide) (born 1972)
* 9 September
** Ian Cochrane, novelist (born 1941)
** Thomas Kerr, aerospace engineer (born 1924)
* 10 September – Glyn Owen, actor (born 1928)
* 12 September – John Buller, composer (born 1927)
* 13 September – Eric Sams, musicologist and Shakespeare scholar (born 1926)
* 14 September – John Seymour, author and self-sufficiency campaigner (born 1914)
* 17 September – Katharina Dalton, physician (born 1916)
* 19 September
** Stanley Clarke, businessman and philanthropist (born 1933)
** Kenneth Sandford, opera singer (born 1924)
* 20 September – Brian Clough, footballer and football manager (born 1935)
* 23 September
** Nigel Nicolson, writer and politician (born 1917)
** Maurice Michael Stephens, World War II flying ace (born 1919)
* 25 September – Michael Davies, writer on Roman Catholicism (born 1936)
* 30 September – Michael Relph, film producer and film director (born 1915)

===October===
* 4 October – Michael Grant, ancient historian (born 1914)
* 6 October
** William Clark, Baron Clark of Kempston, politician (born 1917)
** Pete McCarthy, broadcaster and travel writer (born 1951)
* 7 October
** Kenneth Bigley, civil engineer (executed in Iraq) (born 1942)
** Tony Lanfranchi, racing driver (born 1935)
** Rosemary Murray, chemist and professor (born 1913)
* 9 October – Bryan R. Wilson, author of religious books (born 1926)
* 11 October
** Paul Bryan, politician (born 1913)
** Peter Kerr, 12th Marquess of Lothian, peer and landowner (born 1922)
* 13 October
** Bernice Rubens, novelist (born 1928)
** Ivor Wood, television animator (born 1932)
* 14 October – Sheila Keith, actress (born 1920)
* 15 October – Bill Eyden, jazz drummer (born 1930)
* 16 October
** Vincent Brome, writer (born 1910)
** Harold Perkin, social historian (born 1926)
* 18 October – Nancy Carline, artist (born 1909)
* 20 October – Lynda Lee-Potter, &quot;Daily Mail&quot; columnist (born 1935)
* 23 October – Bill Nicholson, footballer and football manager (born 1919)
* 25 October – John Peel, DJ and radio presenter (born 1939)
* 29 October
** Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, member of the Royal Family and last surviving aunt of The Queen (born 1901)

===November===

* 1 November – James Hanson, Baron Hanson, industrialist (born 1922)
* 4 November – Robert Heaton, songwriter and drummer (New Model Army) (born 1961)
* 5 November – Basil McIvor, politician (born 1928)
* c. 5 November – Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 10th Earl of Shaftesbury, peer (born 1938)
* 6 November
** Fred Dibnah, steeplejack and television personality (born 1938)
** Robert Lang, actor (born 1934)
* 9 November – Emlyn Hughes, footballer, football manager and TV gameshow captain (born 1947)
* 13 November
** John Balance, English singer-songwriter (Coil) (born 1962)
** Keith Weller, footballer (born 1946)
* 14 November – David Stanley Evans, astronomer (born 1916)
* 19 November – John Robert Vane, pharmacologist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (born 1927)
* 22 November
** Reginald Coates, civil engineer (born 1920)
** Arthur Hopcraft, screenwriter (born 1932)
* 24 November – Janet Kear, ornithologist (born 1933)
* 25 November – Denis Richards, historian (born 1910)
* 26 November – C. Walter Hodges, writer, artist and Shakespearean scholar (born 1909)
* 27 November – John Dunn, radio presenter (born 1934)
* 28 November – Molly Weir, actress (born 1910)
* 30 November – Bill Brown, football goalkeeper (born 1931)

===December===
* 2 December
** Kevin Coyne, singer and composer (born 1944)
** Alicia Markova, ballerina (born 1910)
* 6 December
** Frank Reginald Carey, World War II air ace (born 1912)
** Adrian Morris, artist (born 1929)
* 8 December – Leslie Scarman, Baron Scarman, judge (born 1911)
* 13 December – David Wheeler, computer scientist (born 1927)
* 14 December – Harry Bowcott, rugby union player and manager (born 1907)
* 15 December
** Harry Errington, only London firefighter to receive the George Cross in World War II (born 1910)
** Sidonie Goossens, harpist (born 1899)
* 17 December – Dick Heckstall-Smith, saxophonist (born 1934)
* 18 December – Anthony Sampson, writer and journalist (&quot;&quot;) (born 1926)
* 23 December
** Richard Abel Smith, army officer (born 1933)
** John W. Duarte, composer and guitarist (born 1919)
** Ifor James, horn player (born 1931)
* 24 December
** Richard Annand, soldier, first recipient of the Victoria Cross during World War II (born 1914)
** Anthony Meyer, former Conservative MP who unsuccessfully challenged Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s leadership in 1989 (born 1920)
** Dame Rosemary Rue, physicist and civil servant (born 1928)
* 26 December
** Garard Green, actor (born 1924)
** Sir Angus Ogilvy, husband of Princess Alexandra (born 1928)
** Frank Pantridge, physician (born 1916)
* 29 December – John Bridgeman, sculptor (born 1916)

==See also==
* 2004 in British music
* 2004 in British television
* List of British films of 2004
* 2004 in England

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4603569" start="21" end="51" title="2004 in the United Kingdom" label="2004 in the [[United Kingdom]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="71" end="78" title="Monarch of the United Kingdom" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="81" end="93" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="96" end="110" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="113" end="123" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="125" end="131" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785234" start="199" end="215" title="Thirty-year rule" label="Thirty-year rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="272" end="289" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="324" end="334" title="Civil list" label="Civil list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314412" start="374" end="388" title="Peter Townsend (RAF officer)" label="Peter Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="401" end="404" title="World War II" label="War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="443" end="446" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="473" end="482" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="530" end="537" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="544" end="559" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q851384" start="655" end="664" title="junk food" label="junk food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193276" start="759" end="792" title="death of Diana, Princess of Wales" label="death of Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q328744" start="807" end="820" title="Dodi Fayed" label="Dodi Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="856" end="868" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="929" end="953" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1148" end="1160" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="1196" end="1206" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="1221" end="1235" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q606662" start="1243" end="1260" title="Elgin Marbles" label="Parthenon Marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1283" end="1289" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="1294" end="1307" title="Serial killer" label="Serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310260" start="1312" end="1326" title="Harold Shipman" label="Harold Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883956" start="1410" end="1428" title="suicide by hanging" label="suicide by hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="1437" end="1452" title="Bichard Inquiry" label="Bichard Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="1479" end="1492" title="Soham murders" label="Soham murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="1567" end="1606" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="1610" end="1615" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="1674" end="1690" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q161801" start="1869" end="1897" title="Sudden Infant Death Syndrome" label="Sudden Infant Death Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="1993" end="2023" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="2036" end="2047" title="White paper" label="White paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254068" start="2054" end="2093" title="Delivering Security in a Changing World" label="Delivering Security in a Changing World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="2194" end="2209" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="2274" end="2288" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2289" end="2299" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249890" start="2354" end="2375" title="Higher Education Act 2004" label="Higher Education Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q538104" start="2506" end="2518" title="Tuition payments" label="tuition fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="2528" end="2544" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639325" start="2585" end="2599" title="Hutton Inquiry" label="Hutton Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q713489" start="2639" end="2654" title="David Kelly (weapons expert)" label="Dr. David Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2739" end="2742" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116214" start="2839" end="2848" title="Greg Dyke" label="Greg Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528402" start="2886" end="2898" title="Gavyn Davies" label="Gavyn Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757096" start="2953" end="2968" title="Andrew Gilligan" label="Andrew Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="3177" end="3213" title="Soham Murders" label="two girls who were murdered at Soham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185539" start="3293" end="3333" title="Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority" label="Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="3350" end="3367" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="3368" end="3378" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707800" start="3430" end="3441" title="Robin Butler, Baron Butler of Brockwell" label="Lord Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="3489" end="3516" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658204" start="3554" end="3561" title="British Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q860002" start="3562" end="3568" title="cockle (bivalve)" label="cockle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="3612" end="3625" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="3627" end="3637" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="3703" end="3714" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="3729" end="3740" title="Maxine Carr (criminal)" label="Maxine Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="3757" end="3768" title="Ian Huntley" label="Ian Huntley"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="3784" end="3797" title="Soham murders" label="Soham murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148419" start="3882" end="3897" title="Richard Desmond" label="Richard Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="3922" end="3935" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="3952" end="3962" title="Daily Star (United Kingdom)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="3969" end="3976" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="4045" end="4064" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4155" end="4158" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639325" start="4178" end="4192" title="Hutton inquiry" label="Hutton inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="4210" end="4227" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="4228" end="4238" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q357" start="4324" end="4338" title="Guantanamo Bay detainment camp" label="Guantanamo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4354" end="4358" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="4373" end="4379" title="Danish people" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="4441" end="4451" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="4510" end="4512" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q849756" start="4787" end="4814" title="British Olympic Association" label="British Olympic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="4834" end="4844" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q357493" start="4854" end="4868" title="Dwain Chambers" label="Dwain Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="4891" end="4904" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="4951" end="4958" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416940" start="4959" end="4962" title="Tetrahydrogestrinone" label="THG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376196" start="4980" end="4993" title="Katharine Gun" label="Katharine Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="5038" end="5042" title="GCHQ" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748972" start="5074" end="5094" title="Official Secrets Act 1951" label="Official Secrets Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="5172" end="5210" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General for England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q333550" start="5304" end="5315" title="Clare Short" label="Clare Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5357" end="5360" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5367" end="5372" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="5400" end="5413" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="British spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="5473" end="5483" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="5493" end="5510" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="5528" end="5546" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="5609" end="5630" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4602810" start="5638" end="5663" title="2004 Football League Cup final" label="Football League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="5688" end="5696" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109155" start="5742" end="5747" title="Vauxhall Astra" label="Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="6064" end="6085" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30824875" start="6157" end="6169" title="Murder of Kriss Donald" label="Kriss Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="6208" end="6217" title="Pakistanis" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="6255" end="6262" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="6287" end="6297" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="6340" end="6354" title="Pritzker Architecture Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="6415" end="6432" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="6434" end="6447" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="6496" end="6507" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096942" start="6523" end="6540" title="Operation Crevice" label="Operation Crevice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094347" start="6722" end="6736" title="Alistair Cooke" label="Alistair Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6772" end="6785" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533551" start="6845" end="6864" title="Letter from America" label="Letter from America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="6932" end="6942" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454840" start="6969" end="6979" title="United Kingdom European Constitution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="6996" end="7011" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="EU Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191161" start="7051" end="7065" title="30 St Mary Axe" label="30 St Mary Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="7099" end="7113" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="7127" end="7140" title="Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="7170" end="7177" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="7189" end="7201" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619614" start="7238" end="7257" title="Behind the Laughter" label="Behind the Laughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7339" end="7348" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q64827196" start="7361" end="7372" title="Maxine Carr (criminal)" label="Maxine Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618124" start="7527" end="7563" title="Stockline Plastics factory explosion" label="Stockline Plastics factory explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="7613" end="7620" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q557758" start="7633" end="7645" title="Piers Morgan" label="Piers Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="7682" end="7694" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="7781" end="7793" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="7928" end="7945" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398039" start="7966" end="7983" title="Fathers 4 Justice" label="Fathers 4 Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8007" end="8023" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380597" start="8027" end="8058" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8088" end="8098" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="8111" end="8133" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="8139" end="8147" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="8159" end="8165" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077534" start="8195" end="8210" title="Leicester South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leicester South"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525123" start="8212" end="8224" title="Jim Marshall (British politician)" label="Jim Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q938985" start="8330" end="8339" title="Peppa Pig" label="Peppa Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081049" start="8363" end="8379" title="Nick Jr. Channel" label="Nick Jr. Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="8384" end="8388" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q79983" start="8413" end="8426" title="José Mourinho" label="José Mourinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="8457" end="8465" title="FC Porto" label="FC Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="8473" end="8494" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="8543" end="8555" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="8617" end="8622" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="8652" end="8678" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132040" start="8679" end="8693" title="Jack McConnell" label="Jack McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333141" start="8720" end="8733" title="Rhodri Morgan" label="Rhodri Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="8739" end="8762" title="First Minister of Wales" label="First Minister of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887985" start="8862" end="8876" title="2004 United Kingdom elections" label="Super Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888160" start="8888" end="8923" title="2004 United Kingdom local elections" label="2004 United Kingdom local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8925" end="8931" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="9027" end="9040" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="9125" end="9142" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704885" start="9230" end="9263" title="2004 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2004 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="9265" end="9269" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="9360" end="9374" title="Euroscepticism" label="Euroscepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9387" end="9393" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="9402" end="9415" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671136" start="9471" end="9499" title="2004 London mayoral election" label="2004 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="9501" end="9516" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615093" start="9575" end="9588" title="Steven Norris" label="Steven Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="9665" end="9694" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9696" end="9702" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="9711" end="9717" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="9740" end="9757" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="9762" end="9766" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="9789" end="9802" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="9880" end="9895" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="9901" end="9913" title="Football League First Division" label="Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="9925" end="9953" title="EFL Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="9955" end="9967" title="Football League Second Division" label="Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="9975" end="9985" title="EFL League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="9990" end="10004" title="Football League Third Division" label="Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="10012" end="10022" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="10050" end="10065" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="10113" end="10128" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704885" start="10157" end="10180" title="2004 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2004 European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="10196" end="10217" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="10289" end="10303" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="10325" end="10339" title="Rafael Benítez" label="Rafael Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="10378" end="10393" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="10399" end="10408" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="10427" end="10440" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="10446" end="10458" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="10484" end="10502" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="10546" end="10553" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="10573" end="10587" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="UEFA Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="10625" end="10633" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="10637" end="10646" title="penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="10769" end="10776" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938068" start="10803" end="10825" title="murder of Stephen Oake" label="murder of Stephen Oake"/>
<link wikidata="Q81672" start="10834" end="10850" title="attempted murder" label="attempted murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="10904" end="10914" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686451" start="10993" end="11005" title="Jeffrey John" label="Jeffrey John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958876" start="11027" end="11031" title="dean (religion)" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="11035" end="11044" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240992" start="11130" end="11144" title="David Westwood" label="David Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="11169" end="11183" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="11185" end="11199" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108626" start="11228" end="11239" title="Premier Inn" label="Premier Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42177" start="11337" end="11340" title="bed" label="bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="11385" end="11389" title="moon" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="11428" end="11437" title="Elizabeth II" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="11469" end="11493" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="11516" end="11535" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086195" start="11578" end="11590" title="Philip Green" label="Philip Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="11604" end="11631" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="11632" end="11644" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900459" start="11806" end="11837" title="Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee" label="Public Administration Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="11845" end="11861" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="11896" end="11918" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom" label="British Honours System"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="11939" end="11945" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="11968" end="11995" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177544" start="12051" end="12069" title="Countryside Agency" label="Countryside Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727784" start="12087" end="12103" title="The Country Code" label="Countryside Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q688646" start="12128" end="12141" title="Freedom to roam" label="Right to Roam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="12213" end="12227" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635668" start="12261" end="12287" title="Constitutional Reform Act 2005" label="Constitutional Reform Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="12332" end="12347" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002641" start="12365" end="12379" title="Butler Review" label="Butler Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="12424" end="12434" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="12476" end="12503" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="Weapons of Mass Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519231" start="12526" end="12558" title="2004 Leicester South by-election" label="2004 Leicester South by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139215" start="12560" end="12578" title="Parmjit Singh Gill" label="Parmjit Singh Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="12586" end="12603" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916718" start="12664" end="12702" title="2004 Birmingham Hodge Hill by-election" label="2004 Birmingham Hodge Hill by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q269697" start="12704" end="12714" title="Liam Byrne" label="Liam Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="12779" end="12796" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="12860" end="12881" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="12895" end="12910" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q268602" start="13025" end="13037" title="Camblesforth" label="Camblesforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527846" start="13044" end="13049" title="Selby" label="Selby"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="13104" end="13113" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q322148" start="13189" end="13200" title="Council Tax" label="Council Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="13225" end="13235" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="13251" end="13266" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661677" start="13299" end="13320" title="European Commissioner" label="European Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q939607" start="13393" end="13414" title="University of Roehampton" label="Roehampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="13430" end="13455" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2458070" start="13490" end="13500" title="Lee Hughes" label="Lee Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="13659" end="13667" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888594" start="13692" end="13720" title="Home Office Circular 46/2004" label="Home Office Circular 46/2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848216" start="13955" end="13965" title="Trusthorpe" label="Trusthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="13967" end="13979" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="14019" end="14029" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q142358" start="14113" end="14126" title="Great Britain at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="14147" end="14167" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="14171" end="14177" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488728" start="14250" end="14273" title="Boscastle flood of 2004" label="Boscastle flood of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="14334" end="14342" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q230758" start="14358" end="14370" title="Kelly Holmes" label="Kelly Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="14405" end="14425" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398039" start="14463" end="14480" title="Fathers 4 Justice" label="Fathers 4 Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="14503" end="14509" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="14531" end="14548" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="14567" end="14577" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="14633" end="14649" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="14680" end="14690" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="14729" end="14743" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="14794" end="14800" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="14809" end="14830" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="14858" end="14882" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="next election after that"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138632" start="14908" end="14915" title="parkrun" label="parkrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001619" start="14931" end="14952" title="Bushy Parkrun" label="Bushy Park Time Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017532" start="14969" end="14979" title="Bushy Park" label="Bushy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117105" start="15019" end="15029" title="Ken Bigley" label="Ken Bigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="15034" end="15043" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746031" start="15093" end="15121" title="Scottish Parliament Building" label="Scottish Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="15125" end="15134" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q723669" start="15148" end="15162" title="Enric Miralles" label="Enric Miralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q468855" start="15209" end="15224" title="Margaret Hassan" label="Margaret Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="15266" end="15277" title="Arsenal F.C" label="Arsenal F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493716" start="15390" end="15400" title="Battle of the buffet" label="2-0 defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="15409" end="15426" title="Manchester United" label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447556" start="15443" end="15458" title="Selby Coalfield" label="Selby Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q246915" start="15493" end="15530" title="Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester" label="Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="15539" end="15556" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058330" start="15646" end="15691" title="2004 North East England devolution referendum" label="2004 North East England devolution referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q246915" start="15828" end="15842" title="Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester" label="Princess Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="15858" end="15890" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852797" start="15899" end="15918" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 10th Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="15964" end="15968" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822730" start="16023" end="16046" title="Ufton Nervet rail crash" label="Ufton Nervet rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="16147" end="16156" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098314" start="16174" end="16186" title="Children Act 2004" label="Children Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="16694" end="16704" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638187" start="16716" end="16732" title="Hunting Act 2004" label="Hunting Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="16745" end="16756" title="fox hunting" label="fox hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824826" start="16783" end="16804" title="Civil Partnership Act 2004" label="Civil Partnership Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124452" start="16874" end="16897" title="Civil Contingencies Act 2004" label="Civil Contingencies Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q837488" start="17014" end="17043" title="Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission" label="Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="17123" end="17138" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631977" start="17157" end="17180" title="Wales Millennium Centre" label="Wales Millennium Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="17184" end="17191" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="17232" end="17236" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q209029" start="17288" end="17293" title="Ford Focus (International)" label="Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231402" start="17368" end="17380" title="David Bieber" label="David Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="17417" end="17423" title="Marine (military)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="17475" end="17480" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="17484" end="17494" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q99236" start="17898" end="17912" title="Millau Viaduct" label="Millau Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="17954" end="17967" title="Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="17996" end="18010" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="18022" end="18036" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058145" start="18095" end="18116" title="Northern Bank robbery" label="Northern Bank robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058144" start="18179" end="18192" title="Northern Bank" label="Northern Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295642" start="18200" end="18215" title="Donegall Square" label="Donegall Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q806824" start="18265" end="18279" title="Bank robbery" label="bank robberies"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="18378" end="18392" title="British people" label="British people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177167" start="18403" end="18429" title="Countries affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="thousands of people killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="18449" end="18474" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="18489" end="18494" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18499" end="18513" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="18523" end="18532" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="18545" end="18555" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18576" end="18581" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q544609" start="18620" end="18632" title="Angus Ogilvy" label="Angus Ogilvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="18672" end="18692" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467551" start="18729" end="18757" title="Forces Children&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Forces Children&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="18810" end="18823" title="Iain M. Banks" label="Iain M. Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q901913" start="18842" end="18856" title="The Algebraist" label="The Algebraist"/>
<link wikidata="Q712191" start="18866" end="18884" title="Louis de Bernières" label="Louis de Bernières"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916077" start="18903" end="18922" title="Birds Without Wings (novel)" label="Birds Without Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q232772" start="18932" end="18947" title="Susanna Clarke" label="Susannah Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474920" start="18961" end="18992" title="Jonathan Strange &amp;amp; Mr Norrell" label="Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q316048" start="18995" end="19012" title="Alan Hollinghurst" label="Alan Hollinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448434" start="19032" end="19050" title="The Line of Beauty" label="The Line of Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q494257" start="19060" end="19071" title="Andrea Levy" label="Andrea Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542810" start="19085" end="19097" title="Small Island (novel)" label="Small Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="19100" end="19114" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40205" start="19134" end="19145" title="Cloud Atlas (novel)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="19154" end="19169" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="19177" end="19186" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342080" start="19200" end="19217" title="A Hat Full of Sky" label="A Hat Full of Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q595128" start="19234" end="19246" title="Going Postal" label="Going Postal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="19260" end="19276" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19289" end="19327" title="The Orange Book: Reclaiming Liberalism" label="The Orange Book: Reclaiming Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152223" start="19344" end="19357" title="Paul Marshall (financier)" label="Paul Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q333663" start="19362" end="19372" title="David Laws" label="David Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q107586581" start="19401" end="19410" title="James Rew" label="James Rew"/>
<link wikidata="Q105622926" start="19445" end="19460" title="Shola Shoretire" label="Shola Shoretire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41743791" start="19496" end="19509" title="Hannah Moncur" label="Hannah Moncur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936414" start="19544" end="19562" title="Millie Bobby Brown" label="Millie Bobby Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q58007617" start="19594" end="19604" title="Kit Connor" label="Kit Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q104589982" start="19624" end="19634" title="TommyInnit" label="TommyInnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q111299232" start="19669" end="19682" title="Millie Gibson" label="Millie Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109638024" start="19711" end="19723" title="Jordan James (footballer, born 2004)" label="Jordan James"/>
<link wikidata="Q114760149" start="19758" end="19779" title="Desharne Bent-Ashmeil" label="Desharne Bent-Ashmeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q381700" start="19812" end="19855" title="Prince Odysseas-Kimon of Greece and Denmark" label="Prince Odysseas-Kimon of Greece and Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19870" end="19880" title="Jimi Gower" label="Jimi Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404803" start="19919" end="19939" title="Mohammad Sahil Saeed" label="Mohammad Sahil Saeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113049" start="19972" end="19986" title="Jack Henderson (artist)" label="Jack Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q113509374" start="20038" end="20048" title="Rico Lewis" label="Rico Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q674343" start="20077" end="20091" title="Estella Taylor" label="Estella Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q674343" start="20105" end="20122" title="Lady Helen Taylor" label="Lady Helen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798233" start="20163" end="20179" title="Lillian Beckwith" label="Lillian Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q263648" start="20215" end="20225" title="Joan Aiken" label="Joan Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q912217" start="20249" end="20261" title="Brian Gibson (director)" label="Brian Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743320" start="20292" end="20304" title="Jeff Nuttall" label="Jeff Nuttall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11251652" start="20357" end="20371" title="Norman Heatley" label="Norman Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794058" start="20425" end="20435" title="John Evans (footballer, born 1929)" label="John Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307863" start="20463" end="20472" title="Reg Smith" label="Reg Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820932" start="20533" end="20559" title="Mervyn Pike, Baroness Pike" label="Mervyn Pike, Baroness Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369864" start="20600" end="20612" title="Tom Hurndall" label="Tom Hurndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q310260" start="20659" end="20673" title="Harold Shipman" label="Harold Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390221" start="20727" end="20742" title="Kenneth Hubbard" label="Kenneth Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13616740" start="20769" end="20782" title="John T. Lewis" label="John T. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002371" start="20828" end="20851" title="Wilhelmina Barns-Graham" label="Wilhelmina Barns-Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931275" start="20875" end="20912" title="Hugh Jenkins, Baron Jenkins of Putney" label="Hugh Jenkins, Baron Jenkins of Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403698" start="20953" end="20965" title="Rikki Fulton" label="Rikki Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932616" start="21001" end="21013" title="Hugh Scanlon" label="Hugh Scanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q444534" start="21062" end="21072" title="M. M. Kaye" label="M. M. Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681081" start="21096" end="21110" title="James Saunders (playwright)" label="James Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536900" start="21150" end="21165" title="George Bennions" label="George Bennions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967743" start="21247" end="21259" title="Ally MacLeod" label="Ally MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="21283" end="21314" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934106" start="21330" end="21340" title="Bob Stokoe" label="Bob Stokoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q335167" start="21408" end="21435" title="Alan Bullock" label="Alan Bullock, Baron Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579847" start="21474" end="21491" title="William MacQuitty" label="William MacQuitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025356" start="21535" end="21549" title="Nicholas Evans (artist)" label="Nicholas Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q794004" start="21573" end="21590" title="Frances Partridge" label="Frances Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q603529" start="21632" end="21648" title="Bloomsbury Group" label="Bloomsbury Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="21676" end="21690" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999699" start="21732" end="21747" title="Norman Thelwell" label="Norman Thelwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775031" start="21788" end="21800" title="Martin Booth" label="Martin Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174199" start="21835" end="21849" title="Peter Gellhorn" label="Peter Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13530046" start="21901" end="21915" title="Ivor Stanbrook" label="Ivor Stanbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494705" start="21971" end="21981" title="Fred Brown (virologist)" label="Fred Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994671" start="22009" end="22018" title="Ted Paige" label="Ted Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145063" start="22058" end="22070" title="Colin Eaborn" label="Colin Eaborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q923538" start="22120" end="22131" title="Neil Ardley" label="Neil Ardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="22185" end="22197" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742546" start="22233" end="22247" title="Malcolm Pasley" label="Malcolm Pasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434849" start="22290" end="22300" title="Sandy Glen" label="Sandy Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384512" start="22336" end="22349" title="Keith Hopkins" label="Keith Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352554" start="22392" end="22404" title="Robin Hunter" label="Robin Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442677" start="22436" end="22444" title="Tony Lee (pianist)" label="Tony Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176634" start="22484" end="22499" title="David Shoenberg" label="David Shoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364329" start="22552" end="22565" title="Sydney Carter" label="Sydney Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q233973" start="22612" end="22622" title="John Pople" label="John Pople"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="22633" end="22644" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292613" start="22679" end="22693" title="Richard Marner" label="Richard Marner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116698" start="22740" end="22750" title="Ted Walker" label="Ted Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594757" start="22796" end="22807" title="David Oates (archaeologist)" label="David Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555789" start="22849" end="22891" title="Lionel Sackville-West, 6th Baron Sackville" label="Lionel Sackville-West, 6th Baron Sackville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499834" start="22929" end="22940" title="Larry Trask" label="Larry Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="23011" end="23024" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094347" start="23091" end="23105" title="Alistair Cooke" label="Alistair Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533551" start="23137" end="23156" title="Letter from America" label="Letter from America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005152" start="23179" end="23191" title="Hubert Gregg" label="Hubert Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q713388" start="23240" end="23249" title="John Paul (colonial administrator)" label="John Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997514" start="23312" end="23325" title="Paul Atkinson (guitarist)" label="Paul Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798951" start="23357" end="23373" title="Arthur Halestrap" label="Arthur Halestrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23421" end="23432" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q449926" start="23457" end="23471" title="Alwyn Williams (geologist)" label="Alwyn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349573" start="23507" end="23522" title="Robert Sangster" label="Robert Sangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684866" start="23564" end="23576" title="Adrian Beers" label="Adrian Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q816577" start="23622" end="23633" title="Ben Pimlott" label="Ben Pimlott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222464" start="23670" end="23683" title="Caron Keating" label="Caron Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q515881" start="23732" end="23749" title="Micheline Charest" label="Micheline Charest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352723" start="23786" end="23803" title="Robin Popplestone" label="Robin Popplestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418483" start="23849" end="23864" title="Geraint Howells" label="Geraint Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q353050" start="23903" end="23915" title="Philip Locke" label="Philip Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q323207" start="23938" end="23956" title="John Maynard Smith" label="John Maynard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q320560" start="23998" end="24014" title="Norris McWhirter" label="Norris McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167618" start="24077" end="24091" title="Ross McWhirter" label="Ross McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619186" start="24107" end="24121" title="Ronnie Simpson" label="Ronnie Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436747" start="24180" end="24192" title="Ian Robinson (publisher)" label="Ian Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522007" start="24229" end="24244" title="Len Vale-Onslow" label="Len Vale-Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964600" start="24296" end="24309" title="Brian Manning (historian)" label="Brian Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141920" start="24346" end="24355" title="Thom Gunn" label="Thom Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238689" start="24387" end="24426" title="John Henniker-Major, 8th Baron Henniker" label="John Henniker-Major, 8th Baron Henniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381241" start="24477" end="24494" title="Jeffrey Alan Gray" label="Jeffrey Alan Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858592" start="24543" end="24557" title="Anthony Ainley" label="Anthony Ainley"/>
<link wikidata="Q391058" start="24580" end="24621" title="Andrew Cavendish, 11th Duke of Devonshire" label="Andrew Cavendish, 11th Duke of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388843" start="24650" end="24660" title="Erik Smith" label="Erik Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967589" start="24709" end="24723" title="John Cornforth (historian)" label="John Cornforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994443" start="24771" end="24791" title="Douglas John Foskett" label="Douglas John Foskett"/>
<link wikidata="Q388923" start="24825" end="24839" title="Percy M. Young" label="Percy M. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189604" start="24890" end="24904" title="Dennis Wilshaw" label="Dennis Wilshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015276" start="24940" end="24954" title="Danny McLennan" label="Danny McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q460474" start="25001" end="25009" title="Anna Lee" label="Anna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490981" start="25034" end="25046" title="Shaun Sutton" label="Shaun Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877822" start="25092" end="25105" title="Clint Warwick" label="Clint Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="25116" end="25131" title="The Moody Blues" label="The Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174664" start="25156" end="25192" title="Peter Hill-Norton" label="Peter Hill-Norton, Baron Hill-Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817220" start="25238" end="25279" title="Len Murray, Baron Murray of Epping Forest" label="Len Murray, Baron Murray of Epping Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016142" start="25324" end="25337" title="Sally Gilmour" label="Sally Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016202" start="25364" end="25375" title="Adele Leigh" label="Adele Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525123" start="25414" end="25426" title="Jim Marshall (British politician)" label="Jim Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388357" start="25454" end="25466" title="Ronald Smith (musician)" label="Ronald Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677193" start="25499" end="25513" title="Jack Rosenthal" label="Jack Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q256893" start="25562" end="25580" title="Frances Shand Kydd" label="Frances Shand Kydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="25592" end="25616" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="25644" end="25651" title="Prince William, Duke of Cambridge" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="25656" end="25661" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q434489" start="25685" end="25695" title="Iona Brown" label="Iona Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q730110" start="25744" end="25757" title="Judy Campbell" label="Judy Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713581" start="25790" end="25800" title="Don Potter" label="Don Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599832" start="25847" end="25867" title="Stanley O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Stanley O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016299" start="25898" end="25915" title="Geoffrey Thompson (businessman)" label="Geoffrey Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486254" start="25953" end="25969" title="Stuart Hampshire" label="Stuart Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105857" start="26007" end="26024" title="J. Gwyn Griffiths" label="J. Gwyn Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498128" start="26072" end="26088" title="Frederick Jaeger" label="Frederick Jaeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145355" start="26129" end="26144" title="Colin McCormack" label="Colin McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016298" start="26176" end="26190" title="Doris Thompson" label="Doris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578703" start="26216" end="26240" title="Blackpool Pleasure Beach" label="Blackpool Pleasure Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q391207" start="26265" end="26279" title="Muriel Angelus" label="Muriel Angelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218946" start="26313" end="26325" title="Hugh B. Cave" label="Hugh B. Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553140" start="26374" end="26392" title="Anthony Buckeridge" label="Anthony Buckeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q723964" start="26438" end="26450" title="Peter Barnes (playwright)" label="Peter Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150193" start="26495" end="26506" title="Richard May (judge)" label="Richard May"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220880" start="26537" end="26548" title="John Barron (actor)" label="John Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342501" start="26579" end="26596" title="Robert Burchfield" label="Robert Burchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="26619" end="26644" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172828" start="26675" end="26686" title="Peter Birks" label="Peter Birks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795318" start="26728" end="26739" title="Arnold Ziff" label="Arnold Ziff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967397" start="26796" end="26808" title="Frank Farmer (physicist)" label="Frank Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q747891" start="26844" end="26853" title="Pat Roach" label="Pat Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769371" start="26898" end="26907" title="Paul Foot (journalist)" label="Paul Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="26941" end="26953" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="26961" end="26973" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307504" start="26998" end="27013" title="Julian Ridsdale" label="Julian Ridsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706405" start="27050" end="27059" title="Alan Cook (physicist)" label="Alan Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="27096" end="27109" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="27153" end="27156" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760643" start="27172" end="27186" title="Margo McLennan" label="Margo McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500885" start="27236" end="27250" title="Laurence Stark" label="Laurence Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q777588" start="27301" end="27324" title="Robert Yewdall Jennings" label="Robert Yewdall Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="27333" end="27363" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144887" start="27391" end="27402" title="Colin Bibby" label="Colin Bibby"/>
<link wikidata="Q835175" start="27433" end="27446" title="Bernard Levin" label="Bernard Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585833" start="27485" end="27497" title="Gordon Smith (footballer, born 1924)" label="Gordon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q273769" start="27541" end="27559" title="Godfrey Hounsfield" label="Godfrey Hounsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="27612" end="27649" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200676" start="27665" end="27681" title="Peter Woodthorpe" label="Peter Woodthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839427" start="27715" end="27727" title="Trevor Skeet" label="Trevor Skeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668594" start="27775" end="27790" title="Stephen Terrell" label="Stephen Terrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325481" start="27843" end="27859" title="Sheila Callender" label="Sheila Callender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142279" start="27897" end="27909" title="Hugh Manning" label="Hugh Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679478" start="27943" end="27957" title="Leslie Shepard" label="Leslie Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q750855" start="28006" end="28022" title="Donald M. Ashton" label="Donald M. Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q202524" start="28064" end="28077" title="Derek Johnson (runner)" label="Derek Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q322597" start="28113" end="28123" title="Carl Wayne" label="Carl Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="28133" end="28141" title="The Move" label="The Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585653" start="28188" end="28213" title="Gordon Parry, Baron Parry" label="Gordon Parry, Baron Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407303" start="28254" end="28268" title="Brian Scarlett" label="Brian Scarlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045199" start="28308" end="28322" title="Caroline Pratt" label="Caroline Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q547864" start="28385" end="28398" title="Fritha Goodey" label="Fritha Goodey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981222" start="28447" end="28459" title="Ian Cochrane (novelist)" label="Ian Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016186" start="28485" end="28496" title="Thomas Kerr (engineer)" label="Thomas Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572875" start="28546" end="28555" title="Glyn Owen" label="Glyn Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223817" start="28592" end="28603" title="John Buller (composer)" label="John Buller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448409" start="28643" end="28652" title="Eric Sams" label="Eric Sams"/>
<link wikidata="Q323710" start="28720" end="28732" title="John Seymour (author)" label="John Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793571" start="28802" end="28818" title="Katharina Dalton" label="Katharina Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040067" start="28860" end="28874" title="Stanley Clarke (businessman)" label="Stanley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390670" start="28922" end="28938" title="Kenneth Sandford" label="Kenneth Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="28982" end="28994" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q333231" start="29058" end="29072" title="Nigel Nicolson" label="Nigel Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793351" start="29111" end="29135" title="Maurice Michael Stephens" label="Maurice Michael Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984167" start="29190" end="29204" title="Michael Davies (Catholic writer)" label="Michael Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379985" start="29263" end="29276" title="Michael Relph" label="Michael Relph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351047" start="29351" end="29364" title="Michael Grant (classicist)" label="Michael Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006825" start="29411" end="29449" title="William Clark, Baron Clark of Kempston" label="William Clark, Baron Clark of Kempston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172134" start="29477" end="29490" title="Pete McCarthy" label="Pete McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117105" start="29549" end="29563" title="Kenneth Bigley" label="Kenneth Bigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090291" start="29614" end="29629" title="Tony Lanfranchi" label="Tony Lanfranchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368408" start="29660" end="29675" title="Rosemary Murray" label="Rosemary Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q995108" start="29725" end="29740" title="Bryan R. Wilson" label="Bryan R. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149560" start="29796" end="29806" title="Paul Bryan (politician)" label="Paul Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175172" start="29834" end="29870" title="Peter Kerr, 12th Marquess of Lothian" label="Peter Kerr, 12th Marquess of Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q449028" start="29919" end="29933" title="Bernice Rubens" label="Bernice Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131882" start="29959" end="29968" title="Ivor Wood" label="Ivor Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481757" start="30017" end="30029" title="Sheila Keith" label="Sheila Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908938" start="30066" end="30076" title="Bill Eyden" label="Bill Eyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931685" start="30119" end="30132" title="Vincent Brome" label="Vincent Brome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439224" start="30156" end="30169" title="Harold Perkin" label="Harold Perkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530436" start="30215" end="30228" title="Nancy Carline" label="Nancy Carline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708554" start="30264" end="30280" title="Lynda Lee-Potter" label="Lynda Lee-Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="30288" end="30298" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q712767" start="30342" end="30356" title="Bill Nicholson (footballer)" label="Bill Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="30417" end="30426" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q246915" start="30479" end="30516" title="Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester" label="Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="30572" end="30581" title="Elizabeth II" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426423" start="30626" end="30652" title="James Hanson, Baron Hanson" label="James Hanson, Baron Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q327212" start="30695" end="30708" title="Robert Heaton" label="Robert Heaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501951" start="30734" end="30748" title="New Model Army (band)" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867217" start="30777" end="30789" title="Basil McIvor" label="Basil McIvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852797" start="30832" end="30879" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 10th Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 10th Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494999" start="30914" end="30925" title="Fred Dibnah" label="Fred Dibnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346701" start="30981" end="30992" title="Robert Lang (actor)" label="Robert Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q453337" start="31027" end="31039" title="Emlyn Hughes" label="Emlyn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345782" start="31123" end="31135" title="John Balance" label="John Balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107195" start="31164" end="31168" title="Coil (band)" label="Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194798" start="31185" end="31197" title="Keith Weller" label="Keith Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176710" start="31238" end="31257" title="David Stanley Evans" label="David Stanley Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q309971" start="31298" end="31314" title="John Robert Vane" label="John Robert Vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="31349" end="31386" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308648" start="31416" end="31431" title="Reginald Coates" label="Reginald Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799119" start="31463" end="31478" title="Arthur Hopcraft" label="Arthur Hopcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q293231" start="31521" end="31531" title="Janet Kear" label="Janet Kear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257482" start="31575" end="31589" title="Denis Richards" label="Denis Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006967" start="31629" end="31645" title="C. Walter Hodges" label="C. Walter Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226126" start="31716" end="31725" title="John Dunn (radio presenter)" label="John Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896690" start="31771" end="31781" title="Molly Weir" label="Molly Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q861977" start="31819" end="31829" title="Bill Brown (goalkeeper)" label="Bill Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q940448" start="31895" end="31906" title="Kevin Coyne" label="Kevin Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="31943" end="31957" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489176" start="31997" end="32017" title="Frank Reginald Carey" label="Frank Reginald Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685238" start="32055" end="32068" title="Adrian Morris (painter)" label="Adrian Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454977" start="32104" end="32133" title="Leslie Scarman, Baron Scarman" label="Leslie Scarman, Baron Scarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q92944" start="32169" end="32182" title="David Wheeler (computer scientist)" label="David Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667442" start="32231" end="32244" title="Harry Bowcott" label="Harry Bowcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668691" start="32306" end="32321" title="Harry Errington" label="Harry Errington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="32362" end="32374" title="George Cross" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32378" end="32390" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q438096" start="32406" end="32422" title="Sidonie Goossens" label="Sidonie Goossens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209691" start="32460" end="32480" title="Dick Heckstall-Smith" label="Dick Heckstall-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q573976" start="32522" end="32537" title="Anthony Sampson" label="Anthony Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323617" start="32605" end="32623" title="Richard Abel Smith" label="Richard Abel Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q919267" start="32653" end="32667" title="John W. Duarte" label="John W. Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q896386" start="32707" end="32717" title="Ifor James" label="Ifor James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323746" start="32760" end="32774" title="Richard Annand" label="Richard Annand"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="32808" end="32822" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526020" start="32858" end="32871" title="Sir Anthony Meyer, 3rd Baronet" label="Anthony Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="32926" end="32943" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368423" start="32990" end="33002" title="Rosemary Rue" label="Rosemary Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521937" start="33061" end="33073" title="Garard Green" label="Garard Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q544609" start="33100" end="33112" title="Angus Ogilvy" label="Angus Ogilvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170191" start="33125" end="33143" title="Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy" label="Princess Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488886" start="33159" end="33174" title="Frank Pantridge" label="Frank Pantridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q342873" start="33214" end="33228" title="John Bridgeman (sculptor)" label="John Bridgeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603510" start="33267" end="33288" title="2004 in British music" label="2004 in British music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603512" start="33291" end="33317" title="2004 in British television" label="2004 in British television"/>
<link wikidata="Q777714" start="33320" end="33349" title="List of British films of 2004" label="List of British films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603517" start="33352" end="33367" title="2004 in England" label="2004 in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780144" wikidata="Q3491014" url="?curid=780144" title="Holleford crater">
<text>The Holleford Crater is a meteorite crater near the community of Holleford, part of South Frontenac, Ontario, Canada. It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 550 ± 100 million years (Ediacaran or Cambrian). Although there is a surface depression over the area, the crater itself is not exposed at the surface.
Holleford Crater was discovered in the 1950s during analysis of aerial photographs under the direction of Carlyle S. Beals of the Dominion Observatory in Ottawa. In the late 1950s, the Geological Survey of Canada conducted a series of four geophysical studies: magnetic observations, seismic studies, gravity studies, and a diamond drilling program. The seismic and gravity studies and the drilling all produced data consistent with the impact theory. The drill core revealed breccia and similar materials at predicted depths. The studies concluded that an ancient meteorite impact crater is present in the Precambrian bedrock below the surface. The meteorite was estimated to be approximately in diameter and to have impacted at approximately .

== Location ==
Holleford Crater is located on the Babcook Family Homestead Farm properties (including the original Babcook Homestead Farm, established 1803, owned by the family of the late Frederick and Jean Babcook, at Hartington, Ontario (about 1/2 hour north of Kingston Ontario). (It was the birthplace of the last surviving veteran of the Canadian army in World War One, Jack Babcock, who died on February 18, 2010, at the age of 109.) 
Starting in the 1960s, the site has been visited frequently by geology students from Queen&#x27;s University, at Kingston. In the 1970s, as a result of efforts by the late Frederick Babcook, an official commemorative plaque was erected along the road beside the Babcook Homestead Farm by the Province of Ontario. Queen&#x27;s University&#x27;s Miller Hall Museum of Geology maintains a display dedicated to the Holleford Meteorite Crater.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Aerial Exploration of the Holleford Structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3491014" start="4" end="20" title="Holleford crater" label="Holleford Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="26" end="35" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="36" end="42" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116649" start="84" end="99" title="South Frontenac, Ontario" label="South Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="101" end="108" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="127" end="135" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38526" start="177" end="184" title="million" label="million"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="192" end="201" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="205" end="213" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191839" start="383" end="401" title="aerial photography" label="aerial photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q266818" start="449" end="469" title="Dominion Observatory" label="Dominion Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="473" end="479" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986634" start="504" end="531" title="Geological Survey of Canada" label="Geological Survey of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747649" start="559" end="570" title="geophysical survey" label="geophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="580" end="588" title="Magnetometer" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="603" end="610" title="Reflection seismology" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202243" start="620" end="627" title="Exploration geophysics" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688575" start="643" end="659" title="Drilling rig" label="diamond drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942237" start="775" end="785" title="Core sample" label="drill core"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="795" end="802" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="926" end="937" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875169" start="1286" end="1305" title="Hartington, Ontario" label="Hartington, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1331" end="1347" title="Kingston Ontario" label="Kingston Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919579" start="1442" end="1454" title="Jack Babcock" label="Jack Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="1593" end="1616" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University at Kingston" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780145" wikidata="Q64103354" url="?curid=780145" title="Île Rouleau crater">
<text>Île Rouleau is an impact crater in Baie-James, Quebec, Canada, located on a small, uninhabited island in Lake Mistassini in the centre of the province.

The crater is in diameter and the age is estimated to be less than 300 million years (Permian or younger). Part of the crater is exposed to the surface, but most of it is under the waters of the lake.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Caty, J. L., Chown, E.H. and Roy,D.W., A new astrobleme: Ile Rouleau structure, Lake Mistassini, Quebec. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, v. 13, pp. 824–831. 1976
* Evangelatos, J., Butler, K.E. and Spray, J.G., A marine magnetic study of a carbonate-hosted impact structure: Ile Rouleau, Canada. Geophysical Journal International, v. 179, pp. 171–181. 2009

== External links ==
* Aerial Exploration of the Ile Rouleau Structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64103354" start="0" end="11" title="Île Rouleau crater" label="Île Rouleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="18" end="31" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092296" start="35" end="45" title="Baie-James" label="Baie-James"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="47" end="53" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458051" start="105" end="120" title="Lake Mistassini" label="Lake Mistassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="239" end="246" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780148" wikidata="Q388488" url="?curid=780148" title="Ilumetsa crater">
<text>Ilumetsa is a set of two probable meteorite craters in Estonia. 

The Ilumetsa site is located in south eastern Estonia and it consists of two structures, located 725 m from each other. Their diameters are: 75–80 m and ~50 m. Their true depths are about 8 and 3.5 m, respectively. Both structures are surrounded by a rim up to a few meters high: the rims are highest in their eastern parts with maximum rim heights of Ilumetsa Large 4.5 m and 1.5 m for Ilumetsa Small.

The Large Ilumetsa structure has been dated by radiocarbon dating the gyttja and peat from the very bottom of the crater shaped depression. The lowermost organic beds were dated to 6030 +/-100 14C years (7170– 6660 cal. years BP). Recent radiocarbon dating charcoals buried within assumed proximal ejecta blankets of these crater-like features showed Ilumetsa Large and Ilumetsa Small formed simultaneously between 7170 and 7000 cal. years BP.
No clear meteorite fragments or shock metamorphic effects were ever found around those structures. Because of that Ilumetsa is not a proven impact crater. However, indirect lines of evidence are enough to call it a &quot;probable&quot; impact site. It is: 1) presence of deformed sedimentary beds (including the rim consisting of sands mixed with numerous clayey till lenses;, 2) only a small thickness of glacial sediments, 3) simultaneous formation of both structures as showed by radiocarbon dating.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q388488" start="0" end="8" title="Ilumetsa crater" label="Ilumetsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="34" end="43" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="44" end="51" title="impact crater" label="craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="55" end="62" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="517" end="535" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q947139" start="540" end="546" title="gyttja" label="gyttja"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780149" wikidata="Q2990549" url="?curid=780149" title="Ilyinets crater">
<text>Ilyinets is an impact crater in Ukraine (Vinnytsia Oblast).

It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 378 ± 5 million years (Upper Devonian). The crater is not exposed at the surface.

The Ilyinets crater is located at the boundary of Rosynsko-Tikychki, Dnistersko-Buzki megastructures of the Ukrainian Shield.

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Star wound&quot; at Vinnitsia Region Portal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2990549" start="0" end="8" title="Ilyinets crater" label="Ilyinets"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="15" end="28" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="32" end="39" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166709" start="41" end="57" title="Vinnytsia Oblast" label="Vinnytsia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="139" end="147" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367245" start="243" end="251" title="Ros (river)" label="Rosynsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467974" start="252" end="260" title="Hirskyi Tikych" label="Tikychki"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="262" end="272" title="Dniester" label="Dnistersko"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="273" end="278" title="Southern Bug" label="Buzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q521551" start="301" end="317" title="Ukrainian Shield" label="Ukrainian Shield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780152" wikidata="Q6270248" url="?curid=780152" title="Iso-Naakkima">
<text>Iso-Naakkima is a lake in Southern Savonia, Finland, about 10 km south of the town of Pieksämäki. It is notable for having an eroded impact crater under the northwestern part of the lake. It is one of the oldest known, about 1200 million years old (900–1200 Ma, Mesoproterozoic). Of the known craters older than a billion years old, it is also one of the smallest being only 3 km in diameter.

At the time of the impact event, the continent of Baltica (modern northeastern Europe) was located near the equator. The crater is filled by recent (Quaternary) sediments and is not visible to the surface. Its existence was revealed by strikingly circular geophysical anomalies which are concentrated in a region 3 km in diameter; the actual remnant is about 2 km wide and 160 m deep. Its existence was later confirmed by drilling results. The discovery was made in 1989 and therefore Iso-Naakkima is the fourth known impact structure in Finland.

==See also==
*Impact craters in Finland

==References==

==External links==
*Iso-Naakkima impact structure
*Iso Naakkima impact structure — Division of Geophysics, University of Helsinki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6270248" start="0" end="12" title="Iso-Naakkima" label="Iso-Naakkima"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="18" end="22" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693" start="26" end="42" title="Southern Savonia" label="Southern Savonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="44" end="51" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q613701" start="86" end="96" title="Pieksämäki" label="Pieksämäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="133" end="146" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="262" end="277" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="444" end="451" title="Baltica" label="Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="473" end="479" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="502" end="509" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="543" end="553" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="555" end="563" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="650" end="661" title="geophysics" label="geophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177444" start="816" end="824" title="Boring (earth)" label="drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614344" start="956" end="981" title="Impact craters in Finland" label="Impact craters in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780154" wikidata="Q1576687" url="?curid=780154" title="Lake Yanisyarvi">
<text>Lake Yanisyarvi (; ) is a lake in the Republic of Karelia, Russia, located north of and draining to Lake Ladoga.

The basin of this somewhat circular lake was formed by meteorite impact 700±5 million years ago during the Cryogenian period. The crater is in diameter.

Prior to World War II, the lake was thought to be the second known volcanic caldera in Finland (the other was Lake Lappajärvi). Both were eventually recognized as impact craters.

==References==
==External links==
*Lake Jänisjärvi Impact Crater at NASA Earth Observatory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1576687" start="0" end="15" title="Lake Yanisyarvi" label="Lake Yanisyarvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="26" end="30" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914" start="38" end="57" title="Republic of Karelia" label="Republic of Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="59" end="65" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="100" end="111" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="169" end="178" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q507402" start="221" end="231" title="Cryogenian" label="Cryogenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="244" end="250" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="277" end="289" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="344" end="351" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="355" end="362" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q891569" start="378" end="393" title="Lake Lappajärvi" label="Lake Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233523" start="516" end="538" title="NASA Earth Observatory" label="NASA Earth Observatory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780156" wikidata="Q595341" url="?curid=780156" title="Kaali crater">
<text>Kaali is a group of nine meteorite craters in the village of Kaali on the Estonian island of Saaremaa. Most recent estimates put its formation shortly after 1530–1450 BC (3237 ± 10 14C yr BP). It was created by an impact event and is one of the few impact events that has occurred in a populated area (other ones are: Henbury craters in Australia and Carancas crater in Peru).

Before the 1930s, there were several hypotheses about the origin of the crater, including theories involving vulcanism and karst processes. Its meteoritic origins were first conclusively demonstrated by Ivan Reinvald in 1928, 1933 and 1937.

==Formation==

The impact is thought to have happened in the Holocene period, around 3,500 years ago. The estimates of the age of the Kaali impact structure (Saaremaa Island, Estonia) provided by different authors vary by as much as 6,000 years, ranging from ~6,400 to ~400 years before current era (BCE). Analysis of silicate spherules in Estonian bogs show that the possible age of the impact craters could be approximately 7,600 years. A study based on elevated iridium signal in a nearby bog suggested the much younger age of 4th century BC. The craters were formed by a meteor with an estimated impact velocity of between with a total mass of between 20 and 80 metric tonnes. According to some researchers the meteor arrived from the north-east.

At an altitude of , the meteor broke into pieces and fell to the Earth in fragments, the greatest of which produced a crater with a diameter of and a depth of . The explosion removed approximately of dolomite and other rocks and formed a tall, extremely hot gas flow. Vegetation was incinerated up to from the impact site.

Lake Kaali () is on the bottom of this crater. Eight smaller craters are also associated with this bombardment. Their diameters range from and their respective depths vary from . They are all within of the main crater.

==Effects==
According to the theory of more recent impact, Estonia at the time of impact was in the Nordic Bronze Age and the site was forested with a small human population. The impact energy of about 80 TJ (20 kilotons of TNT) is comparable with that of the Hiroshima bomb blast. It incinerated forests within a radius.

==In mythology==

Scholars, such as Karl Kello, maintain that the event featured prominently in regional mythology. It was, and still is, considered a sacred lake. There is archaeological evidence that it may well have been a place of ritual sacrifice. At some point during the early Iron Age, the lake was surrounded by a stone wall long, with a median width of about and an average height of .

Finnish mythology has stories that may originate with the formation of Kaali. One of them is in runes 47, 48 and 49 of the Kalevala epic: Louhi, the evil wizard, steals the Sun and fire from people, causing total darkness. Ukko, the god of the sky, orders a new Sun to be made from a spark. The virgin of the air starts to make a new Sun, but the spark drops from the sky and hits the ground. This spark goes to an &quot;Aluen&quot; or &quot;Kalevan&quot; lake and causes its water to rise. Finnish heroes see the ball of fire falling somewhere &quot;behind the Neva River&quot; (the direction of Estonia from Karelia). The heroes head in that direction to seek fire, and they finally gather flames from a forest fire.

According to a theory proposed by Lennart Meri, it is possible that Saaremaa was the legendary Thule island, first mentioned by ancient Greek geographer Pytheas, whereas the name &quot;Thule&quot; could have been connected to the Finnic word &quot;tule&quot; (&quot;(of) fire&quot;) and the folklore of Estonia, which depicts the birth of the crater lake in Kaali. Kaali was considered the place where &quot;The sun went to rest.&quot;

==Namesake==
The asteroid 4227 Kaali is named after it. Except for their names, there is no connection between this asteroid and the crater.

== Meteoritic iron artefacts ==
In 2023, archaeologists analysed the Bronze Age Mörigen Arrowhead, found in Switzerland; it was made of meteoritic iron whose composition suggested its origin from the Kaali meteorite.

==References==
*

==External links==

*About Kaali crater on the official Saaremaa website
*Photos of the Kaali crater
*Impact tectonics
*Interactive panoramic aerial view of the Kaali crater area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595341" start="0" end="5" title="Kaali crater" label="Kaali"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="25" end="34" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="35" end="41" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469567" start="61" end="66" title="Kaali, Estonia" label="Kaali"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="74" end="81" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="93" end="101" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="214" end="226" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464782" start="318" end="333" title="Henbury Meteorites Conservation Reserve" label="Henbury craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035398" start="351" end="366" title="2007 Carancas impact event" label="Carancas crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q102904" start="487" end="496" title="Volcanology" label="vulcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="501" end="506" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="681" end="689" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="938" end="946" title="Silicate minerals" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="1085" end="1092" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q605601" start="2016" end="2033" title="Nordic Bronze Age" label="Nordic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="2121" end="2123" title="terajoule" label="TJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="2128" end="2143" title="kilotons of TNT" label="kilotons of TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166070" start="2176" end="2190" title="Hiroshima bomb (unit)" label="Hiroshima bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q669000" start="2344" end="2353" title="Estonian mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397346" start="2390" end="2401" title="sacred lake" label="sacred lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="2481" end="2490" title="sacrifice" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2523" end="2531" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q939935" start="2636" end="2653" title="Finnish mythology" label="Finnish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464470" start="2675" end="2684" title="folk memory" label="originate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130924" start="2759" end="2767" title="Kalevala" label="Kalevala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073318" start="2774" end="2779" title="Louhi" label="Louhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844965" start="2859" end="2863" title="Ukko" label="Ukko"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="3198" end="3208" title="Neva" label="Neva River"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="3246" end="3253" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="3342" end="3353" title="forest fire" label="forest fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153149" start="3390" end="3402" title="Lennart Meri" label="Lennart Meri"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="3451" end="3456" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="3509" end="3516" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="3586" end="3592" title="Finnic language" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="3819" end="3829" title="4227 Kaali" label="4227 Kaali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4004" end="4014" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q121832835" start="4015" end="4032" title="Mörigen Arrowhead" label="Mörigen Arrowhead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780159" wikidata="Q1303354" url="?curid=780159" title="Kalkkop crater">
<text>Kalkkop is an impact crater which can be found on a private farm south east of the town of Aberdeen, Eastern Cape, in the Eastern Cape Province of South Africa. The name is derived from two Afrikaans words, namely &quot;kalk&quot; meaning limestone and &quot;kop&quot; meaning head.

The meteorite impact occurred about 250,000 years ago (Pleistocene) on what is now the flat Karoo landscape. It left a crater 640 metres in diameter and a few hundred metres deep. Over time, draining water left a limestone deposit 88 metres deep. This lies over a breccia layer a further 210 metres deep. Only a weathered circular ridge is still visible at the surface.

This is one of four confirmed impact sites in South Africa and six within the Southern African region.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1303354" start="0" end="7" title="Kalkkop crater" label="Kalkkop"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="14" end="27" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q319416" start="91" end="113" title="Aberdeen, Eastern Cape" label="Aberdeen, Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="122" end="143" title="Eastern Cape Province" label="Eastern Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="147" end="159" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="190" end="199" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="239" end="248" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="288" end="297" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="339" end="350" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q916997" start="376" end="381" title="Karoo" label="Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="548" end="555" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="733" end="748" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780161" wikidata="Q3776613" url="?curid=780161" title="Kaluga crater">
<text>Kaluga is an impact crater located in Kaluga Oblast of the Central Federal District, Russia.

It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 380 ± 5 million years old (Upper Devonian). The crater is buried under of sediments; it is not exposed at the surface.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3776613" start="0" end="6" title="Kaluga crater" label="Kaluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="13" end="26" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842" start="38" end="51" title="Kaluga Oblast" label="Kaluga Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190778" start="59" end="83" title="Central Federal District" label="Central Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="85" end="91" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="176" end="184" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780163" wikidata="Q2073192" url="?curid=780163" title="Kamensk crater">
<text>Kamensk crater is an impact crater located to the north of Kamensk-Shakhtinsky town in Rostov Oblast, Russia. It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 49.0 ± 0.2 million years old (Eocene). The crater is not exposed at the surface. It may have formed at the same time as the smaller and nearby Gusev crater.

== Description ==
Six laser total-fusion analyses of the Kamensk impact glass have a weighted-mean age of 49.2 ± 0.1 Ma relative to sanidine from the Taylor Creek Rhyolite of New Mexico, that has an age of 27.92 Ma relative to a K-Ar age of 162.9 ± 0 Ma for a primary fluence-monitor standard SB-3 biotite or of 513.9 Ma for an international hornblende standard MMhb-1. This isotopic age of the Kamensk glass recalculated using a reference age for MMhb-1 of 520.4 Ma is 49.9 ± 0.1 Ma.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2073192" start="0" end="14" title="Kamensk crater" label="Kamensk crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="21" end="34" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q144017" start="59" end="78" title="Kamensk-Shakhtinsky" label="Kamensk-Shakhtinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573" start="87" end="100" title="Rostov Oblast" label="Rostov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="189" end="195" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q372566" start="302" end="314" title="Gusev crater (Russia)" label="Gusev crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q426723" start="449" end="457" title="sanidine" label="sanidine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="467" end="488" title="Taylor Creek Rhyolite" label="Taylor Creek Rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="492" end="502" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="615" end="622" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057300" start="659" end="669" title="hornblende" label="hornblende"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780164" wikidata="Q2561115" url="?curid=780164" title="Kara crater">
<text>Kara is a meteorite crater in the Yugorsky Peninsula, Nenetsia, Russia.

Heavily eroded, it is presently in diameter, though it is thought to be originally before erosion. Its age is estimated to be 70.3 ± 2.2 million years old (Late Cretaceous). Impactite outcrops located on the Baydarata Gulf (Baydaratskaya) shore north-east of the crater imply that the original size of the crater could have been the 4th largest on Earth. The crater is not exposed at the surface.

The Kara crater lies in the southeastern end of the Yugorsky Peninsula, while the Ust-Kara site lies offshore, east of the small Kara or Karskaya Guba inlet. It was formerly believed that these two sites were two separate craters and that they formed a twin impact structure from the Late Cretaceous. However, it seems that the Ust-Kara site does not exist as a separate site. Apparently, the suevite outcrops of the Ust-Kara impact structure are only a part of the Kara impact structure.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Earth Impact Database
* The Kara Crater Size: Suevite layer outside the crater depression</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2561115" start="0" end="4" title="Kara crater" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="10" end="19" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="20" end="26" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914144" start="34" end="52" title="Yugorsky Peninsula" label="Yugorsky Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164" start="54" end="62" title="Nenetsia" label="Nenetsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="229" end="244" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q976105" start="247" end="256" title="Impactite" label="Impactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991455" start="281" end="295" title="Baydaratskaya Bay" label="Baydarata Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561115" start="553" end="561" title="Kara crater" label="Ust-Kara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="608" end="621" title="Karskaya Guba" label="Karskaya Guba"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="760" end="770" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q447600" start="864" end="871" title="suevite" label="suevite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780165" wikidata="Q720015" url="?curid=780165" title="Karakul (Tajikistan)">
<text>Karakul or Qarokul (Kyrgyz for &quot;black lake&quot;, replacing the older Tajik name Siob; ; ; , ; ) is an endorheic lake, in diameter, located within a impact crater. It is located in the Tajik National Park in the Pamir Mountains in Tajikistan.

==Impact crater==
Karakul lies within a circular depression, which has been interpreted as an impact crater with a rim diameter of . Some estimates say the impact is relatively recent. A preliminary estimate dated it to between 25 Ma and 23 Ma. However, it may be from the recent Pliocene epoch (5.3 to 2.6 Ma). The Earth Impact Database (EID) also lists it as younger than 5 Ma. It is larger than the Eltanin impact (2.5 Ma), which has already been suggested as a contributor to the cooling and ice cap formation in the Northern Hemisphere during the late Pliocene.

The Karakul impact structure was first identified around 1987 through studies of imagery taken from space.

==Lake description==
The lake/crater lies at an elevation of above mean sea level. A peninsula projecting from the south shore and an island off the north shore divide the lake into two basins: a smaller, relatively shallow eastern one, between deep, and a larger western one, deep. It is endorheic (lacking a drainage outlet) and the water is brackish. There is a small village with the same name on the eastern shore of the lake.

The lake level was 35 m higher after the last ice age.

==Environment==
Although the lake lies within a national park, much of the surroundings are used as pasture. The lake, with its islands, marshes, wet meadows, peat bogs, and pebbly and sandy plains, has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA) because it supports significant numbers of the populations of various bird species, either as residents, or as breeding or passage migrants. 

These species include bar-headed geese, ruddy shelducks, common mergansers, saker falcons, Himalayan vultures, lesser sand plovers, brown-headed gulls, Tibetan sandgrouse, yellow-billed choughs, Himalayan rubythroats, white-winged redstarts, white-winged snowfinches, rufous-streaked accentors, brown accentors, black-headed mountain finches and Caucasian great rosefinches. The lake&#x27;s islands are the main places where waterbirds rest and nest. 

The only fish in the lake are &quot;Triplophysa lacusnigri&quot;.

==Events==
Higher than Lake Titicaca, Karakul hosted the Roof of the World Regatta from 2014 to 2017. This replaced the Alpine Bank Dillon Open, held on the Dillon Reservoir in Colorado, United States as the highest sailing regatta in the world.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720015" start="0" end="7" title="Karakul (Tajikistan)" label="Karakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q720015" start="11" end="18" title="Karakul (Tajikistan)" label="Qarokul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="20" end="26" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="75" end="80" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9019918" start="108" end="122" title="endorheic lake" label="endorheic lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="154" end="167" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076575" start="190" end="209" title="Tajik National Park" label="Tajik National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="217" end="232" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="236" end="246" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="480" end="482" title="Megaannum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="529" end="537" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327084" start="565" end="586" title="Earth Impact Database" label="Earth Impact Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334017" start="651" end="665" title="Eltanin impact" label="Eltanin impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q878077" start="745" end="752" title="ice cap" label="ice cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="986" end="1006" title="above mean sea level" label="above mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="1059" end="1065" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1214" end="1223" title="Endorheic basin#Endorheic lakes" label="endorheic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="1269" end="1277" title="brackish water" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="1514" end="1521" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1551" end="1556" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q759978" start="1560" end="1570" title="wet meadow" label="wet meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="1573" end="1577" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="1578" end="1581" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14673" start="1588" end="1594" title="pebble" label="pebbly"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1599" end="1603" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="1605" end="1610" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="1636" end="1658" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="1665" end="1684" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="1814" end="1830" title="bird migration" label="passage migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q191125" start="1856" end="1872" title="Bar-headed goose" label="bar-headed geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170723" start="1874" end="1888" title="ruddy shelduck" label="ruddy shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q180991" start="1891" end="1907" title="common merganser" label="common merganser"/>
<link wikidata="Q165974" start="1910" end="1922" title="saker falcon" label="saker falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q643101" start="1925" end="1942" title="Himalayan vulture" label="Himalayan vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q305255" start="1945" end="1963" title="lesser sand plover" label="lesser sand plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26064" start="1966" end="1983" title="brown-headed gull" label="brown-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q127890" start="1986" end="2004" title="Tibetan sandgrouse" label="Tibetan sandgrouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q191386" start="2006" end="2026" title="yellow-billed chough" label="yellow-billed chough"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075676" start="2029" end="2049" title="Himalayan rubythroat" label="Himalayan rubythroat"/>
<link wikidata="Q796484" start="2052" end="2073" title="white-winged redstart" label="white-winged redstart"/>
<link wikidata="Q499290" start="2076" end="2098" title="white-winged snowfinch" label="white-winged snowfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036507" start="2102" end="2126" title="rufous-streaked accentor" label="rufous-streaked accentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q995751" start="2129" end="2143" title="brown accentor" label="brown accentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030043" start="2146" end="2173" title="black-headed mountain finch" label="black-headed mountain finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q819706" start="2180" end="2205" title="Caucasian great rosefinch" label="Caucasian great rosefinch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2323" end="2345" title="Triplophysa lacusnigri" label="Triplophysa lacusnigri"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="2377" end="2390" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="2429" end="2436" title="Regatta" label="Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276944" start="2511" end="2527" title="Dillon Reservoir" label="Dillon Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2541" end="2554" title="United States" label="United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780166" wikidata="Q235693" url="?curid=780166" title="Menstrual pad">
<text>A menstrual pad is an absorbent item worn in the underwear when menstruating, bleeding after giving birth, recovering from gynecologic surgery, experiencing a miscarriage or abortion, or in any other situation where it is necessary to absorb a flow of blood from the vagina. A menstrual pad is a type of menstrual hygiene product that is worn externally, unlike tampons and menstrual cups, which are worn inside the vagina. Pads are generally changed by being stripped off the pants and panties, taking out the old pad, sticking the new one on the inside of the panties and pulling them back on. Pads are recommended to be changed every 3–4 hours to avoid certain bacteria that can fester in blood; this time also may differ depending on the kind worn, flow, and the time it is worn.

Menstrual pads are made from a range of materials, differing depending on style, country of origin, and brand. The pads are not the same as incontinence pads, which generally have higher absorbency and are worn by those who have urinary incontinence problems. Although menstrual pads are not made for this use, some use them for this purpose.

==Types ==
===Disposable ===
Although producers are generally reluctant to reveal the exact composition of their products, the main materials of disposable menstrual pads are usually bleached rayon (cellulose made from wood pulp), cotton and plastics. In addition, fragrance and antibacterial agents can be included. The plastic parts are the backsheet and polymer powder as an additional powerful absorbent (superabsorbent polymers) that turns into a gel when moistened. Procter &amp; Gamble advertise a proprietary material called Infinicel as the core of their napkins.
In general, the layering is as follows: &quot;an absorbent core material placed between a flexible liquid-pervious topsheet and a liquid-impervious plastic backsheet that has an adhesive on the outside for attaching the napkin to an undergarment&quot;. As is the case with disposable tampons and diapers, recycling is difficult and rarely done due to cost reasons, although proof-of-principle solutions appear to exist. When not dumped in a landfill where the non-biodegradable parts may persist for thousands of years, conventional hygiene products can at best be &quot;thermally recycled&quot; (incinerated).

There are several different types of disposable menstrual pads:

* Panty liner: Designed to absorb daily vaginal discharge, light menstrual flow, spotting, slight urinary incontinence, or as a backup for tampon or menstrual cup use.
* Ultra-thin: A very compact which may be as absorbent as a Regular or Maxi/Super pad but with less bulk.
* Regular: A middle range absorbency pad.
* Maxi/Super: A larger absorbency pad, useful for the start of the menstrual cycle when menstruation is often heaviest.
* Overnight: A longer pad to allow for more protection while the wearer is lying down, with an absorbency suitable for overnight use.
* Maternity: These are usually slightly longer than a maxi/Super pad and are designed to be worn to absorb lochia (bleeding that occurs after childbirth) and also can absorb urine.

The shape, absorbency and lengths may vary depending on manufacturer, but usually range from the short slender panty liner to the larger and longer overnight. Long pads are offered for extra protection or for larger people whose undergarments might not be completely protected by regular length pads, and also for overnight use.

Other options are often offered in a manufacturer&#x27;s line of pads, such as wings or tabs that wrap around the sides of underwear to add additional leak protection and help secure the pad in place. Deodorant is also added to some pads, which is designed to cover menstrual odor with a light fragrance. There are even panty liners specifically designed to be worn with a thong/G-string.

===Reusable (cloth) ===


Some people use a washable or reusable cloth menstrual pad. These are made from a number of types of fabric—most often cotton flannel, bamboo, or hemp (which is highly absorbent and not as bulky as cotton). Most styles have wings that secure around the underpants, but some are just held in place (without wings) between the body and the underpants. Some (particularly the older styles) are available in belted styles. Cloth menstrual pads made a comeback around the 1970s, with their popularity increasing in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Reasons people choose to switch to cloth menstrual pads include comfort, savings over time, environmental impact and health reasons.

Washable menstrual pads do not need to be disposed of after use and therefore offer a more economical alternative. Reusable menstrual pads can be found on a number of websites, or are made at home (instructions are available online). They have become a popular alternative because they are allergen- and perfume-free, and can be more comfortable for people who experience irritation from using disposable pads.

There are many styles of cloth menstrual pads available today, ranging from panty liners to overnight pads. Popular styles of cloth menstrual pads include all-in-one, or AIO pads, in which the absorbent layer is sewn inside the pad, &quot;inserts on top&quot; style pads, which have absorbent layers that can be secured on top of the pad as needed, envelope or pocket style pads, which have absorbent layers that can be inserted inside the pad as needed, and a foldable style, in which the pad folds around the absorbent layers. Cloth menstrual pads can also have a waterproof lining, which provides more leak protection but may also be less breathable than those with no lining.

==Uses==
Menstrual pads are worn to absorb menstrual discharge, thereby protecting clothing and furnishings. They are usually individually wrapped so they are easier and more discreet to carry in a purse or bag. This wrapper may be used to wrap the soiled pads before disposing of them in appropriate receptacles. Some people prefer to wrap the pads with toilet paper instead of (or as well as) using the wrapper, which, often being made of slick plastic with a small tape tab, may not adequately stick. Menstrual pads of any type should not be flushed down the toilet as they can cause blockages. In developed countries, public toilets almost always include a receptacle in which to place soiled pads. In first aid, they make excellent dressings for heavy bleeding due to their high absorbency if gauze is unavailable or inadequate.

Many people who experience urinary incontinence use menstrual pads to manage bladder leaks. However, since menstrual pads are designed to absorb menstrual flow, they are not as effective in absorbing urinary leaks; incontinence pads are designed for this purpose.

If someone does not have menstrual pads on hand while menstruating, they might use toilet paper as a temporary substitution.

==History==
Through the ages societies have used different forms of menstrual protection. Menstrual pads have been mentioned as early as the 10th century, in the &quot;Suda&quot;, where Hypatia, who lived in the 4th century AD, was said to have thrown one of her used menstrual rags at an admirer in an attempt to discourage him. In ancient Egypt, women used softened papyrus, a grass-like plant, to absorb their menstrual blood. Before commercially available menstrual hygiene products, most women used pieces of cloth to absorb their menstrual flow. &quot;On the rag&quot; is a term that originally referred to menstrual rags, but its modern usage is as a menstrual euphemism.

Until disposable menstrual pads were created, cloth or reusable pads were widely used to collect menstrual blood. People often used a variety of home-made menstrual pads which they crafted from various fabrics, or other absorbent materials, to collect menstrual blood. Even after disposable pads were commercially available, for several years they were too expensive for many families to afford. When they could be afforded, people were allowed to place money in a box so that they would not have to speak to the clerk and take a box of Kotex pads from the counter themselves. It took several years for disposable menstrual pads to become commonplace. For easier use, inventor Carolyn R. Mobley patented the tab construction for a sanitary napkin. Disposables are now used nearly exclusively in most of the industrialized world.

The first of the disposable pads were generally in the form of a cotton wool or similar fibrous rectangle covered with an absorbent liner. The liner ends were extended front and back so as to fit through loops in a special girdle or belt worn beneath undergarments. This design was notorious for slipping either forward or back of the intended position.

Disposable menstrual pads grew from a Benjamin Franklin invention created to help stop wounded soldiers from bleeding, but appear to have been first commercially available from around 1880 with Thomas and William Southall&#x27;s pad. The first commercially available American disposable napkins were Lister&#x27;s Towels created by Johnson &amp; Johnson in 1888. Disposable pads had their start with nurses using their wood pulp bandages to absorb their menstrual flow, creating a pad that was made from easily obtainable materials and inexpensive enough to throw away after use. Kotex&#x27;s first advertisement for products made with this wood pulp (cellucotton) appeared in January 1921. Johnson &amp; Johnson introduced &quot;Modess&quot; Sanitary Napkins in 1926, researched by Lillian Gilbreth. Lilian Gilbreth&#x27;s market research report published in 1927 gives valuable information about American&#x27;s experiences of menstruation in 1920s. The surveys she conducted on over 1000 people with periods reveal that &quot;the most significant fact concerning the marketing angle of the sanitary napkin [...] is that it is availability that sells a napkin.&quot; Several of the first disposable pad manufacturers were also manufacturers of bandages, which could give an indication of what these products were like.

In 1956, Mary Kenner obtained a patent for an adjustable sanitary belt with an inbuilt, moisture-proof napkin pocket. However, the company that first showed interest in her invention rejected it after they discovered that she was African American.

Later an adhesive strip was placed on the bottom of sanitary pads for attachment to the crotch of the panties, and this became a favoured method. The belted sanitary napkin quickly disappeared during the early 1980s.

The ergonomic design and materials used to make pads also changed through the 1980s to today. With earlier materials not being as absorbent and effective, and early pads being up to two centimetres thick, leaks were a major problem. Some variations introduced were quilting of the lining, adding &quot;wings&quot; and reducing the thickness of the pad by utilising products such as sphagnum and polyacrylate superabsorbent gels derived from petroleum. The materials used to manufacture most pads are derived from the petroleum industry and forestry. The absorbent core, made from chlorine bleached wood pulp, could be reduced to make slimmer products with the addition of polyacrylate gels which sucks up the liquid quickly and holds it in a suspension under pressure. The remaining materials are mostly derived from the petroleum industry, the cover stock used is polypropylene non woven, with the leakproof barrier made from polyethylene film.

==Society and culture==

Pads, especially reusable ones, may be visible on full body scanners.

===Developing countries===
In developing countries, makeshift pads are still used to collect menstrual blood as they are cheaper. Rags, soil, and mud are also reportedly used for collecting menstrual flow by people who cannot afford the more expensive disposable pads or tampons.

In order to meet the need for achieving an inexpensive solution to reduce unsanitary and unhygienic practices in countries like India, Arunachalam Muruganantham from rural Coimbatore in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, India, developed and patented a machine which could manufacture low-cost sanitary pads for less than a third of the former cost. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation awarded Nairobi-based ZanaAfrica a grant of US$3 million. ZanaAfrica explores creative approaches to menstrual health education for adolescent girls.

==Health effects==
In 2024 it was reported that a brand of menstrual pad was found to contain the toxic chemical PFOA.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*Museum of Menstruation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235693" start="2" end="15" title="Menstrual pad" label="menstrual pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q332828" start="22" end="31" title="Absorption (chemistry)" label="absorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="49" end="58" title="Undergarment" label="underwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="64" end="76" title="menstruation" label="menstruating"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138772" start="78" end="105" title="lochia" label="bleeding after giving birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="159" end="170" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="174" end="182" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="252" end="257" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="267" end="273" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083164" start="304" end="321" title="feminine hygiene" label="menstrual hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q976338" start="362" end="368" title="tampon" label="tampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216997" start="374" end="387" title="menstrual cup" label="menstrual cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49223" start="487" end="494" title="panties" label="panties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015249" start="925" end="941" title="incontinence pad" label="incontinence pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="1014" end="1034" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194058" start="1274" end="1284" title="disposable" label="disposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587" start="1312" end="1320" title="bleaching" label="bleached"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="1321" end="1326" title="rayon" label="rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="1328" end="1337" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="1348" end="1357" title="wood pulp" label="wood pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1360" end="1366" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1371" end="1379" title="plastics" label="plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151963" start="1394" end="1403" title="fragrance" label="fragrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1408" end="1421" title="antibacterial" label="antibacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="1486" end="1493" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332828" start="1527" end="1536" title="Absorption (chemistry)" label="absorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q631266" start="1538" end="1560" title="superabsorbent polymer" label="superabsorbent polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185744" start="1581" end="1584" title="gel" label="gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="1601" end="1621" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q976338" start="1986" end="1992" title="tampon" label="tampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187359" start="1998" end="2004" title="diaper" label="diaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="2166" end="2179" title="biodegradable" label="biodegradable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915573" start="2273" end="2291" title="thermal recycling" label="thermally recycled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273163" start="2381" end="2392" title="pantiliner" label="Panty liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="2460" end="2468" title="Metrorrhagia" label="spotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="2477" end="2497" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q216997" start="2528" end="2541" title="menstrual cup" label="menstrual cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="2762" end="2777" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138772" start="3056" end="3062" title="lochia" label="lochia"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="3360" end="3372" title="undergarment" label="undergarment"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="3737" end="3741" title="odor" label="odor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273163" start="3781" end="3792" title="panty liner" label="panty liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426205" start="3840" end="3848" title="G-string" label="G-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317732" start="3916" end="3935" title="cloth menstrual pad" label="cloth menstrual pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="4023" end="4027" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="6247" end="6266" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="6508" end="6528" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015249" start="6696" end="6712" title="incontinence pad" label="incontinence pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5840" start="6829" end="6841" title="toilet paper" label="toilet paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="7040" end="7044" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7058" end="7065" title="Hypatia#Sanitary napkins" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q948607" start="8089" end="8094" title="Kotex" label="Kotex"/>
<link wikidata="Q844770" start="8447" end="8458" title="cotton wool" label="cotton wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194058" start="8737" end="8747" title="Disposable" label="Disposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="8775" end="8792" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333718" start="9069" end="9090" title="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson" label="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q948607" start="9317" end="9322" title="Kotex" label="Kotex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40197" start="9520" end="9536" title="Lillian Gilbreth" label="Lillian Gilbreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737525" start="10068" end="10079" title="Mary Kenner" label="Mary Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="10908" end="10916" title="sphagnum" label="sphagnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q423145" start="11198" end="11210" title="polyacrylate" label="polyacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="11391" end="11404" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q154055" start="11548" end="11565" title="full body scanner" label="full body scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="11599" end="11619" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q235553" start="11985" end="12010" title="Arunachalam Muruganantham" label="Arunachalam Muruganantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="12022" end="12032" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="12058" end="12068" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="12199" end="12236" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="12245" end="12252" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12259" end="12269" title="ZanaAfrica foundation" label="ZanaAfrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046456" start="12338" end="12354" title="Menstrual hygiene management" label="menstrual health"/>
<link wikidata="Q418348" start="12501" end="12505" title="PFOA" label="PFOA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780168" wikidata="Q3737900" url="?curid=780168" title="Kärdla crater">
<text>Kärdla (also Kärdla astrobleme) is a meteorite crater near the town of Kärdla in Estonia.

It is in diameter and its age is estimated to be about 455 million years (Late Ordovician). The crater is not exposed at the surface.

Its formation has been associated with the breakdown of 100km asteroid, that might have also resulted in the Tvären and Lockne craters in Sweden among others.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3737900" start="0" end="6" title="Kärdla crater" label="Kärdla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737900" start="13" end="30" title="Kärdla crater" label="Kärdla astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="37" end="46" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="47" end="53" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q155066" start="71" end="77" title="Kärdla" label="Kärdla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="81" end="88" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="180" title="Ordovician#Subdivisions" label="Late Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538240" start="335" end="341" title="Tvären" label="Tvären"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551102" start="346" end="359" title="Lockne crater" label="Lockne crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780170" wikidata="Q774694" url="?curid=780170" title="Ohio Stadium">
<text>Ohio Stadium is an American football stadium in Columbus, Ohio, on the campus of Ohio State University. It primarily serves as the home venue of the Ohio State Buckeyes football team and is also the site for the university&#x27;s Spring Commencement ceremonies each May. Common nicknames for the stadium include &quot;The Horseshoe&quot;, &quot;The Shoe&quot;, and &quot;The House That Harley Built&quot;.

From 1996 to 1998, Ohio Stadium was the home venue for the Columbus Crew of Major League Soccer prior to the opening of Columbus Crew Stadium in 1999. The stadium also was the home venue for the OSU track and field teams from 1923 to 2001. In addition to athletics, Ohio Stadium is also a concert venue, with U2, Taylor Swift, The Rolling Stones, Genesis, Pink Floyd, and Metallica among the many acts to have played at the venue.

The stadium opened in 1922 as a replacement for Ohio Field and had a seating capacity of 66,210. In 1923, a cinder running track was added that was later upgraded to an all-weather track. Seating capacity gradually increased over the years and reached a total of 91,470 possible spectators in 1991. Beginning in 2000, the stadium was renovated and expanded in several phases, removing the track and adding additional seating, which raised the capacity to 101,568 by 2001 and to 102,329 in 2007. In 2014, additional seating was added in the end zone, raising the official capacity to 104,944. Another renovation to add more luxury suites began in 2017 and will eventually lead to a decrease of 2,600 seats. It is the largest stadium by capacity in the state of Ohio, and the third largest on-campus football stadium in the United States. Ohio Stadium was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1974.

==Construction==
As early as 1913, Ohio Field at High Street and Woodruff Avenue was unable to contain the crowds attracted to many Buckeye home football games. This led to faculty discussion of moving the site elsewhere and building a new facility. The growing popularity of football in Ohio led to the design of a horseshoe-shaped stadium, conceptualized and designed by architect Howard Dwight Smith in 1918. A public-subscription Stadium Campaign to fund the project began in October 1920 and raised over $1.1 million in pledges by January 1921, of which $975,001 were actually honored.
The stadium was built in 1922 by E. H. Latham Company of Columbus, with materials and labor from the Marble Cliff Quarry Co. at a construction cost of $1.34 million and a total cost of $1.49 million. The stadium&#x27;s original capacity was 66,210. Upon completion, it was the largest poured concrete structure in the world. Many university officials feared that the stadium would never be filled to capacity.

Smith employed numerous revolutionary architectural techniques while building the stadium. At the base is a slurry wall to keep out the waters from the Olentangy River; the stadium rests on the flood plain. Instead of building a large bowl like the previously constructed Yale Bowl, Ohio Stadium was designed to have an upper deck that would hang over part of the lower deck, giving Ohio Stadium its &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, and &quot;C&quot; decks. Instead of employing numerous columns like those at Harvard Stadium, Smith designed double columns that allow for more space between columns. The rotunda at the north end of the stadium, which is now adorned with stained glass murals of the offensive and defensive squads that comprise the Buckeye football team, was designed to look like the dome at the Pantheon in Rome.

==History==

The first game in the stadium was against Ohio Wesleyan University on October 7, 1922, and brought a crowd of around 25,000, which left people concerned because the stadium was half empty. This concern was put to rest at the stadium&#x27;s formal dedication against Michigan on October 21, which the Wolverines won, 19–0. The crowd was announced at the game to be 72,000, but no one is really sure how many people made it into the stadium. This attendance mark was broken in a game against Michigan in 1926 when 90,411 came out to support the Buckeyes; this is also the last time standing-room-only tickets were sold for a game.

The stadium did not regularly sell out until after World War II, and in the 1920s and 1930s most games only drew in 20,000 or 30,000 fans with many more attending the annual game against Michigan. The 1935 contest with Notre Dame was a sellout, with over 81,000 in attendance.

In 1923, a cinder track was built around the football field, which would later be named after Olympian and Ohio State athlete Jesse Owens. The stadium was home to the OSU track and field teams until the opening of Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium in 2001.

===Renovations===
As time passed, minor adjustments raised the seating capacity to more than 90,000. In 1984, a new $2.1 million scoreboard was installed. The stadium was heavily renovated from 1998 to 2001. The press box was replaced, additional seating was installed, and 81 luxury suites and 2,500 club seats were added. The south end zone scoreboard was also replaced by a video board that is able to show replays, highlights, animations, graphics and statistical information. Additionally, a smaller version of the south end scoreboard was added to the north end and a new LED ribbon board that runs end-zone to end-zone was added to the balcony prior to the 2009 season. In 1998, the track was removed and a slurry wall was built underneath the field to allow it to be lowered , which places it below the water table. After the 1999 season, the field of play was lowered to add seating closer to the field. The temporary bleachers in the south end zone were replaced with permanent seating. However, the south end of the stadium remains partially open, thus allowing the stadium to maintain its notable horseshoe configuration. General improvements were made in the seating and concourse areas. The result of the $194 million renovation was a capacity that rose to 101,568. 80% of the cost of the renovation was funded by the sale of leases on the suites and club seats, with the remaining 20% funded by donations and the sale of naming rights for portions of the stadium. No public or university money was spent in the renovation process.

In 1971, the natural grass field was removed, and AstroTurf was installed, compliments of a donation by Lou Fisher in dedication to fellow football player Joseph Campanella. A plaque was placed on the southeast corner in memory of Campanella. In 1979, the surface was replaced with SuperTurf. In 1990, natural grass made its return to the Horseshoe, in the form of a special grass called &quot;Prescription Athletic Turf.&quot; New field designs were put in place for the 1992 season and existed through the 2006 season. During the 2006 season, problems with the natural grass began to arise. After serious damage to the field during use in the spring of 2006, the field never recovered and had to be re-sodded. That grass never took root because of bad weather, and the university was forced to re-sod the field again only three weeks after the old sod was laid. The university spent approximately $150,000 to perform both soddings. In response to this, OSU replaced the natural grass with FieldTurf for the 2007 season. This new artificial turf looks and feels like real grass but requires minimal upkeep.
In March 2012 the university announced a $7 million renovation to the scoreboard installed during the 2000–01 renovation. The project began April 23 and was completed in time for the 2012 season opener on September 1. The current scoreboard includes a Panasonic HD screen, stretching , and incorporates upgrades to the audio system and the LED running boards (which are the smaller screens underneath the larger screen that usually display score updates and advertisements). A Pro Sound audio system with 25 different speakers flank the scoreboard. Older speakers throughout the Horseshoe received improvements and will eventually be replaced by new speakers fitted into the existing framework.

Prior to the 2014 season, 2,500 seats were added to the south stands. These seats were built over the entrance tunnels and raised the official capacity of the stadium to 104,851, making it the third largest stadium in the country and the fourth largest stadium in the world. The renovations also included permanent lights added to the northeast and southeast corners of the stadium, as well as atop the press box, and the playing surface was replaced.

=== Field name ===
The playing surface at Ohio Stadium is known as Safelite Field, named for Columbus-based Safelite, a glass repair company. The naming rights deal was announced August 26, 2022, and allows the company’s logos to be displayed on the field. The name of the facility, however, did not change.

===Timeline of seating capacity===

===Night football games===
Before the 2014 renovations, Ohio Stadium did not have permanent lights at the stadium, thus night games were rare. Ohio State&#x27;s first night game in the stadium was played on September 14, 1985, when the #9 Buckeyes defeated the Pittsburgh Panthers, 10–7. Ohio State did not play another night game at Ohio Stadium until September 11, 1993, when the 16th-ranked Buckeyes defeated #12 Washington 21–12. Ohio State played a total of 12 more night games before permanent lighting was installed, nine of which were against ranked opponents. The Buckeyes are 16-5 (.762) overall and 9-1 (.900) in the Big Ten in night games through September 18, 2017. Ohio State&#x27;s most recent night game was a 42–17 win versus Tennessee on December 21, 2024 as part of the 2024–25 College Football Playoff.

Below is a table of teams the Buckeyes have faced in multiple night games at Ohio Stadium.

===Largest attendance===
===2024 commencement death===
On May 5, 2024, a woman fell to her death from the stands atop the stadium during Ohio State&#x27;s commencement ceremony. The ceremony was not stopped, and no speakers acknowledged the death.

==Buckeye football==
The largest crowd in stadium history is 110,045, set November 26, 2016, in a game against Michigan. The attendance broke the previous record of 108,975 set the previous year for the game against Michigan State. Ohio State has ranked in the top five for attendance for many years, and was the national leader in attendance for the 2014 season, averaging 106,296 people per game. The school set the national spring game record on April 16, 2016, when they drew 100,189 fans for their 2016 spring game. This broke the previous record of 99,391 set by the Buckeyes in their 2015 spring game.

Mel Kiper, Jr. ranked Ohio Stadium second in atmosphere in 2002, behind the Army–Navy Game, and quoted Beano Cook in saying &quot;There is nothing that beats when the Ohio State Marching Band and the sousaphone player dots the &#x27;i&#x27; for Script Ohio.&quot; The crowd attending these home games is known for creating harsh and difficult environments for opponents. University of Iowa coach Hayden Fry complained after a 1985 loss that the fans were too loud for his quarterback, Chuck Long, to call plays and suggested sound meters be used to gauge the noise level, penalizing home teams if there was too much noise. He said, &quot;It&#x27;s a realistic fact that happened. He became mentally disturbed for the first time since he&#x27;s been a starter for us because of his inability to communicate.&quot;

===O-H-I-O===

One famous chant by the Buckeye fans, usually starting with the students in the South Stands, is O-H-I-O. The entire South end yells O then the East stands follow with H, the North with I and the West with O. The chant loops around the stadium loudly sometimes for 5 to 10 minutes. Before kickoff the entire stadium screams O continuously until the ball is kicked; immediately following the kick the stadium shouts in unison O-H-I-O.

==Events==

===Columbus Crew===
Major League Soccer games were held at Ohio Stadium between 1996 and 1998. The home opener was held on April 13, 1996, against D.C. United before 25,266 fans. Brian McBride scored 2 goals and had an assist in a 4–0 rout. The field at Ohio Stadium was the smallest in the MLS, measuring only 62 yards wide by 106 yards long, limited by the track surrounding it. Because of the smaller market for soccer than Ohio State football, B Deck, C Deck, and the South end zone seats were closed, leading to a capacity of 25,243.

Attendance stayed strong through the first season, seeing a record audience of 31,550 September 15, 1996 win over the MetroStars, 2–0. Despite the facility&#x27;s size, problems like field dimensions and the lack of lighting pushed the Crew to find a new home. Jamey Rootes, Crew president and general manager stated, &quot;We prefer a smaller, more intimate environment (than Ohio Stadium) … We&#x27;ve got to create a major league environment. Ohio Stadium is a great stadium, but we cannot create a major league environment in a facility that is way too big for us.&quot; The Crew finished their tenure at Ohio Stadium 30–18.

===Concerts===

=== Buckeye Country Superfest ===
=== Classic For Columbus ===
On August 28, 2021, Ohio Stadium played host to the Classic For Columbus, which matched up two HBCUs, in Central State Marauders and Kentucky State Thorobreds. Kentucky State won 20–6 in front of approximately 20,000 fans.

===High school===
The stadium hosted the Ohio High School Athletic Association football championship games for all seven divisions from 2014 to 2016. The stadium had previously hosted the championships for Divisions I and III in 1982 and all divisions (five at the time) from 1983 to 1989.

===International soccer===
The 2016 International Champions Cup match between Real Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain was held at Ohio Stadium on July 27, 2016. The match, won by Paris Saint-Germain 3–1, drew 86,641 fans, the largest crowd to ever see a soccer game in the state of Ohio.

Chelsea F.C. and Manchester City F.C. played in a friendly match at the stadium on August 3, 2024, with 71,280 in attendance. Manchester City won 4–2 with a hat-trick scored by Erling Haaland. The stadium had a temporary grass pitch installed over the normal turf surface for the match, which was criticized by Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola.

===Ice hockey===
The National Hockey League (NHL) announced on February 15, 2024, that the Columbus Blue Jackets will host the Detroit Red Wings in the 2025 NHL Stadium Series at Ohio Stadium, scheduled for March 1, 2025.

==See also==
* List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums

==References==
*

==External links==
*Stadium history on display at main library in &quot;The Lantern&quot;
*WOSU history of stadium
*The Ohio Stadium Story Highly detailed account of genesis, funding, and construction of Ohio Stadium
*Stadium Journey Review of Ohio Stadium
*Ohio Stadium under construction in 1922
*Ohio Stadium under construction in 1921</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q774694" start="0" end="12" title="Ohio Stadium" label="Ohio Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="19" end="36" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="48" end="62" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="81" end="102" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="149" end="177" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State Buckeyes football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095375" start="386" end="392" title="Chic Harley" label="Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q457163" start="466" end="479" title="Columbus Crew" label="Columbus Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="483" end="502" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112858" start="527" end="548" title="Columbus Crew Stadium" label="Columbus Crew Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="716" end="718" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="720" end="732" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="734" end="752" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="754" end="761" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="763" end="773" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="779" end="788" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080816" start="887" end="897" title="Ohio Field" label="Ohio Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="908" end="924" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600962" start="1613" end="1626" title="List of U.S. stadiums by capacity" label="third largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1706" end="1742" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2041" end="2045" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919503" start="2136" end="2155" title="Howard Dwight Smith" label="Howard Dwight Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755173" start="2445" end="2468" title="Marble Cliff Quarry Co." label="Marble Cliff Quarry Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q781696" start="2863" end="2874" title="slurry wall" label="slurry wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019404" start="2907" end="2922" title="Olentangy River" label="Olentangy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535796" start="3027" end="3036" title="Yale Bowl" label="Yale Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587879" start="3262" end="3277" title="Harvard Stadium" label="Harvard Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="3565" end="3573" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194266" start="3639" end="3663" title="Ohio Wesleyan University" label="Ohio Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="4446" end="4456" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="4631" end="4642" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="4676" end="4691" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186725" start="4719" end="4747" title="Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium" label="Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="4821" end="4837" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q781696" start="5472" end="5483" title="slurry wall" label="slurry wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="6355" end="6364" title="AstroTurf" label="AstroTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="7296" end="7305" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="7753" end="7756" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797369" start="8670" end="8678" title="Safelite" label="Safelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582487" start="9168" end="9187" title="1985 Pittsburgh Panthers football team" label="Pittsburgh Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026190" start="9323" end="9333" title="1993 Washington Huskies football team" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q124097641" start="9650" end="9659" title="2024 Tennessee Volunteers football team" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124344651" start="9696" end="9728" title="2024–25 College Football Playoff" label="2024–25 College Football Playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="9978" end="9999" title="Graduation" label="commencement ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810754" start="10682" end="10696" title="Mel Kiper, Jr." label="Mel Kiper, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1439106" start="10758" end="10772" title="Army–Navy Game" label="Army–Navy Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876295" start="10785" end="10795" title="Beano Cook" label="Beano Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q499387" start="10882" end="10892" title="sousaphone" label="sousaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121909758" start="10927" end="10938" title="Script Ohio" label="Script Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="11053" end="11071" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686318" start="11078" end="11088" title="Hayden Fry" label="Hayden Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115596" start="11167" end="11177" title="Chuck Long" label="Chuck Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q238593" start="12105" end="12116" title="D.C. United" label="D.C. United"/>
<link wikidata="Q314366" start="12137" end="12150" title="Brian McBride" label="Brian McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="12616" end="12626" title="MetroStars" label="MetroStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146315" start="12759" end="12771" title="Jamey Rootes" label="Jamey Rootes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="13302" end="13307" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="HBCUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061855" start="13312" end="13335" title="Central State University" label="Central State Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187623" start="13340" end="13365" title="Kentucky State University" label="Kentucky State Thorobreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080825" start="13472" end="13509" title="Ohio High School Athletic Association" label="Ohio High School Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095076" start="13753" end="13785" title="2016 International Champions Cup" label="2016 International Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="13800" end="13811" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="13816" end="13835" title="Paris Saint-Germain F.C." label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="14007" end="14019" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="14024" end="14044" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="14164" end="14173" title="hat-trick (association football)" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967995" start="14184" end="14198" title="Erling Haaland" label="Erling Haaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164038" start="14342" end="14355" title="Pep Guardiola" label="Pep Guardiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="14379" end="14401" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="14449" end="14470" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="14485" end="14502" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q124735163" start="14510" end="14533" title="2025 NHL Stadium Series" label="2025 NHL Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981271" start="14596" end="14641" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums" label="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063998" start="14733" end="14744" title="The Lantern" label="The Lantern"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780174" wikidata="Q7047279" url="?curid=780174" title="Noele Gordon">
<text>Joan Noele Gordon (25 December 1919 – 14 April 1985) was an English actress and television presenter, of Scottish descent. She played the role of Meg Mortimer (originally Richardson, later Ryder) in the long-running British soap opera &quot;Crossroads&quot; from 1964 to 1981, with a brief return in 1983.

==Early life==
Gordon was born on 25 December 1919, at 139 Clements Road, East Ham, Essex (now in the London Borough of Newham). Her father, who was from Scotland, was an engineer in the Merchant Navy when she was born. She was given the middle name of Noele because she was born on Christmas Day. After attending convent school in Ilford, she was taught to dance by Maude Wells and later spent several years living in Southend-on-Sea. She made her first public appearance at the East Ham Palace and shortly afterwards, sang &quot;Dear Little Jammy Face&quot; at a restaurant in London. After this event, her mother and her aunt were keen for her to begin a stage career. Gordon was credited as the first woman to be seen on colour television sets, as she took part, as a teenager, in John Logie Baird&#x27;s colour transmission tests in 1938.

==Career==
===Early career===
Gordon attended RADA, appearing in repertory theatres and the West End stage. She was a soubrette in musical theatre roles during the 1940s and 1950s, and made her West End debut at the London Hippodrome in 1943 as Maggie Watson in Cole Porter&#x27;s &quot;Let&#x27;s Face It!&quot;; replacing Joyce Barbour in that part. She returned to that theatre later that year as Louise Panache (aka &quot;Panny&quot;) in the musical &quot;The Lisbon Story&quot; from June 1943 to July 1944. In April 1949, she took the role of Meg Brockie in the original London production of &quot;Brigadoon&quot; for 685 performances at Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre. She stayed with the show for a national tour. In 1953, she toured as Mrs Sally Adams in &quot;Call Me Madam&quot; after Billie Adams had played the role in the London season at the Coliseum.

She appeared in two British films, &quot;29 Acacia Avenue&quot; (1945) and &quot;Lisbon Story&quot; (1946) in minor parts.

In 1954, Gordon spent a year in New York City learning American television production at New York University.&lt;ref name=&quot;independent/b2274237&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;birminghammail/26146923&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Her stage career came to a halt in 1955, when she joined Associated Television in London, where she presented their first-ever programme, &quot;The Weekend Show&quot;. She worked behind the scenes as Head of Lifestyle programmes. Gordon helped Reg Watson and Ned Sherrin launch ATV Midlands in 1956.

As well as being a producer, Gordon became a presenter for the new Birmingham-based service. Her first television appearance for ATV in the Midlands, &quot;Tea With Noele Gordon&quot;, was the first popular ITV chat show, and while presenting this series, she became the first woman to interview a British Prime Minister, when Harold Macmillan was in office. Initially commissioned as an emergency schedule filler, the show became so successful that Gordon gave up her executive position to concentrate on presenting. She then moved on to present a daily live entertainment show, &quot;Lunchbox&quot;, an early daytime programme.

===&quot;Crossroads&quot;===
In the summer of 1964, &quot;Lunchbox&quot; came to an end after more than 2,000 episodes. It made way for a new daily soap opera, &quot;Crossroads&quot;, in which Gordon played the role of motel owner Meg Richardson (later Meg Mortimer), a part that had been developed with Gordon in mind, as she was still under contract to Lew Grade&#x27;s ATV.

First in 1969, and over the following decade, she won the &quot;TV Times&quot; award for portraying the &quot;most compulsive character&quot; on eight occasions. &quot;Crossroads&quot; also turned Noele Gordon into a gay icon.

Gordon was the only member of the &quot;Crossroads&quot; cast who had a permanent contract; all other cast members were booked on an &quot;ad hoc&quot; basis.

Gordon stayed with the programme until she was sacked in 1981, when ATV was in the process of being re-constituted into a new company, Central Independent Television. Central was obliged to continue ATV&#x27;s commitment to &quot;Crossroads&quot;; however, Head of Programmes Charles Denton and Head of Drama Margaret Matheson wanted to end the soap opera in favour of more expensive and lavish drama productions. The decision to dismiss Gordon—the show&#x27;s most popular cast member—was taken in the hope that viewers would desert the show, giving Central a valid excuse to axe it. The British press had stated that Denton was the one responsible for the sacking of Gordon, though it was later revealed that Jack Barton, producer and head writer of &quot;Crossroads&quot;, was responsible for Gordon&#x27;s sacking. Margaret Matheson had stated that it was not Denton or herself who sacked Gordon. According to Denton, &quot;I simply carried out the request of the &quot;Crossroads&quot; producer (Barton) to dismiss her. I took the flak as that was part of my job to protect my staff.&quot; Gordon returned to &quot;Crossroads&quot; in August 1983 for two episodes.

In 1985, Matheson&#x27;s successor Ted Childs ordered &quot;Crossroads&quot; to be revamped; one element in the updating of the show was its renaming as &quot;Crossroads Motel&quot;. The programme&#x27;s new look was designed to bring back Gordon on an &quot;as and when&quot; basis, starting with a three-month stint from April 1985. Gordon&#x27;s return as Meg was devised by the new producer, Phillip Bowman, who himself ended the involvement with the series of regulars Ronald Allen and Sue Lloyd. Gordon, who had already appeared in 3,521 episodes, was too ill to make the planned return.

===Later career===
After the termination of her &quot;Crossroads&quot; contract, Gordon starred in the musical &quot;&quot; at Leicester&#x27;s Haymarket Theatre, followed by a revival of Irving Berlin&#x27;s musical &quot;Call Me Madam&quot;, touring the Midlands. It then moved to the Victoria Palace Theatre in the West End, where it ran for only 88 performances. Her last stage role was in &quot;No, No, Nanette&quot; at Plymouth&#x27;s Theatre Royal. She became ill during the run and had to be replaced.

In an interview she gave to &quot;TV Times&quot; in 1981, Gordon announced that she might, once her stage work had come to an end, take up the offer of returning to presenting. In the same interview, she commented that a future role as a breakfast television presenter was being negotiated. She would, however, not return to television full-time because of her theatre commitments.

==Personal life, illness and death==
Gordon never married. She had been engaged to Captain Robertson Crichton (later a High Court judge) in 1941, but he broke off the engagement shortly before the wedding was due to take place.

For many years, in the 1960s and early 1970s, she stayed in a large white-washed Georgian manor house at Weir End, near Ross-on-Wye, beside the A40 road to Monmouth; her mother Joan (1893–1979) lived in the house and Gordon joined her at weekends.

It became known in 1982 that Gordon was suffering from cancer, for which she underwent two major operations. She retired to her home in Birmingham, where she died in 1985 of stomach cancer, at the age of 65. She was buried in the churchyard of St Mary&#x27;s parish church in Ross-on-Wye, next to her mother. Tony Adams, who played Adam Chance in &quot;Crossroads&quot;, commented just after her death that &quot;There has never been a star of &quot;Crossroads&quot;, although Nolly was &quot;Crossroads&quot;.&quot;

==Legacy==
A televised drama, &quot;Nolly&quot;, with Helena Bonham Carter playing Gordon, written by Russell T Davies and directed by Peter Hoar, was made by ITV Studios. It depicts her time in &quot;Crossroads&quot; and her sacking from the show. It first aired in February 2023.

==References==
==External links==
*Noele Gordon webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7047279" start="0" end="17" title="Noele Gordon" label="Joan Noele Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="241" end="251" title="Crossroads (British TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025593" start="381" end="389" title="East Ham" label="East Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="391" end="396" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="409" end="433" title="London Borough of Newham" label="London Borough of Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="461" end="469" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177743" start="478" end="486" title="Engine officer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970920" start="494" end="507" title="Merchant Navy (United Kingdom)" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="621" end="635" title="convent school" label="convent school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="639" end="645" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="726" end="741" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="1092" end="1108" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q523926" start="1198" end="1202" title="RADA" label="RADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="1217" end="1234" title="repertory theatre" label="repertory theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1244" end="1252" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q836983" start="1270" end="1279" title="soubrette" label="soubrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="1283" end="1298" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150147" start="1368" end="1385" title="London Hippodrome" label="London Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="1414" end="1425" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532313" start="1439" end="1458" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297390" start="1476" end="1489" title="Joyce Barbour" label="Joyce Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q107240735" start="1612" end="1628" title="The Lisbon Story (musical)" label="The Lisbon Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q611332" start="1755" end="1764" title="Brigadoon" label="Brigadoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="1795" end="1821" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027101" start="1917" end="1930" title="Call Me Madam" label="Call Me Madam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868965" start="2004" end="2012" title="London Coliseum" label="Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632885" start="2056" end="2072" title="29 Acacia Avenue" label="29 Acacia Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885496" start="2096" end="2108" title="Lisbon Story (1946 film)" label="Lisbon Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2171" end="2184" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2228" end="2247" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="2431" end="2452" title="Associated Television" label="Associated Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065637" start="2618" end="2628" title="Reg Watson" label="Reg Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945635" start="2633" end="2644" title="Ned Sherrin" label="Ned Sherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2742" end="2752" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="2981" end="2995" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="3002" end="3018" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="3472" end="3482" title="Crossroads (British TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q336801" start="3661" end="3670" title="Lew Grade, Baron Grade" label="Lew Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="3678" end="3681" title="Associated Television" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672252" start="3748" end="3756" title="TV Times" label="TV Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q40221" start="3901" end="3909" title="gay icon" label="gay icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="4140" end="4143" title="Associated Television" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="4207" end="4237" title="Central Independent Television" label="Central Independent Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076834" start="4348" end="4362" title="Charles Denton (television and film producer)" label="Charles Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693065" start="5278" end="5288" title="Ted Childs" label="Ted Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="5402" end="5418" title="Crossroads Motel" label="Crossroads Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q329580" start="5717" end="5729" title="Ronald Allen" label="Ronald Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944097" start="5734" end="5743" title="Sue Lloyd" label="Sue Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="5965" end="5974" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687022" start="5982" end="5999" title="Haymarket Theatre (Leicester)" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="6026" end="6039" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027101" start="6061" end="6074" title="Call Me Madam" label="Call Me Madam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926899" start="6125" end="6148" title="Victoria Palace Theatre" label="Victoria Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="6156" end="6164" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994415" start="6238" end="6253" title="No, No, Nanette" label="No, No, Nanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="6263" end="6271" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777439" start="6279" end="6292" title="Theatre Royal, Plymouth" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672252" start="6383" end="6391" title="TV Times" label="TV Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q106763051" start="6823" end="6841" title="Robertson Crichton" label="Robertson Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="7042" end="7050" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="7051" end="7062" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057705" start="7081" end="7092" title="Ross-on-Wye" label="Ross-on-Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400528" start="7105" end="7113" title="A40 road" label="A40 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q156990" start="7117" end="7125" title="Monmouth" label="Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7346" end="7356" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="7384" end="7398" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821745" start="7519" end="7529" title="Tony Adams (actor)" label="Tony Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="7563" end="7573" title="Crossroads (British TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q113614146" start="7758" end="7775" title="Nolly (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Nolly&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="7782" end="7802" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q361981" start="7830" end="7846" title="Russell T Davies" label="Russell T Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810607" start="7863" end="7873" title="Peter Hoar" label="Peter Hoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975134" start="7887" end="7898" title="ITV Studios" label="ITV Studios"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780175" wikidata="Q2298709" url="?curid=780175" title="Sprogø">
<text>Sprogø () is a small Danish island, located in the Great Belt, the strait that separates the main islands of Funen and Zealand. It is about halfway across the strait, from the Zealand shore and from the Funen shore.

Although &quot;sprog&quot; is modern Danish for &quot;language&quot;, the island&#x27;s name was recorded originally during the 12th century as &quot;Sproøe&quot; meaning &quot;scout&#x27;s island&quot;, from the old Danish verb &quot;spro&quot; (to scout).

Today, the island is crossed by part of the Great Belt Fixed Link, a series of roads, bridges, and tunnels; it is connected to Funen by a road and rail bridge, and to Zealand by both a road suspension bridge and twin rail tunnels. During the construction, the island was reconfigured drastically, with land reclamation increasing its area from .

There are remains of buildings on the original part of Sprogø from the beginning of the 12th century, a fortress built by order of King Valdemar the Great. During construction work, extensive archaeological investigations were undertaken, and among other findings it was revealed that the first inhabitants arrived more than 8,000 years ago.

The island does not have any permanent population today, but is used by &quot;Sund og Bælt&quot;, the company that owns and operates the bridges nearby. It is also a nature reserve, and tours of the island are organised.

Sprogø was a station for the semaphore line across the Belt, &quot;Storebæltstelegrafen&quot;, between Nyborg and Korsør, in operation between 1801 and 1865. Between 1923 and 1961 the island was used for containment of women deemed pathologically promiscuous, the main concern being unwanted pregnancies. At the time the practice was considered humane, given that they had been confined previously. The legacy of confinements on Sprogø inspired the fictional plot of the 2018 Danish movie thriller &quot;Journal 64&quot;.

The lighthouse, which can be seen in the picture, was built by the mail service during 1868, replacing an older structure from 1809. It was built on the foundations of the 12th-century fortress.


== References ==
== External links ==
* Sund &amp; Bælt Photo Archive: Sprogø island – construction photographs including aerial photos of Sprogø in its original form (log in using the default username and password)
* Sprogø, -øen i midten – History of Sprogø; many images of the island
* Sprogø fyr – about Sprogø lighthouse; many photographs.
* Sprogø - Stories from The Heritage Agency of Denmark
* Sådan tager Sprogø form på 16. år</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2298709" start="0" end="6" title="Sprogø" label="Sprogø"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="21" end="27" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="28" end="34" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q204715" start="51" end="61" title="Great Belt" label="Great Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="67" end="73" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="109" end="114" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="119" end="126" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="254" end="260" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213962" start="520" end="541" title="Great Belt Fixed Link" label="Great Belt Fixed Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="666" end="683" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="698" end="704" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="778" end="794" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="954" end="977" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="King Valdemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1015" end="1029" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="1332" end="1346" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="1417" end="1431" title="semaphore line" label="semaphore line"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="1455" end="1475" title="Storebæltstelegrafen" label="Storebæltstelegrafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530435" start="1491" end="1497" title="Nyborg" label="Nyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784816" start="1502" end="1508" title="Korsør" label="Korsør"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780176" wikidata="Q1628462" url="?curid=780176" title="Karikkoselkä">
<text>Karikkoselkä is a lake formed in an impact crater in Petäjävesi, Finland. Karikkoselkä is located in Central Finland approximately 30 km east from the centre of Keurusselkä, a much older and larger impact crater. Most lakes in the region are elongated in northwest–southeast direction due to glaciation, but Karikkoselkä is strikingly round.

Many shatter cones, rock formations that form under the extreme pressures of impact, have been found around the lake. Further evidence comes from aeromagnetic maps, which show a clear magnetic anomaly in the impact crater area. In addition, samples collected from deep drillings into the lake bottom confirm the impact origin of the structure.

The crater is the smallest identified in Finland, 1.4 km diameter and 150 m deep. Due to sediments the lake has a maximum depth of 26m which is unusually deep for a lake in the region. Karikkoselkä is estimated to be between 230 Ma and 450 Ma (million years old), most likely near 240 Ma (Triassic or earlier). Some sources give an unreasonably young age of 1.88 Ma, which is likely a misquotation – the discovery paper mentions that the bedrock in the region (known as the Central Finland Granite Complex) formed about 1.88 Ga (thousand million years ago), in the late Paleoproterozoic era.

There is evidence of a neolithic settlement on the southern shore of the lake. According to a plate erected there, no excavations have yet been conducted and the age of the settlement remains unknown.

==See also==
*Impact craters in Finland

==References==
==External links==
*Karikkoselkä impact structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1628462" start="0" end="12" title="Karikkoselkä" label="Karikkoselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="18" end="22" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="36" end="49" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q935835" start="53" end="63" title="Petäjävesi" label="Petäjävesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="65" end="72" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697" start="101" end="116" title="Central Finland" label="Central Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476939" start="161" end="172" title="Keurusselkä" label="Keurusselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="292" end="302" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="348" end="360" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q381526" start="489" end="506" title="Aeromagnetic survey" label="aeromagnetic maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q117987" start="527" end="543" title="magnetic anomaly" label="magnetic anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177444" start="612" end="621" title="Boring (earth)" label="drillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="777" end="785" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="917" end="919" title="annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="977" end="985" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="1126" end="1133" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="1258" end="1274" title="Paleoproterozoic" label="Paleoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1304" end="1313" title="neolithic" label="neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614344" start="1497" end="1522" title="Impact craters in Finland" label="Impact craters in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780180" wikidata="Q505062" url="?curid=780180" title="Felix Draeseke">
<text>Felix August Bernhard Draeseke (7 October 1835 – 26 February 1913) was a composer of the &quot;New German School&quot; admiring Franz Liszt and Richard Wagner. He wrote compositions in most forms including eight operas and stage works, four symphonies, and much vocal and chamber music.

==Life==
Felix Draeseke was born in the Franconian ducal town of Coburg, Germany. He was attracted to music early in life and wrote his first composition at age 8. He encountered no opposition from his family when, in his mid-teens, he declared his intention of becoming a professional musician. A few years at the Leipzig Conservatory did not seem to benefit his development, but after one of the early performances of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Lohengrin&quot; he was won to the camp of the New German School centered on Franz Liszt at Weimar, where he stayed from 1856 (arriving just after Joachim Raff&#x27;s departure) to 1861. In 1862 Draeseke left Germany and made his way to Switzerland, teaching in the Suisse Romande in the area around Lausanne. 

Upon his return to Germany in 1876, Draeseke chose Dresden as his place of residence. Though he continued having success in composition, it was only in 1884 that he received an official appointment to the Dresden Conservatory and, with it, some financial security. In 1894, two years after his promotion to a professorship at the Royal Saxon Conservatory, at the age of 58, he married his former pupil Frida Neuhaus. In 1912 he completed his final orchestral work, the Fourth Symphony. On 26 February 1913 Draeseke suffered a stroke and died; he is buried in the Tolkewitz cemetery in Dresden.

==Music and styles==
During his career Draeseke divided his efforts almost equally among compositional genres and composed in most of them, including symphonies, concertos, opera, chamber music, and works for solo piano. With his early Piano Sonata in C-sharp minor &quot;Sonata quasi Fantasia&quot; of 1862–1867 he aroused major interest, winning Liszt&#x27;s unreserved admiration of it as one of the most important piano sonatas after Beethoven. His operas &quot;Herrat&quot; (1879, originally &quot;Dietrich von Bern&quot;) and &quot;Gudrun&quot; (1884, after the medieval epic of the same name) met with some success, but were subsequently neglected.

Draeseke keenly followed new developments in all facets of music. His chamber music compositions make use of newly developed instruments, among them the violotta, an instrument developed by Alfred Stelzner as an intermediary between viola and cello, which Draeseke used in his A major String Quintet, and also the viola alta, an instrument developed during the 1870s by Hermann Ritter and the prototype of viola expressly endorsed by Richard Wagner for his Bayreuth Orchestra.

A heavily contrapuntal composer, Draeseke reveled in writing choral music, achieving major success with his B minor &quot;Requiem&quot; of 1877–1880. His most contrapuntal work is called &quot;Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios&quot;, which requires three days for a complete performance, a work which occupied him between the years 1894–1899 but whose conception reaches back to the 1860s. According to some , Draeseke&#x27;s &quot;Symphonia Tragica&quot; (Symphony No. 3 in C major, Op. 40) deserves a place alongside the symphonies of Brahms and Bruckner. Other orchestral works by Draeseke include the Serenade in D major (1888) and its companion of the same year, the symphonic prelude after Kleist&#x27;s &quot;Penthesilea&quot;. Draeseke also composed a quantity of chamber music.

==Estimation==
During his life, and the period shortly following his death, the music of Draeseke was held in high regard, even among his musical opponents. His compositions were performed frequently in Germany by the leading artists of the day, including Hans von Bülow, Arthur Nikisch, Fritz Reiner, and Karl Böhm. However, as von Bülow once remarked to him, he was a &quot;harte Nuß&quot; (&quot;a hard nut to crack&quot;) and despite the quality of his works, he would &quot;never be popular among the ordinary&quot;. Draeseke could be sharply critical and this sometimes led to strained relations, the most notorious instance being with Richard Strauss, when Draeseke attacked Strauss’s &quot;Salome&quot; in his 1905 pamphlet &quot;Die Konfusion in der Musik&quot; — rather surprising, as Draeseke was a clear influence on the young Strauss.

Draeseke&#x27;s music was promoted during the Third Reich. After the Second World War, changes in fashion and political climates allowed his name and music to slip into obscurity. But as the 20th century ended, new recordings spurred a renewed interest in his music.

==Notable works==

===Orchestral===
*Symphony No. 1 in G major, Op. 12 (1872)
*Symphony No. 2 in F major, Op. 25 (1876)
*Symphony No. 3 in C major, Op. 40 &quot;Symphonia Tragica&quot; (1885–6)
*Symphony No. 4 in E minor, WoO 38 &quot;Symphonia Comica&quot; (1912)
*&quot;Julius Caesar&quot;, symphonic poem (1860, revised 1865)
*Serenade in D major for small orchestra, Op. 49 (1888)
*&quot;Penthesilea&quot;, symphonic prelude (after Kleist), Op. 50 (1888)
*&quot;Jubel-ouvertüre&quot;, Op. 65 (1898)
*Concerto for Piano and Orchestra in E-flat, Op. 36 (1885–6)
*Symphonic Andante for Cello and Orchestra in E minor, WoO 11 (1876)

An early symphony in C major, completed in 1856 and premiered that year, was still lost as of 1966.

===Operas===
*&quot;König Sigurd&quot; - opera in 3 acts after Emanuel Geibel&#x27;s &quot;Sigurd&quot; (1853–7)
*&quot;Dietrich von Bern&quot; - opera in 3 acts (1877; revised by Otto zur Nedden, 1925)
*&quot;Gudrun&quot; - opera in 3 acts (1879–84)
*&quot;Bertram de Born&quot; - opera in 3 acts (1892–4)

===Choral and vocal (religious and secular)===
*Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios, Opp. 70–73 (1895–9): 
** Prelude: &quot;Die Geburt des Herrn&quot; (&quot;The Birth of the Lord&quot;), Op. 70
** First Oratorio: &quot;Christi Weihe&quot; (&quot;Christ&#x27;s Consecration&quot;), Op. 71
** Second Oratorio: &quot;Christus der Prophet&quot; (&quot;Christ the Prophet&quot;), Op. 72
** Third Oratorio: &quot;Tod und Sieg des Herrn&quot; (&quot;Death and Victory of the Lord&quot;), Op. 73
*Grand Mass in A minor, Op. 85 (1908–9)
*Requiem in E minor (1909–10)
*&quot;Columbus&quot;, Cantata for soprano, baritone, male chorus, and orchestra, Op. 52 (1890)
*Der Mönch von Bonifazio Op. 74, a melodrama (1901)

===Chamber music===
*String Quartet No. 1 in C minor, Op. 27 (1880)
*String Quartet No. 2 in E minor, Op. 35 (1886)
*String Quartet No. 3 in C-sharp minor, Op. 66 (1895)
*Quintet in A major &#x27;Stelzner-Quintett&#x27; for 2 violins, viola, violotta, and cello (1897)
*Quintet in F major for 2 violins, viola, and 2 cellos, Op. 77 (1901)
*Quintet in B-flat major for piano, string trio and horn, Op. 48 (1888)
*Viola Sonata No. 1 in C minor (1892)
*Viola Sonata No. 2 in F major (1902)
*Clarinet Sonata in B-flat major, Op. 38 (1887)
*Cello Sonata in D major, Op. 51 (1890)

&quot;Portions of this page are reprinted by permission of the Internationale Draeseke Gesellschaft and International Draeseke Society/North America.&quot;

==References==
;Notes
;Sources
*M. Guiérrez-Denhoff and H. Loos, Eds. &quot;Felix Draeseke: Chronik seines Lebens&quot;. Gudrun Schröder Verlag, Bonn, 1989.
*S. Döhring, H. John, and H. Loos, Eds. &quot;Deutsche Oper zwischen Wagner und Strauss&quot;. Gudrun Schröder Verlag, Bonn, 1998.
*A. H. Krueck. &quot;The Symphonies of Felix Draeseke. A Study in Consideration of Developments in Symphonic Form in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century&quot;, Zürich Diss. phil 1967.

==External links==

*Website of the International Draeseke Society
*Complete list of Compositions by Draeseke
*Complete list of Recordings of Draeseke&#x27;s Music
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505062" start="0" end="30" title="Felix Draeseke" label="Felix August Bernhard Draeseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="73" end="81" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q681379" start="95" end="112" title="New German School" label="New German School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="128" end="139" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="144" end="158" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14821" start="353" end="359" title="Coburg, Germany" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="361" end="368" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q312578" start="603" end="623" title="University of Music and Theatre Leipzig" label="Leipzig Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23085" start="728" end="737" title="Lohengrin (opera)" label="Lohengrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="819" end="825" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q547301" start="874" end="886" title="Joachim Raff" label="Joachim Raff"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="1027" end="1035" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="1090" end="1097" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q468181" start="1244" end="1264" title="Hochschule für Musik Carl Maria von Weber" label="Dresden Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="1784" end="1794" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="1796" end="1804" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1807" end="1812" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="1814" end="1827" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1848" end="1853" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="2072" end="2081" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700567" start="2444" end="2452" title="violotta" label="violotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q108472" start="2481" end="2496" title="Alfred Stelzner" label="Alfred Stelzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612486" start="2661" end="2675" title="Hermann Ritter" label="Hermann Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="2725" end="2739" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q329133" start="2748" end="2756" title="Bayreuth Festspielhaus" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="2779" end="2791" title="counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966678" start="2962" end="3014" title="Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios" label="Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="3325" end="3331" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="3336" end="3344" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494" start="3484" end="3497" title="Heinrich von Kleist" label="Kleist&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q379828" start="3504" end="3515" title="Penthesilea" label="Penthesilea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="3832" end="3846" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q57210" start="3848" end="3862" title="Arthur Nikisch" label="Arthur Nikisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="3864" end="3876" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q84241" start="3882" end="3891" title="Karl Böhm" label="Karl Böhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="4218" end="4233" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q723407" start="4274" end="4280" title="Salome (opera)" label="Salome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4471" end="4482" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966678" start="5784" end="5836" title="Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios" label="Christus. Mysterium in a Prelude and Three Oratorios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812110" start="6162" end="6184" title="Tod und Sieg des Herrn" label="Tod und Sieg des Herrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700567" start="6704" end="6712" title="violotta" label="violotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995464" start="6802" end="6865" title="Quintet for Piano, Strings and Horn (Draeseke)" label="Quintet in B-flat major for piano, string trio and horn, Op. 48"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780182" wikidata="Q1733735" url="?curid=780182" title="Karla crater">
<text>Karla Crater (; ) is a meteorite impact crater in Tatarstan, Russia.

It is 10 km in diameter and the age is estimated to be 5 ± 1 million years old (probably Pliocene). The crater is exposed at the surface.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1733735" start="0" end="12" title="Karla crater" label="Karla Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="23" end="32" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="33" end="46" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="50" end="59" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="159" end="167" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780184" wikidata="Q1738301" url="?curid=780184" title="Kelly West crater">
<text>Kelly West is a deeply eroded impact crater situated in the central Northern Territory, Australia. It was discovered during Government geological mapping and first reported in 1973, the evidence for impact coming principally from an abundance of shatter cones at the site.

== Description ==
The surface expression of Kelly West comprises a circular hill of Palaeoproterozoic quartzite about in diameter, interpreted as a central uplift of a larger complex impact crater. Recent geophysical interpretation suggests an original crater diameter of , less than earlier estimates of about . The age is poorly constrained, but must be older than Middle Cambrian because sedimentary rocks of this age overlie the central uplift and were not deformed by the impact event.

==See also==

*List of impact craters in Australia

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1738301" start="0" end="10" title="Kelly West crater" label="Kelly West"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="30" end="43" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="68" end="86" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="88" end="97" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="246" end="258" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="358" end="375" title="Palaeoproterozoic" label="Palaeoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="376" end="385" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="648" end="656" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782241" start="781" end="816" title="List of impact craters in Australia" label="List of impact craters in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780188" wikidata="Q235209" url="?curid=780188" title="Bronislava Nijinska">
<text>Bronislava Nijinska (; ; ; ; – February 21, 1972) was a Russian ballet dancer of Polish origin, and an innovative choreographer. She came of age in a family of traveling, professional dancers.

Her own career began in Saint Petersburg. Soon she joined Ballets Russes which ventured to success in Paris. She met war-time difficulties in Petrograd and revolutionary turbulence in Kiev. In France again, public acclaim for her works came quickly, cresting in the 1920s. She then enjoyed continuing successes in Europe and the Americas. Nijinska played a pioneering role in the broad movement that diverged from 19th-century classical ballet. Her introduction of modern forms, steps, and motion, and a minimalist narrative, prepared the way of future works.

Following serious home training, she entered the state ballet school in the Russian capital at the age of nine. In 1908 she graduated as an &#x27;Artist of the Imperial Theatres&#x27;. An early breakthrough came in Paris in 1910 when she became a member of Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes. For her dance solo Nijinska created the role of Papillon in &quot;Carnaval&quot;, a ballet written and designed by Michel Fokine.

She assisted her famous brother Vaslav Nijinsky as he worked up his controversial choreography for &quot;L&#x27;Après-midi d&#x27;un faune&quot;, which Ballets Russes premiered in Paris in 1912. Similarly, she aided him in his creation of the 1913 ballet &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot;.

She developed her own art in Petrograd and Kiev during the First World War, Revolution and Civil War. While performing in theaters, she worked independently to design and stage her first choreographies. Nijinska started a ballet school on progressive lines in Kiev. She published her writing on the art of movement. In 1921 she fled Russian authorities.

Rejoining the Ballets Russes, Diaghilev appointed her the choreographer of the influential ballet company based in France. Nijinska thrived, creating several popular, cutting-edge ballets to contemporary music. In 1923, with a score by Igor Stravinsky she choreographed her iconic work &quot;Les noces&quot; [The Wedding].

Starting in 1925, with a variety of companies and venues she designed and mounted ballets in Europe and the Americas. Among them were Teatro Colón, Ida Rubinstein, Opéra Russe à Paris, Wassily de Basil, Max Reinhardt, Markova-Dolin, Ballet Polonaise, Ballet Theatre, the Hollywood Bowl, Jacob&#x27;s Pillow, Serge Denham, Marquis de Cuevas, as well as her own companies.

Due to war in 1939 she relocated from Paris to Los Angeles. Nijinska continued working in choreography and as an artistic director. She taught at her studio. In the 1960s for The Royal Ballet in London, she staged revivals of her Ballets Russes-era creations. Her &quot;Early Memoirs&quot;, translated into English, was published posthumously.

==Early life==
Bronislava Nijinska was the third child of the Polish dancers Tomasz [Foma] Nijinsky and Eleonora Nijinska (maiden name Bereda), who were then traveling performers in provincial Russia. Bronislava was born in Minsk, but all three children were baptized in Warsaw. She was the younger sister of Vaslav Nijinsky, a ballet star of world renown.

===A family of dancers===
Each of their parents had begun dancing careers in Warsaw at the Teatr Wielki (the Grand Theater). When they later met each was already a ballet professional with the Setov troupe based in Kiev. With the troupe they performed in provincial capitals of the then Russian Empire. They were married in Baku. Tomasz [Russian: Foma] Nijinsky, five years younger, had risen to be premier danseur and ballet master. His wife Eleonora Bareda, orphaned at seven, had followed her elder sister into ballet, and was then dancing as a first soloist.

The father Tomasz Nijinsky, by his skills as ballet master, managed to form and direct his own small troupe of a dozen dancers, plus students. He created a ballet pantomime, and performed in circus-theaters, using Polish and Russian music. In 1896 he staged &quot;The Fountain of Bakhchisarai&quot;, from an 1823 poem by Pushkin. The mother Eleonora danced the role of the captured princess; her children Vatsa and Broni watched her perform it. Tomasz choreographed &quot;two very successful ballets&quot;, the other being &quot;Zaporozbeskaya Tcharovnitza&quot;. Nijinska implies that their small troupe prospered, but that has been questioned. In addition to renting theaters for his shows, Tomasz contracted with &#x27;café chantants&#x27;, popular nightspots where patrons dined while being entertained with music and dance. Family life was surrounded by artists at work and at home. Her father &quot;loved to be with painters, writers, actors, and musicians.&quot; Two touring African-American tap dancers, Jackson and Johnson, visited their home, and gave Nijinska her first lessons.
In the past Tomasz had forgone opportunities, turning down dance offers because of his family obligations. In 1897 near Saint Petersburg, Eleonora and Thomasz danced on stage together for the last time. He then continued on the road alone as a dancer. On a prior trip to Finland, he had become involved with another ballet dancer. Eventually this led to a permanent separation from his wife. His relationships with his children suffered; he saw them infrequently.

Eleonora on her own established the family&#x27;s permanent residence in Saint Petersburg. For years she had struggled with being on the road continuously while caring for her three children. A large flat she rented and opened a &quot;pension&quot;. Bronislava (Broni) records that her brother Vaslav (or Vatsa) became bitter and years later turned against his father because of the suffering endured by his mother.

===Her brother Vatsa===
&quot;By nature Vaslav [Vatsa] was a very lively and adventurous boy.&quot; In her book &quot;Early Memoirs&quot; Nijinska writes about the adventures of young Vatsa, older than her by 22 months. Living with a mother and father who danced on stage and were regularly traveling on tour, the children acquired an intrepid attitude and a physical prowess in everyday life. The two parents encouraged their children&#x27;s athletic development and, while scolding misbehavior, were not punitive. Curiosity drove Vatsa to explore his frequently-new neighborhoods, sometimes crossing parental lines. His bravery and daring on rooftops impressed Broni.

How Vatsa loved to climb! Whenever he was at the top of a tree, on a high post, on the swing, or on the roof of our house, I noticed a rapturous delight on his face, a delight to feel his body high above the ground, suspended in midair.

Vatsa investigated the strange streets of different towns and cities where the family&#x27;s theatrical life took them. Along the way he was training his body. It became an instrument of extraordinary strength and balance. Seemingly without fear he relished his freedom. His mind took innovative turns, which his body followed, or vice versa. Often Broni was invited along. From Vatsa&#x27;s adventures she, too, acquired a body unusually trained for dance.

===Childhood dance skills===

Her parents not only were dancing on stage; they also taught ballroom dancing to adults and had special dance classes for children. Early on they instructed their daughter in folk dances: Polish, Hungarian, Italian, and Russian. She learned ballet, together with all kinds of different dance steps. She picked up some acrobatic techniques from her father, who would &#x27;talk shop&#x27; and trade skills with circus performers. Later she was able to draw on this rich experience in her choreographic works.

Broni Nijinska was not quite four when she made her theatrical debut in a Christmas pageant with her brothers in Nizhny Novgorod. She always seemed familiar with being on stage, in children&#x27;s skits or to make brief appearances on the adult stage. Her aunt Stepha, her mother&#x27;s elder sister, had retired from performance but was teaching dance in Vilno; she helped Broni. Dancers with her parents would give her lessons or tips. After their parents&#x27; separation, her brother Vaslav Nijinsky entered the Imperial Theatrical School. When she was about nine years old, Broni began ballet lessons with the famous Enrico Cecchetti. He quickly recognized her skills.

===Imperial Theatrical School===
In 1900, Bronislava was accepted into the state-sponsored school for performing arts. Her brother Vaslav had entered it two years before. Located in Saint Petersburg, it offered a multi-year program. As with Vaslav&#x27;s acceptance, her mother had enlisted support from various people linked to ballet, including Stanislav Gillert and Cecchetti. Present at the entrance examination were 214 candidates ready to demonstrate their dance abilities. Legendary ballet master Marius Petipa participated in the trials, as did Cecchetti and Sergei Legat. Twelve girls were accepted.

Bronislava graduated in 1908, taking &#x27;First Award&#x27; for achievement both in dance and in academic subjects. Seven women graduated that year. In addition to her diploma she was enlisted as an &#x27;Artist of the Imperial Theatre&#x27;. It was a government formality which assured her of financial security, and of the privileged life of a professional dancer.

==Of Vaslav Nijinsky==

===His influence while at Ballets Russes===
Perhaps her brother Vaslav Nijinsky had the greatest influence on Bronislava Nijinska and her career. In Nijinska&#x27;s memoir several times she describes that Vaslav from a young age followed his overwhelming curiosity. Although his dancing skill was praised in school and he learned several musical instruments, she notes his low academic performance; she attributes it to his disinterest and impatience. Instead he&#x27;d set off with daring to explore the neighborhoods and test his physical limits. This contributed to his becoming an incredible dancer. At Mariinsky Theater he quickly rose and at Ballets Russes he became famous almost overnight. Soon Vaslav was performing as a star principal dancer.
As his pupil she became the first person to know and be influenced by his radically new ideas regarding dance and his desire to substitute a rigorously stylized form of movement for the classical ballet tradition.

She describes his innovations in creating a new Blue Bird role for the ballet &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; in 1907: how he changed the restrictive costume and energized the movements. When Nijinsky created &quot;L&#x27;Après-midi d&#x27;un Faune&quot; [&quot;Afternoon of the Faun&quot;] in 1912 he used Nijinska to rehearse it in secret, to follow with her body his description of the steps one by one.

She similarly assisted him in creating &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot;. Yet due to her pregnancy, Nijinska withdrew from the role of the Chosen Maiden. Prof. Garafola, however, characterizes it as her brother &#x27;evicting&#x27; her from the maiden role in &quot;Rite&quot;. Nonetheless, Baer writes:

Although Bronislave Nijinska is often identified as the sister of the celebrated Vaslav Nijinsky, she was a major artist in her own right and a key figure in the development of twentieth-century ballet. ... As one of twentieth-century&#x27;s ballet&#x27;s great innovators, she transformed the art.

;Her 1913 break with Diaghilev

When her brother suddenly married, Diaghilev terminated his position at Ballets Russes. Bronislava Nijinska left the company in solidarity with him.

During a 1913 Ballets Russes tour in South American, Vaslav Nijinsky married Romola de Pulszky. It created controversy in the company and in ballet stories from the tour. As Nijinska explains in her memoirs, Vaslav was very reserved and, other than herself, had few confidants or even close colleagues in the dance world. He was a young man alone on the tour when he wed. He was alone because her pregnancy had kept her in Europe.

Nijinska speculated that, behind the scenes, business decisions had motivated events. By getting rid of Nijinsky, Diaghilev managed to secure financing and the return of the choreographer Fokine to the company. The break left emotional scars, and a sense of betrayal. Diaghilev dismissed Vaslav for reasons other than his September marriage: artistic quarrels over ballet design, his military draft status, and his demand for payments in arrears.

===&#x27;Saison Nijinsky&#x27; 1914, and later===

In early 1914 Vaslav Nijinsky on his own started a new ballet company in London: Saison Nijinsky. Bronislava offered her assistance, yet learned there was only a short time to prepare for its premiere performance. Vaslav had signed a contract to open at a dance hall, the London Palace Theatre, in four and a half weeks (March 2). Nijinska quickly decided to return to Russia to recruit the cast, but Warsaw was where the experienced dancers were found. She with others explained her brother&#x27;s innovative choreographies. She directed rehearsals, as musicians and scores, sets and costumes were arranged.

Nijinska herself was to perform, e.g., with Vaslav in &quot;Le Spectre de la rose&quot;. Its anticipated premiere was well received. Vaslav&#x27;s brilliant dancing drew prolonged applause. After performing for two weeks, however, a business dispute developed. It arose when Nijinsky became sick and unable to perform for a few days. It led the theater owner Alfred Butt to cancel the company&#x27;s season. Nijinsky managed to pay his dancers. Some attributed the company&#x27;s downfall to Vaslav&#x27;s erratic emotional tendencies, which had intensified after his recent marriage and his dismissal from Ballets Russes.

;Reunited in 1921

Brother and sister became separated for seven years, first by World War I, then by the Russian Revolution, followed by the Russian Civil War. There was little chance for communication as mail service first became irregular and then was discontinued. In 1921 they met again in Vienna, where they remained together for a short time.

==Career as a dancer==

===Imperial Ballet in Saint Petersburg: 1908–1911===
In 1908, Nijinska was admitted to the Imperial Ballet (then also known as the Mariinsky Ballet and later known as the Kirov Ballet). She followed in her brother&#x27;s footsteps. In the corps de ballet her first year, she performed in Michel Fokine&#x27;s &quot;Les Sylphides&quot;. Under Fokine&#x27;s gaze and leadership, she was able to directly experience the choreographic vision of this master on the cutting-edge. Both she and her brother Nijinsky, however, left Russia during the summers of 1909 and 1910 to perform for Diaghilev&#x27;s company in Paris.

Nijinska danced with the Mariinsky Ballet for three years. However, the growth and insights acquired at Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes, which was then unexpectedly revolutionizing the ballet world, clearly exceeded that at Mariinsky Theater. Then, suddenly, she felt compelled to resign after the Theater&#x27;s dismissal of her brother Vaslav, chiefly because his star performances in Paris were making ballet-world headlines. As a result, Nijinska was deprived of her rights respecting the title &#x27;Artist of the Imperial Theaters&#x27; and its associated income.

===Diaghilev and Ballets Russes in Paris: 1909–1913===

Nijinska appeared in the Sergei Pavlovitch Diaghilev&#x27;s first two Paris seasons, 1909 and 1910. After leaving the Mariinsky, she became a permanent member of his newly formed company, Ballets Russes. In 1912 she had married fellow dancer Aleksander Kochetowsky, and gave birth to their daughter Irina in 1913.
Here initially Nijinska danced in the corps de ballet, e.g., in &quot;Swan Lake&quot; (the Czardas), in &quot;Les Sylphides&quot; (the Mazurka), and in &quot;Le Spectre de la Rose&quot;. As she developed on the professional stage she was promoted, and eventually given significant parts. Her brother coached her for the role of Papillon [the butterfly] in Fokine&#x27;s &quot;Carnaval&quot; (1909). In part danced with feet and hands fluttering in a coordinated rhythm at an accelerated &quot;prestissimo tempo&quot;, she eluded Pierrot, played in pantomime by Vsevolod Meyerhold. The role of the Ballerina Doll in &quot;Petruchka&quot; (1912) was also transformed. By changing the doll&#x27;s demeanor from theatrical in a tutu to realistic in street clothes, Nijinska modernized the role. She also continually kept in character rather than slipping back into the default look of classical ballet. Among others, the pseudo-Hindu dance of the Bayadere Enivree in &quot;Le Dieu bleu&quot; she did, but did not care for. She struggled and grew as an Odalisque in the popular ballet &quot;Scheherazade&quot;.

In the 1912 production of &quot;Cléopâtre&quot;, she at first danced the Bacchanale (replacing Vera Fokine). Then she switched roles, being awarded Karsavina&#x27;s role of Ta-Hor. &quot;Karsavina danced the role on toe, but I would dance it in my bare feet.&quot; She used a liquid body make-up. For Ta-Hor she received treasured compliments from other artists, both for her dance art and for her dramatic interpretation. The next year she performed in her brother&#x27;s &quot;Jeux&quot; (Games). Nijinska assisted her brother Vaslav in his creation of the ballet &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot;, which premiered in 1913. Particularly for the Chosen Maiden role, she carefully follow Nijinsky&#x27;s instructions as to movement and pose, as the ballet choreography slowly developed. Yet when she became aware of her pregnancy, she told him she&#x27;d have to withdraw and miss its opening performance, angering her brother.

In 1914 she danced for &quot;Saison Nijinsky&quot; (see section above).

===In Petrograd with Sasha and in Kiev: 1915–1921===
After Saison Nijinsky, Bronislava returned to Russia. She continued her ballet career as danseuse, with Sasha her husband as the danseur. During the war and then the revolution, she went on stage in experimental works as well as in classics. In Petrograd the 1915 theatre program listed &quot;ballet by the prima ballerina-artist of the State Ballet Bronislava Nijinska&quot;. The program included music by Tchaikovsky, Mussorgsky, and Borodin. She performed in her own choreographed solos, Le Poupee or Tabatierr, and Autumn Song. Her dance savvy was lauded.

In Kiev in addition to dancing, she established her ballet school and began to choreograph programs. She danced in solos while costumed in tunics, e.g., Etudes (Liszt), Mephisto Valse (Liszt), Nocturnes (Chopin), Preludes (Chopin), Fear or Horror (in silence, costume by Exter), and in company performances, e.g., Twelfth Rhapsody (Liszt), Demons (Tcherepnine), March Funebre (Chopin). In 1921 she left Russia, never to return.

===Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes: 1921–1925, and 1926===
Rejoining Ballets Russes in Paris, Nijinska first worked in Diaghilev&#x27;s ill-starred 1921 London revival of the Petipa&#x27;s classic &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot;. Although a money loser, it was popular, and well designed and danced. Nijinska performed the roles of the Hummingbird Fairy and Pierette, for which she received &quot;high critical praise&quot;.

In 1922, following a personal request by Diaghilev, she performed the title role in Nijinsky&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Après-midi d&#x27;un Faune&quot; during its Paris revival. She had helped her brother with its choreography for its 1912 premier. &quot;Vaslav is creating his Faune by using me as his model. I am like a piece of clay that he is molding...&quot; Yet these appearance became clearly auxiliary to her new, &#x27;second career&#x27; working as the choreographer.

From 1921 to 1924, 1926 with Ballets Russes, Nijinska nonetheless took prominent roles in many of her own dance designs. Accordingly, she performed as the Lilac Fairy in &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot; (1921), the Fox in &quot;Le Renard&quot; (1922), as the Hostess in &quot;Les Biches&quot; (1924), as Lysandre in &quot;Les Fâcheux&quot; (1924), and as the Tennis Player in &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot; (1924).

===In Europe and the Americas: 1925–1934===
Subsequently, for her own ballet companies and for others, she danced in roles of her own inventions: in &quot;Holy Etudes&quot;, &quot;Touring&quot;, &quot;Le Guignol&quot;, and &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot; (all 1925); for Teatro Colón in &quot;Estudios religiosos&quot; (1926); in her &quot;Capricio Espagnole&quot; per Rimsky-Korsakoff in 1931; and in the 1934 ballet based on &quot;Hamlet&quot; per Liszt: the title role. She performed into the 1930s, at venues in Europe and the Americas.

As Nijinska reached her forties, her performance career neared its end. What caused her trouble, and hastened the close of her performance art, was an injury to her Achilles tendon suffered in 1933 while at Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires.

===Appraisals, critiques===

Her qualities as a dancer, of course, are distinct from her more celebrated choreography. Comments by several professional colleagues were collected by the New York ballet critic and author Lynn Garafola:

&quot;She was a very strong dancer, and danced very athletically for a lady, and had a big jump,&quot; commented Frederic Franklin, a dancer and ballet master. &quot;She had incredible endurance, and seemed never to be tired,&quot; recalled Anatole Vilzak, who was a principal dancer in many of her mature choreographies. English dancer Lydia Sokolova, noting her lack of makeup, thought she appeared &quot;a most unfeminine woman, though there was nothing particularly masculine about her character. Thin but immensely strong, she had iron muscles in her arms and legs, and her highly developed calf muscles resembled Vaslav&#x27;s; she had the same way of jumping and pausing in the air.&quot; Alicia Markova, a prima ballerina absoluta of Britain, concluded that Nijinska &quot;was a strange combination, this terrific strength, and yet there was a softness.&quot;

The composer Igor Stravinsky, to whose music she created several fine choreographic works, wrote that &quot;Bronislava Nijinska, sister of the famous dancer [is] herself an execellent dancer endowed with a profoundly artistic nature.&quot; After helping her brother Vaslav for many months in his laborious design of the 1913 ballet &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot; (music by Stravinsky), she found she&#x27;d become pregnant. She could not then take to the stage to perform the star role as the sacrificial maiden. Frustrated, Vaslav then screamed at her, &quot;There is no one to replace you. You are the only one who can perform this dance, only you, Bronia, and no one else!&quot;

Nancy Van Norman Baer in her book on Nijinska writes, &quot;Between 1911 and 1913, while [her brother] Nijinsky&#x27;s fame continued to soar, Nijinska emerged as a strong and talented dancer.&quot; Author and critic Robert Greskovic describes a common understanding of her gifts, &quot;Nowhere near the beauty and exemplar of her art that Pavlova and Spessivtseva were, Bronislava Nijinska (1891–1972) instead began to make her mark as a choreographer.&quot;

Nonetheless Nijinska must have truly excelled as a dancer. When only a young student, her prowess on the dance floor had been recognized by top professionals. &quot;If Marius Petipa patted her approvingly on the head and Enrico Cecchetti placed her, at age eight, front and center in his class between two prima ballerinas, she must have been good.&quot; Yet before the First World War her brother&#x27;s legendary dance skills had overshadowed her own. Years later, however, the editor of &quot;The Dancing Times&quot; wrote of her at a 1921 Ballets Russes performance of &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot;:

Nijinska ... appeals to me as the most versatile dancer of the entire company. Her technique in her classical numbers is beyond reproach ... and her mime and personality in the demi-charactère dances are most convincing.

An early signature of hers was a tough &quot;virility&quot;. &quot;Her own roles were packed with jumps and beats.&quot; Much later, in her prime, Nijinska crafted to combine her strength with an emotional touch &quot;unexpectedly poignant&quot;. She liked the flow of movement on the stage.

==As a choreographer==
&quot;In her lifetime Nijinska choreographed over seventy ballets, as well as dance sequences for numerous films, operas, and other stage productions.&quot; An annotated, chronological catalogue of her choreographies is presented by Nancy Van Norman Baer in her book on Nijinska. Her early experiences in choreographic arts involved the assistance given her brother Vaslav Nijinsky in his choreographic works for Ballets Russes. She had then tried out the initial stages of various steps created by him.

===During war and revolution, 1914-1921===
At the start of World War I, Nijinska and her husband and daughter, and her mother, were caught on the eastern side of the Eastern Front. Her brother Vaslav was on its western side, eventually in Austria.

The Russian art world in the early twentieth century was often innovative and experimental. &quot;Russian art before the October Revolution had held aloof from revolutionary Marxism.&quot; Thus the composer Igor Stravinsky distinguished clearly between the pre-war conservative fetters on art and the subsequent straitjacket eventually imposed by the Communist Party. For a few years following the war-born 1917 revolution, Russia was in chaos, and many artists managed to operate somewhat independently of Soviet politicians and their totalitarian ideals.

====Petrograd, her first choreographies 1914–1915====
At the start of World War I, Nijinska, her husband Aleksandr Kochtovsky (&#x27;Sasha&#x27;, married in 1912), and their infant daughter Nina returned to Petrograd (then the Russian capital&#x27;s new name). Nijinska had long considered the city her home; it was her last time living there. She found work teaching ballet to Cecchetti&#x27;s students. Newspaper accounts report that Bronislava and Aleksandr met their former colleagues from Ballets Russes, and danced alongside them. Included were Michel Fokine and Tamara Karsavina, and as well the Bolshoi&#x27;s Mikhail Mordkin.

Both became leading dancers at the Petrograd Private Opera Theatre. In 1915 Nijinska produced her first choreographies: &quot;Le Poupée&quot; [The Doll] (or &quot;La Tabatière&quot;), and &quot;Autumn Song&quot;. These creations were for her solo performances at the Narodny Dom Theatre.

She was twenty-five. The 1915 program described her as &quot;the celebrated prima ballerina-artist of the State Ballet&quot;. The music for her dance creation &quot;Autumn Song&quot; was by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, and for &quot;The Doll&quot; by Anatoly Liadov. On that program, performed at the Narodny Dom [People&#x27;s House], were also ballets choreographed by Michel Fokine of Ballets Russes, to be danced by Nijinska and her husband. Her choreography for &quot;Autumn Song&quot;, &quot;the more important&quot; of her two solos, &quot;owed a debt to Fokine&quot;.

====Kiev 1915–1921, her &#x27;École de Mouvement&#x27;====
In August 1915, the family moved to Kiev. Nijinska&#x27;s husband &#x27;Sasha&#x27; Kochtovsky became ballet master at the State Opera Theater. There they both worked on ballet scenes for the operas, and on staging dance divertissements and ballets. In 1917 Nijinska began teaching at several institutions: the State Conservatory of Music, the Central State Ballet Studio, the Yiddish Cultural Center Drama Studio, and the Ukrainian Drama School. In 1919, after their son Leon was born, after her School of Movement was opened, her husband Sasha left the family and traveled alone to Odessa.

=====Treatise on choreography=====
Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;theoretical speculations&quot; about modern ballet apparently began to crystallize. During a short stay in Moscow after the 1917 October Revolution, Nijinska started her treatise: &quot;The School of Movement (Theory of Choreography)&quot;. It was published in 1920 but has become lost to posterity, like much of the dance materials she created in Kiev. The only remnant of it apparently is a 100-page &#x27;manuscript&#x27; found &quot;scrawled&quot; in one of her exercise books.

In a short essay published in 1930, however, she apparently recapitulated her key ideas: &quot;On movement and the school of movement&quot;. Nijinska writes:

N. V. N. Baer observes an imbedded neoclassical implication within Nijinska&#x27;s then radical theory of dance, &#x27;the school of movement&#x27;, i.e., not the overthrow of balletic tradition leading to modern dance, but the incorporation nonetheless of entirely new modes of movement. &quot;It is in this essay that she documents her search for a new means of expression based on the extension of the classical vocabulary of dance steps.&quot;

=====Collaboration with designer Exter=====

In 1917 Nijinska met the visual artist Alexandra Exter (1882-1949) in Moskva. Exter&#x27;s cutting-edge designs employed constructivist ideas. The two traded their views on modern art and the theater. So began a long and fruitful collaboration on various dance projects, with Exter designing sets and costumes. The working relationship that formed endured into the 1920s, after each had independently left Russia, to move to Paris.

Before the war Exter had lived in Western Europe, where she joined &quot;cubist and futurist circles&quot; that were generating popular innovations. Returning to Russia at war&#x27;s start, Exter first settled in Moscow. With Alexander Tairov at his Kamerny [Chamber] Theater, she had &quot;aspired to create a dynamic fusion of drama, movement, and design known as &#x27;synthetic theater&#x27;.&quot; In 1918, having relocated to Kiev, Exter opened an art studio, which doubled as a salon for many of Kiev&#x27;s rising artists.

Art discussions were also held evenings at Nijinska&#x27;s dance school, where Exter joined in. Their ideas were compatible and mutually reinforcing. Curator/author Nancy Van Norman Baer writes that they became &quot;close artistic associates&quot; and &quot;fast friends&quot;.

In addition to Exter, Les Kurbas (1887-1937) worked with Nijinska. As a Ukrainian theater producer and film director, Kurbas was a leading arts figure in Kyiv and a promoter of local performance. They entered into a &quot;complementary and deep&quot; collaboration, sharing studio space, movement classes, dancer-actors, and theatrical discussions.

=====Her ballet school and its productions=====

In February 1919 in Kiev, she opened her dance school called L&#x27;Ecole de Mouvement [School of Movement]. This was shortly after giving birth to her son Léon. Her school&#x27;s philosophy was to focus on preparing dancers to work with innovative choreographers. Among ideas she taught her students: flowing movement, free use of the torso, and a quickness in linking steps. She wanted her students ready for cutting-edge ballets, like those she had assisted her brother in designing, e.g., &quot;The Rite&quot; and &quot;Faune&quot;. As she stated in her Kiev-era treatise/essay &quot;On Movement and the school of movement&quot;:

&quot;Today&#x27;s ballet schools do not give the dancer the necessary training to work with choreographic innovators. Even the Ballet Russes ... did not create a school to parallel its innovations in the theater.&quot; [86/87] Yet historically, regarding Vigano, Noverre, Vestris, Didelot, Taglioni, Coralli, Petipa: &quot;the &quot;danse d&#x27;ecole&quot; absorbed all the achievements of these choreographers. ... [They] did not destroy the school with their innovations, but only enriched it.&quot; [87]

Under the aegis of this school she staged concerts with her own choreographed solo dances. Included were &quot;her first plotless ballet compositions&quot;: &quot;Mephisto Valse&quot; (1919), and &quot;Twelfth Rhapsody&quot; (1920) music by Liszt, and &quot;Nocturne&quot; (1919) and &quot;Marche Funèbre&quot; (1920), music by Chopin. These solo dances may be &quot;the first abstract ballets&quot; of the 20th century.

In many of her productions her students danced for the public, among whom Serge Lifar was the most outstanding. Accordingly, she began to receive broad recognition as a choreographer. Then, invited by the Ministry of Arts, Nijinska mounted a full theatrical production of the Tchaikovsky ballet &quot;Swan Lake&quot;. She adapted the classic Petipa and Ivanov choreography of 1895. Her success involved trimming the ballet&#x27;s difficulty to fit the level of her weaker students. The performance was held at Kiev&#x27;s State Opera Theater.

=====Reasons for leaving Kiev=====
It had been reported in the literature that Nijinska and family left Kiev in 1921 in order to visit her brother Vaslav Nijinsky in Vienna, after learning of his deteriorating health. Yet she learned about her brother in 1920, when the Russian Civil War prevented travel.

Based on recent research, Prof. Garafola describes a different and suppressed reason. The Cheka, as the notorious Soviet security police was then called, in early 1921 stepped up its harassment of her and her students. Her artistic independence was confronted and by April &quot;L&#x27;École de Mouvement&quot; had been closed.

The school &quot;had given her a new life and an identity of her own as a modern artist. It was her child, the home of her imagination, a community of friends and devoted followers, the catalyst and expression of her creativity. In the weeks that followed [its closing] she quietly made plans to leave.

She traveled west out of Kiev under false pretenses, assisted by other dancers. She&#x27;d taken her two children, Irina aged seven and Leon aged two, and her mother of sixty-four years. After she bribed the Soviet border guards, they waded across the Bug River into Poland, arriving in early May, 1921.

Several weeks later in Vienna the four travelers visited her brother Vaslav, his wife Romola and their children Kyra and Tamara. His health, however, had deteriorated since 1914, their last meeting. Once widely-celebrated as the &quot;god of dance&quot; he had not performed since 1917. Despite such sadness, the family was reunited. Broni found income by working at a cabaret in Vienna. At this point Diaghilev sent her an invitation; he included train fare. Her two children she entrusted to her mother&#x27;s care. Nijinska then departed for Paris to rejoin Ballets Russes.

===Diaghilev&#x27;s &#x27;Ballets Russes&#x27; in Paris and Monte Carlo 1921–1925===
The company staged ballets for twenty years, starting with its 1909 opening of &quot;La Saison Russe&quot; in Paris, and ending in 1929 when its founder Sergei Diaghilev died. He had directed the company&#x27;s operations: both the business and the theatrical (music, choreography, dance, decor and costumes). He chiefly worked with five choreographers, more or less in sequence: Fokine (1909-1912, 1914), Nijinsky (1912-1913, 1917), Massine (1915–1920, 1925-1928), Nijinska (1921-1925, 1926), Balanchine (1925-1929). Diaghilev&#x27;s &quot;successive phases&quot; are described as: &quot;reform (Fokine), modernism (Nijinsky and Massine), and ... constructivism and neoclassicism (Nijinska and Balanchine).&quot; The early twenties were Nijinska&#x27;s time at the helm.

Originally started in Russia by an arts impresario to function as an &quot;exporter of Imperial culture&quot; (initially the ballet productions in Paris), it happened that the company never performed in Russia. By 1918 less than half its dancers were Russian, 18 out of 39. 12 were Polish. The rest were four Italians, two Spaniards, two English women, and a Belgian. The company&#x27;s ambivalent and attenuated connection to Russia had not survived the 1914–1918 war, the 1917 revolutions, and the Russian Civil War. In 1922 for financial reasons it relocated its base of operations from Paris to Monte Carlo.

====Her initial choreographic work, and derivations====
In 1921 Diaghilev asked Nijinska to return to Ballets Russes, chiefly for her choreography. He had become aware of her recent work in Kiev, especially that she had staged the Petipa-Ivanov classic &quot;Swan Lake&quot;, to music by Tchaikovsky. He had re-engaged her &quot;because&quot; of this demonstration of her abilities. As well as ballet mistress and a principal dancer, she was in line to be the Company&#x27;s first and only female choreographer. Yet Diaghilev as ever was also cautious. Partly to test the quality of her work, and partly because of his company&#x27;s financial condition, he first gave Nijinska major tasks in his on-going ballet productions.

=====&quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot;, originally &quot;La Belle au bois dormant&quot; (1921)=====

As theatrical events unfolded in late 1921, Ballets Russes was confronted with a severe financial crisis. The immediate cause was its lavish London production of the celebrated classic &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot; originally staged in 1890 in Saint Petersburg. Its 1921 version had been renamed &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; apparently because, as Diaghilev wryly observed, following the war the role of titled princess had become a rarity.

The ballet was &quot;one of the great Petipa classics from the old Imperial Russian repertory&quot;. &quot;La Belle au bois dormant&quot; [The beauty in woods asleep] was taken from a French fairy tale of that name by Charles Perrault. Music was specially composed for it by Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky. Diaghilev extravagantly revived the entire production of Petipa&#x27;s three-act ballet. Léon Bakst designed the sets which &quot;were of surpassing grandeur and magnificence and no expense was spared...&quot;

Although the main choreographic credit remained with Petipa, the &quot;Additional choreography by Bronislava Nijinska&quot; was recognized. Her most memorable contribution: to the grand divertissement in Act III she added the rousing hopak for the &#x27;Three Ivans&#x27; (&quot;Les trois Ivans&quot;); it &quot;became one of the most popular numbers&quot;. Nijinska designed a half-dozen other, well-crafted choreographic pieces (e.g., &quot;The Marquises&quot;, &quot;Blue Beard&quot;, &quot;Schéhérazade&quot;, &quot;Variations of Prince Charming&quot;). She made other alterations to the ballet, and led its rehearsals. As a principal dancer, she took roles as the Hummingbird Fairy, the Lilac Fairy, and Pierrette. She choreographed a new version of the so-called &quot;finger&quot; variation for herself as the Hummingbird Fairy.

In 1921 in London the key for Diaghilev at Ballets Russes was her mastery of dance, staging and design. &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; production &quot;became a proving ground of Nijinska&#x27;s choreographic talent. She acquitted herself admirably.&quot;

Diaghilev&#x27;s earlier had, post-war, committed the company to revive the 1890 Russian classic. It was a bold decision which incurred a large financial risk. He aimed for excellence, a show of the tradition&#x27;s high production values whatever the expense. After viewing &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; many theater critics were skeptical, disappointed by the apparent retreat from an experimental approach previously associated with Ballets Russes. Diaghilev&#x27;s traditional classic, however, did prove very popular with London&#x27;s growing audience for ballet, for whom it became an artistic learning experience that boded well for future London dance performances. Yet in late 1921 the London aficionados still small numbers meant that they could not purchase enough tickets to cover its great expense. After a run of several months, attendance began to fall. By early 1922 the truly brilliant production had become a colossal, money-losing disaster.

Nijinska arrived in mid-1921 at the Ballets Russes company. She had come from the harsh realities and creative ferment of &#x27;Russia in revolution&#x27;. Her own artistic tastes then clearly favored the experimental Ballets Russes of pre-war days, when Diaghilev was &quot;searching for the creation of a new ballet...&quot; Yet in 1921 &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; was the focus at Ballets Russes, and her first assignment. She wrote later that Diaghilev&#x27;s extravagant revival then &quot;seemed to me an absurdity, a dropping into the past&quot;. No doubt Nijinska felt the stress resulting from the cultural-artistic dissonance: &quot;I started my first work full of protest against myself.&quot;

Over the course of her career, however, Nijinska neither remained a radical champion of rebel experiments, nor did she ever accept as timeless perfection the inherited balletic tradition. While strongly favoring new ideas about the art of movement, eventually she chose to take a middle path: traditional art reconciled with radical innovation, and vice versa.

=====&quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot;, or &quot;Le Mariage de la Belle au bois dormant&quot; (1922)=====
After a run of several months, mounting financial pressures had forced the closure of the lavish London production of &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot;. In an attempt to recoup his investment Diaghilev then asked Stravinsky and Nijinsky to collaborate in creating from its three acts a shorter version. Together they reworked the dance and music to salvage &quot;a one-act ballet, which he called &quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot;.&quot; It proved very popular and became an enduring commercial success, remaining in the repertory of Ballets Russes companies for decades.

&quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot; premiered in Paris at the Théâtre National de l&#x27;Opéra in May 1922. Since the costumes and decor for the London production had been impounded by creditors, those used were by Benoit from a 1909 production of another ballet, as well as new by Gontcharova. The principal dancers were Vera Trefilova as Princess Aurora and Pierre Vladimirov as Prince Charming. With Petipa Nijinska shared the choreographic credit.

======&quot;La Fête Merveilleuse&quot; [The Marvelous Festival] (1923)======
Itself largely excerpted from her &quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot;, the &quot;gala benefit pageant&quot; &quot;La Fête&quot; was performed by Ballets Russes in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles. The gala played to the post-war French taste for theatrical revivals from the 18th-century Ancien régime. The well-heeled audience of aristocrats and art patrons came from all over Europe and from America. Staged by Nijinska, Tchaikovsky&#x27;s music was reorchestrated by Stravinsky, and the costumes were by Juan Gris.

======&quot;Les Contes de Fées&quot; [Stories of the fairies] (1925)======
&quot;Les Contes de Fées&quot; was another spin-off from &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot;, drawn from fairy tales in &quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot; (originally in Act III of &quot;La Belle au bois dormant&quot;). It premiered at Monte Carlo in February 1925. That winter Diaghilev produced it and other ballets in &quot;full dress&quot; even though scenery was not used.

====Her own ballet creations====
Nijinska earned her credits as the sole choreographer for nine works at Ballets Russes during the 1920s. All but one were set to modern musical compositions: three by Igor Stravinsky (two ballets, &quot;Renard&quot;, &quot;Noces&quot;, and an opera, &quot;Mavra&quot;); three by contemporary French composers, Francis Poulenc (&quot;Biches&quot;), Georges Auric (&quot;Fâcheux&quot;), and Darius Milhaus (&quot;Train Bleu&quot;); one by a contemporary English composer, Constant Lambert (from the Shakespeare play); and, one by Modest Mussorgsky (&quot;Nuit&quot;, an opera). One work employed baroque music (&quot;Tentations&quot;).

=====&quot;Le Renard&quot; [The Fox] [Baika] (1922)=====

Nijinska&#x27;s first ballet in her tentative new position as choreographer for Ballets Russes was &quot;Le Renard&quot;, described as a &quot;burlesque ballet with song&quot;. Igor Stravinsky composed the music, which was for small orchestra and four singers. Stravinsky also wrote the libretto, i.e., the lyrics. Originally commissioned by a friend of Diaghilev in 1915, it was not publicly performed until 1922.

The principal dancers were: Nijinska (as the Fox), Stanislas Idzikowski (as the Cock), Jean Jazvinsky and Micel Federov (as the Cat, and the Goat). Costumes and sets by Michel Larionov were in a type of radical, modernist style with a &quot;primitive quality&quot;.

The plot comes from &quot;Russian preliterary theater&quot; sourced in &quot;a tradition of itinerant folk entertainers&quot; impersonating buffoons and animals. Across Europe, late medieval tales of Reynard the Fox were popular. Here, the Fox (a con-artist) works to trick the Cock (a wealthy peasant) in order to literally eat him, but the Cock is saved by the Cat and Goat. &quot;Disguised first as a nun, then as a beggar, the fox embodies criticism of both social and clerical orders.&quot; &quot;Baika&quot; was the original Russian title of &quot;Le Renard&quot;.

Nijinska&#x27;s choreography tended modern. She &quot;juxtaposed movements of animal grace with odd gestures and grotesque postures.&quot; The ballet was narrated by singers off stage. Larionov&#x27;s visual design included simple animal masks for the dancers; the name of each character, e.g., &quot;Goat&quot;, was written in large letters on the dance costume.

In her memoirs, Nijinska discusses Fokine&#x27;s innovative &quot;Dance of the Fauns&quot; (1905). There in the background the many &quot;fauns looked like animals&quot;. The young boys who danced them once &quot;tumbled head over heels&quot; which was not in keeping with &#x27;classical ballet&#x27; techniques. Yet Fokine claimed the result conformed to the &quot;animal characteristics of the dance.&quot; Nijinska then comments:

I, who always spoke against the use of acrobatics in the ballet, made use of somersaults in my very first ballet, Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Le Renard&quot; (1922). But there was no contradiction. I did not use those steps as a trick but to achieve an artistic aim.

Although &quot;Le Renard&quot; was ill-received and seldom performed, Stravinsky&#x27;s harsh music and the childlike costumes were suspected. Yet the ballet had &quot;impeccable avant-garde credentials.&quot; &quot;Diaghilev was pleased with Nijinska&#x27;s work and engaged her as the permanent choreographer for his company.&quot; Stravinsky, too, was pleased. He wrote in his 1936 &quot;Chronicles of my life&quot;:

I still deeply regret that the production [Le Renard] which gave me the greatest satisfaction ... has never been revived. Nijinska had admirably seized the spirit of mountebank buffoonery. She displayed such a wealth of ingenuity, so many fine points, so much satirical verve, that the effect was irresistible.

The premiere of this burlesque ballet also inspired an interesting social event. It was &quot;a first night supper party for &quot;Le Renard&quot;&quot;, planned by Sydney Schiff as a kind of &quot;modernist summit&quot;. Invited were &quot;Proust and Joyce in literature, Stravinsky in music, Picasso in painting.&quot; Garafola comments that only in these years of Diaghilev &quot;would ballet stand so close to the avant-garde.&quot;

=====&quot;Mavra&quot; (1922)=====
An &quot;opéra bouffe&quot; with music by Stravinsky, it was first performed at the Théâtre National de l&#x27;Opéra in Paris, June 1922. The lyric book by Boris Kochno followed a poem by Pushkin, &#x27;A small house in Kolomna&#x27;. &quot;The one-act opera did not require any dances, but Diaghilev asked Nijinska to stage the movement of the four singers.&quot;

=====&quot;Les noces&quot; [The Wedding] [Svadebka] (1923)=====
Nijinska created the ballet &quot;Les noces&quot; [&#x27;The Wedding&#x27; [original title &quot;Les noces Villageoise&quot;, in Russian &quot;Svadebka&quot;]) from the music and libretto by Igor Stravinsky, music commissioned ten years earlier by Diaghilev. In four tableaux, the 24-minute ballet depicts in abstract fashion events surrounding a peasant marriage: the blessing of the Bride, the blessing of the Groom, the Bride&#x27;s departure from her parental home, and the wedding celebration. Dancers first learning the steps often met some difficulty with the intense group movements of the choreography. &quot;When you are truly moving together your individuality is really evident.&quot; Abandoned was the light-hearted sense of folk dance. A realism drawn from her experience of the hard edge of revolution, and tradition, has seasoned Nijinska. She presented her sober observations on folk society, yet also there lurked a vital vision. The heavy, collective mood of predestination is countered by hints of a peasant&#x27;s wit and ability to survive. After first seeing it, H. G. Wells wrote:
The ballet &quot;Les noces&quot; is &quot;a rendering in sound and vision of the peasant soul, in its gravity, in its deliberate and simple-minded intricacy, in its subtly varied rhythms, in its deep undercurrents of excitement...&quot;

Stravinsky&#x27;s idea for the score evolved during war, revolution, and exile. His libretto conveys ancient and set patterns, yet his music uses staccato rhythms and a vocal overlay of upheaval. Left little expressed is the wedding as a reassuring ritual of joy. The tone of the work is darker, more anxious, conjuring a &quot;deeply moving evocation&quot; of the ceremony. Nijinska translated it to dance, embodying in the ballet a tragic sense, the fate of both tradition and revolution. The lyrics were taken from a collection of Russian folk songs (the &quot;Sobranniye Piesni&quot; of Kireievsky), although Stravinsky&#x27;s libretto is arranged in an unorthodox manner. The phrases were selected for their &quot;typicality&quot; or commonality.

Stravinsky told his friend the conductor Robert Craft that his text for &quot;Les noces&quot; &quot;might be compared to one of those scenes in &quot;Ulysses&quot; in which the reader seems to be overhearing scraps of conversation without the connecting thread of discourse.&quot; The voices of the singers seem disconnected from the characters they represent. &quot;Stravinsky&#x27;s composition, while fluid and layered, at times becomes overtly jarring.&quot; In form a cantata, the &quot;music accompanying his choral and solo singers came from an orchestra of percussion, dominated by four pianos.&quot;

Dance writer Robert Johnson claimed that Stravinsky&#x27;s text for &quot;Les noces&quot; manifests his interest in psychology and a collective unconscious of the type posited by Carl Jung. Accordingly, the contrast between a musical &quot;cell&quot; and its elaboration in the score for &quot;Les noces&quot; represents a dialog between profane time (chronos) and sacred time (kairos), as defined by Mircea Eliade. Nevertheless, Stravinsky described his conception of the ballet&#x27;s mise-en-scène as a &quot;masquerade&quot; or &quot;divertissement.,&quot; whose effect would be comic. Nijinska rejected this concept, and it is her somber vision of the ballet that ultimately prevailed.

The minimalist visual designs, both the costumes and the sets, were by Natalia Goncharova, the color scheme being &quot;earthen gold, blue-grey, and black.&quot; Yet &quot;the fanciful, colorful costumes she first proposed struck Nijinska as wrong&quot;. Then Goncharova modified her designs to resemble the style of clothes worn by dancers to rehearsals. Balanchine&#x27;s practical dance clothes for performances &quot;can trace precedents back to &quot;Noces&quot;.&quot; In the end, Goncharova&#x27;s sparse sets and costume design are now &quot;inseparable from the ballet&#x27;s musical and movement elements.&quot; When Nijinska worked on &quot;Les noces&quot;:

I was still breathing the air of Russia, a Russia throbbing with excitement and intense feeling. All the vivid images of the harsh realities of the Revolution were still part of me and filled my whole being.

Nijinska researched ethnological studies of peasant customs in Russia. Yet in boldly translating to the ballet stage, she seems mostly to follow Stravinsky&#x27;s modern score. She directed the women to dance en pointe, in order to elongate their silhouettes and resemble Russian icons. The beating sounds of the pointes jabbing the board demonstrates strength (not the ethereal effect previously associated with &quot;en pointe&quot;). Nijinska&#x27;s groupings of women move largely in unison. The corps often faces square to the audience, a departure from the &quot;epaulement&quot; found in classical works, which softens the look by angling the shoulders. Toward the end of scene one, the women handle extremely long braids of the bride&#x27;s hair, greatly exaggerated in thickness, as if the women were &quot;sailors taking up the mooring lines of a boat.&quot; The whole piece, tethered to an ancient folk tradition, has an overwhelming sense of a controlled conformity.

Her choreography reflected Nijinska&#x27;s interest in modernist abstraction. Corporeal forms like the &quot;cart&quot; that takes the Bride from her parental home, and the &quot;cathedral&quot; grouping at the ballet&#x27;s end, have been abstracted, as also such gestures as the braiding of hair, and the sobbing. The appearance of pyramidal and triangular structures that represent &quot;spiritual striving&quot; furthers this interest in abstraction. It may show the influence of painter Wassily Kandinsky. He had presented the so-called &quot;Program for the Institute of Artistic Culture,&quot; his proposed master plan for the arts, including dance, in Moscow in June 1920.

An iconic pose from &quot;Les noces&quot; has the heads of the women dancers, i.e., the bridesmaids, as if stacked up. Author Jennifer Homans, in defining the ballet&#x27;s tragedy, comments:

In one of the ballet&#x27;s most poignant and telling images, the women dutifully pile their faces like bricks on top of one another, forming an abstract, pyramid structure ... The bride sets her face on the top and rests her head despondently in her hands. We see both the individuals (those faces) and their submission to authority and the group ...

Dance critic Janice Berman writes that Nijinska viewed the wedding celebration from her perspective as a woman: &quot;Nijinska was obviously a feminist; the solemnity of the nuptials derives not only from the sanctity of married love, but from its downside---a loss of freedom, particularly for the bride. She loses not only her long, long braids, but also her privacy, her right to dream. The bride&#x27;s last reverie, after all, comes before the ceremony; she leans her head on her hands, atop a table formed by eight of her friends. After the nuptials, another dreamer takes the bride&#x27;s place.&quot; Also, the critic Johnson points out that &quot;Les noces&quot; is filled with images of dreamers.

&quot;&quot;Les noces&quot; was Nijinska&#x27;s answer to &quot;The Rite&quot;,&quot; a creative continuation of her brother&#x27;s work, here &quot;a reenactment of a Russian peasant wedding.&quot; The ballet movement of the ceremony reflected &quot;not a joyous occasion but a foreboding social ritual.&quot; Dance critic André Levinson in his harsh 1923 review called her choreography &quot;Marxist&quot; in which the individual was swallowed up by the masses. Nijinska, however, escaped from her brother&#x27;s nihilism by following Stravinsky&#x27;s lead &quot;through the formal beauty and discipline of the Orthodox liturgy.&quot; Nonetheless the ballet remained &quot;a modern tragedy, a complicated and very Russian drama that celebrated authority&quot; yet showed its &quot;brutal effect on the lives of individuals.&quot;

Dance academic and critic Lynn Garafola, in discussing the ballet scene in the early 1920s, identifies a major competitor to Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes. She characterizes Ballets suédois (Swedish ballet) led by Rolf de Maré as a company that had &quot;largely succeeded in edging Diaghilev to the sidelines of avant-garde Paris.&quot; Yet Garafola mentions her admiration for the 1922 ballet &quot;Le Renard&quot; (see above) created by Nijinska for Ballets Russes. She continues:

[I]t was only in 1923 that Diaghilev staged a modernist masterpiece that transcended the best of his rival&#x27;s offerings. &quot;Les noces&quot;, probably the greatest dance work of the decade, teamed three of his closest Russian collaborators: Stravinsky, his &#x27;first son&#x27;, as composer; Natalia Goncharova, as designer; and Bronislava Nijinska, as choreographer.

&quot;Bronislava Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;Les noces&quot; [grew] out of boldness of conception without regard for precedent or consequences,&quot; wrote John Martin, dance critic for &quot;The New York Times&quot;. Nijinska herself wrote about &quot;Noces&quot;: &quot;I was informed as a choreographer [by my brother&#x27;s ballets] &quot;Jeux&quot; and &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot;. The unconscious art of those ballets inspired my initial work.&quot;

=====&quot;Les Tentations de la Bergère&quot; [Temptations of the shepherdess] (1924)=====
This one-act ballet featured baroque music composed by Michel de Montéclair (1667–1737), which was recently orchestrated by Henri Casadesus. The sets, costumes, and curtain were by Juan Gris. An alternative title is &quot;L&#x27;Amour Vainqueur&quot; [Love Victorious]. It opened in Monte Carlo.

In the mid-1920s &quot;a significant part of the Ballet Russes repertory turned away from modernism and themes of contemporary life.&quot; This included &quot;Les Tentations de la Bergère&quot; and the ballet &quot;Les Fâcheux&quot;, also choreographed by Nijinska. These were &quot;two works produced by the Ballets Russes during the 1920s that focused on themes related to eighteenth-century France. These productions were rooted in France&#x27;s post-World War I fascination with bygone monarchies and court life.&quot;

=====&quot;Les Biches&quot; [The Does (or &#x27;the girls&#x27;)] (1924), also called &quot;The House Party&quot;=====
A one-act ballet &quot;Les Biches&quot; [&#x27;Les Demoiselles&#x27; was once a proposed alternate title] depicts a contemporary house party for singles, with music to &#x27;entertain&#x27; by Francis Poulenc. &#x27;Fashionable&#x27; scenery and costumes were by cubist painter Marie Laurencin, also French. Poulenc&#x27;s commissioned music for ballet, which originally included sung lyrics, was a &quot;wonderful chameleon of a score&quot;, that was &quot;mischievous, mysterious, now sentimental, now jazzy, now Mozartian...&quot;

Dance writer Robert Johnson comments that beneath this ballet&#x27;s sun-washed, Riviera setting lie &quot;shadowy scenes painted by Watteau: the &quot;Parc des Biches&quot; where Louis XIV trysted, and the forest where voluptuous courtiers rediscovered Cythera, the isle of love... . From the opening notes of Poulenc&#x27;s overture, significantly scored for flutes and woodwinds, we find ourselves in this &quot;bois&quot; of ancient gallantry.&quot; Poulence described the section titled &quot;Jeux&quot; as, &quot;a kind of hunting game, very Louis Quatorze.&quot;

Its January 1924 opening at the Théâtre de Monte Carlo featured &quot;La Nijinska herself&quot; in the cast and, among others, a minor role for Ninette de Valois (she later became director at Sadler&#x27;s Wells). The French title &quot;Les Biches&quot; signifies &quot;the girls&quot; or female deer (the plural of doe), which was &quot;1920s terminology for young women; [it] celebrates ballet women as chic young ladies.&quot; Several English-speaking ballet companies changed the title, e.g., &quot;The House Party&quot; or &quot;The Gazelles&quot;.

&quot;Although Diaghilev to Poulenc praised Nijinska to the heavens ... [he] feared she might be unresponsive to the Latin charm of the Poulenc score.&quot; Her first three choreographies for Ballet Russe had been composed by Stravinsky (Renard, Mavra, Noces). Yet &quot;Poulenc and Nijinska had taken to each other enormously...&quot; During rehearsals, Poulenc remarked that &quot;Nijinska is really a genius&quot; and her choreography&#x27;s &quot;pas de deux is so beautiful that all the dancers insist on watching it. I am enchanted.&quot; Diaghilev concluded:

Poulenc is enthusiastic about Bronya&#x27;s (Nijinska&#x27;s) choreography, and they get along excellently together. The choreography has delighted and astonished me. But then, this good woman, intemperate and antisocial as she is, does belong to the Nijinsky family.

The ballet&#x27;s plot is unspecified. According to Poulenc, an atmosphere of &quot;wantoness&quot; prevails. Apropos of the ballet&#x27;s ambiguity, Richard Buckle asks, &quot;Have the three athletes who enter this whispering world of women just dropped in from the beach, or are they customers?...It is so delightful not to know.&quot; &quot;Les Biches&quot; was intended to be a modern &quot;fête galante,&quot; and in some ways a commentary on Michel Fokine&#x27;s ballet &quot;Les Sylphides&quot;.

Nijinska took the role of the hostess of the house party. The hostess is &quot;a lady no longer young, but very wealthy and elegant.&quot; Her guests are younger: twelve women in pink and three men dressed as athletes wearing ribbon-like sashes. Additional featured characters include La Garçonne, aka &quot;La dame en bleu,&quot; an androgynous figure sometimes described as a &quot;page-boy&quot;; and two women in gray dresses who appear to be a couple. The ballet has eight parts, each with a different dance music. The young guests flirt, appear to take no notice, or play dance games in a setting filled with social satire and ambiguous sexuality. The hostess, dressed in yellow, brandishes a cigarette holder as if posing for an advertisement. Balanchine comments that she seems driven to remain in motion, her hands, her desperate dance: she is unable to image herself alone and still. Nijinska &quot;was &#x27;powerful&#x27; and &#x27;strange,&#x27; a dancer &#x27;intoxicated with rhythm, ... racing against the most breathless &#x27;prestos&#x27; of the orchestra.&quot; In this role of the yellow-clad hostess, Nijinska

flew round the stage, performing amazing contortions of her body, beating her feet, sliding backwards and forwards, screwing her face into an abandoned attitude on the sofa. She danced as the mood took her and was brilliant.
Dance writer Richard Shead appraised &quot;Les Biches&quot; as &quot;a perfect synthesis of music, dance, and design...&quot; He situated it in the aftermath of the radical experimentalism of her brother Vaslav Nijinsky, whose innovations had challenged the classical ballet canons:

The great strength of Nijinska&#x27;s choreography was its inventiveness, together with the fact that it remained essentially &quot;classical&quot;. It is easier to see now than it can have been in the 1920s that the future of choreography lay in classicism but in a classicism which was capable of being extended, varied, distorted even, without departing in any fundamental sense from the mainstream vocabulary of classical dance. Nijinska achieved this in &quot;Les Biches&quot;; Balanchine was to do so latter ...

Following World War I, Diaghilev found it advisable to produce a French-themed work neo-classical in style. Yet the Nijinska&#x27;s dance vocabulary of &quot;Les Biches&quot; is not entirely academic; it blends virtuosic classroom steps, exposed lines and pointe work with body building poses, sporting images and references to popular dance forms. In this regard, &quot;Les Biches&quot; is &quot;the fountainhead of neoclassicism in dance.&quot; According to Irina Nijinska, the choreographer&#x27;s daughter, the famous gesture of La Garçonne upon entering, with one hand held flattened to the side of her face, and the gesture of the female corps de ballet, with one hand raised while resting on an elbow, are both military salutes that Nijinska has abstracted through a technique like Cubism.

In &quot;Les Biches&quot;, writes Lynn Garafola, Nijinska&#x27;s choreography &quot;cracked open the gender codes of classical style, transforming a piece of twenties chic into a critique of sexual mores.&quot; According to Robert Johnson, &quot;loves of various kinds are portrayed and accepted here seeingly without prejudice.&quot; Nijinska has turned the tables, making the ballet&#x27;s three male athletes the object of a libidinous female gaze. &quot;Nijinska has seized the power to frame the discussion about sex.&quot;

Marie Laurencin&#x27;s decor, according to Garafola, had &quot;the same ambiguous blend of innocence and corruption&quot; as the ballet. It opens in a flood of pink light that is &quot;voluptuously feminine&quot;. A host of taboos are explored: &quot;narcissism, voyeurism, female sexual power, castration, sapphism&quot;. Garafola a few pages earlier mentions the career importance of her years in Kiev &quot;fired by the Revolution&#x27;s brave new art&quot;. On one level &quot;Les Biches&quot; appears to creatively conflate the sexual experimentation of post-war Paris and Kiev. Yet Nijinska herself apparently remained somewhat of a skeptic.

Garafola comments that Diaghilev disapproved of the ballet&#x27;s pessimism, its sour look at gender relations. Portrayed was a femininity &quot;only skin-deep, a subterfuge applied like make-up, a construction elaborated over time by men, not an innate female property.&quot; The customary &quot;male bravura dance&quot; is here exposed as pretentious. The ballet &quot;divorces the appearance of love from its reality.&quot; &quot;Les Biches&quot;, surmises Garafola, may be interpreted as disclosing Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;unease with traditional representations of femininity.&quot;

Balanchine, Nijinska&#x27;s successor as choreographer at Ballets Russes, complimented her for &quot;Les Biches&quot; describing it as a &quot;popular ballet of the Diaghilev era&quot;. It was revived several times, he continued, and met with &quot;critical and popular approval&quot;. &quot;Monte Carlo and Paris audiences ... loved it.&quot; &quot;&quot;Les Biches&quot; was very much liked.&quot; &quot;[W]e all knew long before the curtin went down on the first night that &quot;Les Biches&quot; was a smash hit.&quot;

=====&quot;Les Fâcheux&quot; [The Mad, or The Bores] (1924)=====
:fr:Les Fâcheux was originally a three-act ballet comedy, written by the French playwright, librettist, and actor, known by his stage name Molière (1622–1673). It opened in 1661, with baroque music by Pierre Beauchamp and Jean-Baptiste Lully. Without a plot, characters appear, do a monologue, then exit never to return. &quot;Molière&#x27;s hero Éraste [is] continually hindered by well-meaning bores while on his way to visit his lady love.&quot; Adopted for Ballets Russes, the music was by Georges Auric, with scenery designed by Georges Braque, libretto by Jean Cocteau after Molière, choreography by Nijinska.

Nijinska danced the male role of Lysandre, wearing a wig and clothes of the seventeenth-century. Anton Dolin as L&#x27;Elégant danced on point to approximate the baroque era and his performance created a sensation. &quot;Her choreography incorporates mannerisms and poses from the period that she modernized by stylization.&quot; Braque&#x27;s costumes were &#x27;Louis XIV&#x27;. The original music, however, had been lost, so that Auric was free to evoke the past with a modern composition.

Georges Auric was associated with fellow French composers Francis Poulenc, Darius Milhaud, and Arthur Honegger, part of a group called Les Six. French writer Jean Cocteau courted the group as representing a new approach to the arts, including poetry and painting. Ballets suédois in the early 1920s commissioned members of Les Six to compose music for its dance productions. Ballets Russes followed suit. Some 1920s music critics dismissed Les Six compositions as &quot;musiquette&quot;. But current critic Lynn Garafola sees in ballet revivals like &quot;Les Fâcheux&quot; that employ their music a &quot;gaiety and freshness&quot; in their &quot;unpretentious tunes and depiction of everyday life&quot;. Garafola appreciates &quot;the independence of the music in relation to the choreography.&quot;

Ballets Russes dancer Lydia Lopokova, however, about Nijinska&#x27;s ballet &quot;Les Fâcheux&quot; and similar works, commented that it was smooth and professional, but nothing or no one moved her. She longed for very old-fashioned ballets without abstract ideas, with simplicity and poetry. &quot;Massine and Nijinska choreography clever as it is have too much intellect,&quot; she felt.

=====&quot;La Nuit sur le Mont chauve&quot; [Night on Bald Mountain] (1924)=====

The ballet premiered in April, 1924, in Monte Carlo, with principal dancers Lydia Sokolova and Michel Fedorov. Nijinska&#x27;s choreography was set to the music of Modest Mussorgsky. Some designs for ballet then experimented &quot;with costumes that &#x27;reconstructed&#x27; the body, transforming its natural shape.&quot; For &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot;, Nijinska&#x27;s sketches &quot;show elongated, arc-like forms.&quot; The costumes designed by Alexandra Exter &quot;played with shape&quot; and &quot;played with gender&quot;.

Nijinska emphasized the ensemble rather than the individual dancer. Here it was &quot;her inventive use of the corps de ballet as the central figure&quot; rather than a soloist as was the norm. The total effect allowed the &quot;movement of the dancers to blend ... they became a sculpted entity capable of expressing the whole ballet action.&quot; Exter also &quot;depersonalized the dancers, clothing them in identical gray costumes.&quot; Yet it was &quot;the architectural poses of Nijinska&#x27;s choreography that gave the costumes their distinctive shape&quot;.

For his 1867 &#x27;symphonic poem&#x27; &quot;La Nuit sur le Mont chauve&quot; Mussorgsky was inspired by the witches sabbath as told by Nikolai Gogol in his St. John&#x27;s Eve story. The composer, however, repeatedly revised and eventually incorporated the music into Act III of his unfinished opera, Sorochintsy yarmarka [The Fair at Sorochintsy]. He labored on it for years prior to his death in 1881. Mussorgsky himself wrote the opera&#x27;s libretto, based on a Gogol story of the same name. Its ballet scenes thus expressed the &#x27;night on bald mountain&#x27;. The music was re-orchestrated by Rimsky-Korsakov.

=====&quot;Le Train Bleu&quot; [The Blue Train] (1924)=====
The ballet &quot;Le train blue&quot; has been called a &#x27;danced operetta&#x27;. Darius Milhaud composed the music, with the ballet libretto by Jean Cocteau, poet and filmmaker. The dancers&#x27; wardrobe were designed by &#x27;Coco&#x27; Chanel; it included &quot;bathing costumes of the period&quot;. The scenery was by sculptor Henri Laurens. The cast of players: a handsome kid (Anton Dolin), a bathing belle (Lydia Sokolova), a golfer (Leon Wójcikowski), and a tennis player (Nijinska).

The Cocteau libretto has a thin plot. Its title refers to the actual Train Bleu, whose destination was Côte d&#x27;Azur, a fashionable resort area, specifically Monte Carlo. &quot;The Blue Train used to bring the &quot;beau monde&quot; down to the south from Paris...&quot; Diaghilev remarked, &quot;The first point about &quot;Le train bleu&quot; is that there is no Blue Train in it.&quot; The scenario &quot;took place on a beach, where pleasure-seekers disported themselves.&quot; Inspired in part by youth &quot;showing off&quot; with &quot;acrobatic stunts&quot;, the ballet &quot;was a smart piece about a fashionable &quot;plage&quot;&quot; [beach].

Nijinska created a special ambiance through the language of dance, she introduced angular and geometrical movements and organized dancers on stage as interactive groups, that alluded to images of sports activities, such as golf, tennis and recreational games on a beach.
Popular passion for sport caused Cocteau to first conceive of a &#x27;beach ballet&#x27;. The work also provided a prize role for the athletic Anton Dolin, whose &quot;acrobatics astonished and delighted the audience.&quot; When he left the company, however, no one as capable could be found for the role, causing the ballet to be dropped.

Probably the ballet suffered when collaboration between Nijinska and librettist Cocteau collapsed. Garafola writes that contested issues included: (a) gender, Cocteau was said to entertain a &quot;dim view of women&quot; &quot;versus&quot; Nijinska&#x27;s unease with traditional femininity; (b) Cocteau&#x27;s story and gesture approach &quot;verses&quot; &#x27;abstract ballet&#x27; (Cocteau favored substituting out dance for pantomime, but Nijinska was satisfied with a plotless &quot;ballet&quot;); and, (c) the changing aesthetics of dance (Cocteau&#x27;s wholesale preference for acrobatics over dance, but which for Nijinska constituted a series of delicate judgments). Last minute changes were made. Nijinska&#x27;s choreography managed to present for the audience a sophisticated view of the beach ballet. Garafola suggests that here &quot;Only Nijinska had the technical wherewithal ... to wrest irony from the language and traditions of [classical dance].&quot;

&quot;Le train bleu&quot; anticipated the 1933 ballet &quot;Beach&quot;. &quot;Massine&#x27;s choreography, like Nijinska&#x27;s, was a stylization of sport motifs and different dance idioms within a structured balletic framework.&quot; The athletic dance scenes in both incorporated jazz movements. A half-century later, Nijinska&#x27;s 1924 choreography was reconstructed and revived.

===&#x27;Théâtre Chorégraphiques Nijinska&#x27;, England and Paris 1925===
====Leaving Diaghilev, start of her dance company====
January 1925 marked Nijinska&#x27;s departure from Ballets Russes. In part she left because of the grief she experienced when in the end Diaghilev had sided with Cocteau over &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot;. She wanted to lead her own company. Another reason was the 1924 arrival of the dynamic George Balanchine (1904-1983), with an experimental dance troupe from the Soviet Union. Diaghilev recognized his demonstrated talent and recruited him for Ballets Russes. Balanchine filled the choreographer position vacated by Nijinska.

In 1925 Nijinska found sufficient financing to form her ballet company: Théâtre Chorégraphiques Nijinska. It was a chamber ensemble that employed eleven dancers. The Russian avant-garde visual artist Alexandra Exter designed the costumes and sets. Nijinska had first met Exter in Kiev during war and revolution. It was a professional relationship that had continued as Nijinska choreographed for Ballets Russes. Nancy Van Doren Baer highly praised their collaboration, &quot;a most dramatic synthesis of the visual and the kinetic&quot;.

For her company, Nijinska choreographed six short ballets, and danced in five. She also staged four divertissements, dancing one solo.
For the 1925 summer season (August–October), her ballet company toured fifteen English resort towns and provincial cities. It then performed selections in Paris, at an international exhibition and for a gala program. &quot;Judged by any standard, the Théâtre Chorégraphiques offered dancing, choreography, music, and costume design of the highest order.&quot;

====&quot;Holy Etudes&quot;, an abstract ballet [Bach]====
Her first abstract ballet seen outside Russia, to J. S. Bach&#x27;s First and Fifth &quot;Brandenburg Concertos&quot;, was also the first ballet mounted to his music. The dancers wore identical tunics and capes made of silk, with halo-like headgear. &quot;Exter&#x27;s &#x27;uni-sex&#x27; costumes were revolutionary in their day.&quot; Yet, according to accounts, their simple and severe design &quot;added immeasurably to the broad flowing movement and stately rhythms of the choreography, suggesting androgynous beings moving in heavenly harmony.&quot;

Silk &quot;enhanced the ethereal quality of the ballet. The brilliant pink and bright orange capes hung straight from bamboo rods placed across the dancers&#x27; shoulders... .&quot; Baer further observes, &quot;By varying the levels, groupings, and facings of the dancers, Nijinska created a pictorial composition made up of moving and intersecting planes of color.&quot; As in &quot;Les noces&quot;, Nijinska called for dancing en pointe &quot;to elongate and stylize the line of the body&quot;.

Her short, abstract Bach ballet was one of those creations &quot;she cared most about.&quot; She continued to rework its choreography, and presented it in varying forms and under different titles: for Teatro Colón in 1926; for Ballets Nijinska in 1931, which continued to be staged throughout the 1930s; and in 1940 at the Hollywood Bowl.

====Five short modern pieces, four divertissements====
;i. &quot;Touring&quot; (or &quot;The Sports and Touring Ballet Revue&quot;).
Nijinska &quot;took contemporary forms of locomotion as her theme&quot;, with music by Francis Poulenc, costumes and set by Exter. &quot;Cycling, flying, horse-riding, carriage driving ... were all reduced to dancing.&quot; It further illustrated ballet&#x27;s reach to modern life, following her brother Vaslav Nijinsky&#x27;s &quot;Jeux&quot; of 1913, and her &quot;Les Biches&quot; and &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot; of 1924.

;ii. &quot;Jazz&quot;.
The music was Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s 1918 composition &quot;Ragtime&quot;. The composer writes it &quot;was indicative of the passion I felt at that time for jazz ... enchanting me by its truly popular appeal, its freshness, and the novel rhythm...&quot; Exter&#x27;s costumes followed an 1897 Russian performance of &quot;L&#x27;Africaine&quot;. In 1921 Exter had written about her fascination with &quot;interrelationship, co-intensity, rhythmization, and the transition to color construction...&quot; Nininska&#x27;s choreography, however, is lost. When children, she and her brother Vaslav had developed a friendship with two traveling African-American dance performers, house guests of their parents.

;iii. &quot;On the Road. A Japanese pantomime&quot;.
Based on a Kabuki story, with music by Leighton Lucas, and costumes by Exter. Nancy Van Norman Baer conjectures that it developed from a solo called &quot;Fear&quot; designed and danced by Nijinsky in Kiev in 1919, and inspired by the dynamic movements of a Samurai warrior. In discussion, Nijinska mentions a Japanese influence on her early choreographic works, one source being a collection of prints purchased in 1911.
;iv. &quot;Le Guignol&quot;
The title role is a character in a French puppet show, which became also a name for all puppet shows. Music by Joseph Lanner. It was later performed in 1926 at the Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires.

;v. &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot;.

An abbreviated version of her 1924 work for Ballets Russes. &quot;As in &quot;Holy Etudes&quot; and &quot;Les noces&quot;, Nijinska relied on the ensemble instead of using individual dancers to express the ballet-action.&quot;

;Four divertissements.

&quot;The Musical Snuff Box&quot; was a restating of the solo &quot;La Poupée&quot; first danced by Nijinska in Kiev. &quot;Trepak&quot; was her &quot;The Three Ivans&quot; that she had choreographed for Diaghilev&#x27;s &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; in London. The &quot;Mazurka&quot; to Chopin was from &quot;Les Sylphides&quot;. &quot;Polovetsian Dances&quot; was an ensemble for the entire company.

===Companies and exemplary ballets 1926–1930===
During these years, for various ballet companies (including Diaghilev&#x27;s in 1926) and for Teatro Colón in Argentina, Nijinska continued to choreograph and direct performances, and to dance.

====&#x27;Théâtre de l&#x27;Opéra&#x27; in Paris: &quot;Bien Aimée&quot; [or &quot;Beloved&quot;]====
At the Paris Opera Nijinska choreographed the ballet &quot;La Rencontres&quot; [The Encounters], libretto by Kochno, music by Sauguet. At the circus, Oedipus meets the Sphinx. In 1927 she presented there another new ballet, &quot;Impressions de Music-Hall&quot;. She also choreographed dances for several operas.

&quot;Bien Aimée&quot;, a one-act ballet in 1928, was choreographed by Nijinska, music from Schubert and Liszt, libretto and decor by Benois. The dancers included Ida Rubinstein and Anatole Vilzak. Its thin plot features a poet at the piano who reminisces about his departed Muse, and his youth. The ballet was revived by the Markova-Dolan company in 1937. Ballet Theatre in New York City arranged for Nijinska to stage its American premier in 1941/1942.

====Diaghilev&#x27;s &#x27;Ballets Russes&#x27; in Monte Carlo: &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;====
A new version of &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; with music by Constant Lambert premiered in 1926. The ballet impressed Massine, who saw it later in London. &quot;Nijinska&#x27;s choreography was an admirable attempt to express the poignancy of Shakespeare&#x27;s play in the most modern terms.&quot; At the end, the leading dancers Karsavina and Lifar, lovers in real life, &quot;eloped in an aeroplane&quot;. Max Ernst did design work, Balanchine an entr&#x27;acte. &quot;It seemed to me that this ballet was far in advance of its time,&quot; Massine later wrote.

====&#x27;Teatro Colón&#x27; in Buenos Aires: &quot;Estudio Religioso&quot;, choreographies for opera====
In 1926 Nijinska became choreographic director and principal dancer with Teatro Colón (Columbus Theater). Her active association with the Buenos Aires company would endure through 1946. Over a decade before, in 1913 the Ballets Russes had toured Buenos Aires, Montevideo, and Rio de Janeiro, but Nijinska then with child did not go. Nijinsky her brother did. In 1926 she found in Argentina &quot;an inexperienced but enthusiastic group of dancers,&quot; thirty in number, in a ballet organization newly founded by Adolph Bolm.

Nijinska staged &quot;Un Estudio Religioso&quot; to music by Bach in 1926, which she developed from her choreography &quot;Holy Etudes&quot; of 1925. At Teatro Colón she was able to expand the work into a presentation by a full company. She drew on innovative ideas she&#x27;d first developed in Kiev during war and revolution. In both these Bach ballets, there was no libretto, no plot.

This abstract ballet, inspired by the spirituality of the music, was choreographed to an arrangement of the six Brandenburg Concertos and was the first ballet to be mounted to the music of J. S. Bach.

In 1926 and 1927 for the Buenos Aires theater, Nijinska created dance scenes for fifteen operas, including Bizet&#x27;s &quot;Carmen&quot;, Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Tannhäuser&quot;, Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Aïda&quot; and &quot;La Traviata&quot;, Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Le Rossignol&quot;, Rimsky-Korsakov&#x27;s &quot;Tsar Saltan&quot;, Massenet&#x27;s &quot;Thaïs&quot;, and Gounod&#x27;s &quot;Faust&quot;. In 1927 for Teatro Colón, Nijinska directed ballet choreography created by Fokine for Ballets Russes: Ravel&#x27;s Daphnis et Chloë, and Stravinsky&#x27;s Petrouchka.

====&#x27;Ida Rubinstein Ballet&#x27; in Paris: &quot;Boléro&quot;, &quot;La Valse&quot;, &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot;====

The dancer Ida Rubinstein formed a ballet company in 1928, with Bronislava Nijinska named as its choreographer. Rubinstein quickly arranged for Maurice Ravel to compose music for her new dance enterprise. By luck or genius, one of Ravel&#x27;s pieces became popular immediately and famous. It has remained so to this day: his &quot;Boléro&quot;.

For Rubinstein, Nijinska choreographed the original &quot;Boléro&quot; ballet. In it she created an ambient scene around a large circular platform, surrounded by various individual dancers, who by turns hold the gaze. At times to the side several begin to dance and draw notice. Yet the ballet-action always returns to the center. Dramatic movements inspired by Spanish dance are yet abbreviated, understated, stylized.

Rubinstein herself had danced for Diaghilev in the early years of his company Ballets Russes. In the 1910 ballet Scheherazade she and Vaslav Nijinsky (Nijinska&#x27;s brother) both had leading roles. They danced together in a scene Nijinska called &quot;breathtaking&quot;. Rubinstein and Nijinsky also had partnered in the ballet &quot;Cléopâtre&quot; a year before in Paris for Ballets Russes. Rubinstein played the title role. The ballet was &quot;the runaway success of the 1909 season that made her an overnight star&quot;.

Following &quot;Bolero&quot; Rubinstein directed her company to prepare another ballet choreographed by Nijinska, with music by Ravel: his &quot;La valse&quot;. It opened in Monte Carlo in 1929, décor by Benois, featuring as dancers Rubinstein and Vilzak. The ballet was often revived, most famously in 1951 by Balanchine.

A ballet of &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot; [Kiss of the Fairy] originated when Ida Rubinstein asked Igor Stravinsky to compose music to be choreographed by Bronislava Nijinska. It would be staged in Paris in 1928. &quot;The idea was that I should compose something inspired by the music of Tchaikovsky,&quot; wrote Stravinsky. For a theme he chose Hans Christian Andersen&#x27;s &#x27;eerie&#x27; tale of The Ice-Maiden, but he changed the story with his positive spin: &quot;A fairy imprints her magic kiss on a [male] child at birth ... Twenty years later ... she repeats the fatal kiss and carries him off to live in supreme happiness with her...&quot; Stravinsky understood the fairy to be Tchaikovsky&#x27;s Muse whose kiss branded him with a &#x27;magic imprint&#x27; to inspire his music.

The composer Stravinsky conducted the orchestra for the ballet&#x27;s first performance at the Opéra in Paris in 1928. The dancers included Rubinstein, Ludmila Schollar, and Vilzak. &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot; played at other European capitals, and in 1933 and 1936/1937 at the Colón Theatre in Buenos Aires. In 1935 Ashton choreographed a new version that played in London, and in 1937 Balanchine did so for a version that played in New York.

====&#x27;Opéra Russe à Paris&#x27;: &quot;Capriccio Espagnol&quot; [Rimsky-Korsakov]====
This ballet company &#x27;Opéra Russe à Paris&#x27; was founded in 1925 by a Russian singer and her husband, a nephew of French composer Massenet. A company director and major figure was Wassily de Basil (the former Vassily Voskresensky, a Russian entrepreneur, and perhaps once a Cossack officer). Since Sergei Diaghilev&#x27;s death in 1929, followed by the collapse of his &#x27;Ballets Russes&#x27;, a discomforting void inhabited the world of European ballet.
Nijinska in 1930 joined &#x27;Opèra Russe à Paris&#x27; run by de Basil. She was &quot;to choreograph the ballet sequences&quot; in several well-known operas. She was also &quot;to create works for the all-ballet evenings that alternated with evenings of opera.&quot; Consequently, she created the ballet for Capriccio Espagnol by Russian composer Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. She also staged several of her previous ballet creations (&quot;Les noces&quot; and &quot;Les Biches&quot;) and other Ballets Russes fare of the Diaghilev era.

In 1931 she turned down an &quot;unusually generous&quot; offer from de Basil in order to start the company, &#x27;Ballets Nijinska&#x27;. She wanted to pursue projects independently, although she maintained her former working situation for a time longer. Latter in 1934 and 1935 she would again work with de Basil&#x27;s company.

René Blum (brother of the French politician Léon Blum) was then &quot;organizing the ballet seasons at the Casino de Monte Carlo.&quot; In 1931 he began talks with de Basil about combining ballet operations, hence the naissant company &#x27;Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo&#x27;. From de Basil would come &quot;dancers, repertory, scenery, and costumes&quot; and from Blum &quot;the theater and its facilities and financial support&quot;. A contract was signed in January 1932. &quot;From the beginning de Basil acted as impresario.&quot; Soon, however, Blum and de Basil fell out and in 1936 split, each forming his own company. Later in the 1940s Nijinska staged works for a successor to Blum&#x27;s half, then run by Sergei Denham.

===Her dance companies 1931–1932, 1932–1934===
During the early thirties, Nijinska formed and directed several ballet companies of her own. In 1934 misfortune came: a mistaken seizure of essential theatrical gear. This setback forced cancelation of her company&#x27;s autumn performance schedule. It led her to accept an offer to choreograph &#x27;free lance&#x27;, and then resume working for other companies.

====&#x27;Ballets Nijinska&#x27; in Paris: &quot;Etude-Bach&quot;, choreographies for Opéra-Comique====
In 1931, although continuing to stage dance productions for &#x27;Opera Russe à Paris&#x27; (see above), Nijinska began operating independently under her own name: &#x27;Ballets Nijinska&#x27;. Here she choreographed ballet pieces for operas performed at the Opéra-Comique of Paris, and at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées, where under auspices of the &#x27;Opera Russe&#x27; her &#x27;Ballets Nijinska&#x27; operated autonomously.

In 1931 her company staged &quot;Etude-Bach&quot; with Boris Belinsky&#x27;s decor and costumes, after Alexandra Exter. This was a new version of her 1925 &quot;Holy Etudes&quot; and her 1926 &quot;Un Estudio Religioso&quot;.

====&#x27;Théâtre de la Danse Nijinska&#x27; in Paris: &quot;Variations&quot; [Beethoven], &quot;Hamlet&quot; [Liszt]====

From 1932 to 1934 Nijinska directed her Paris-based company, &#x27;Théâtre de la Danse Nijinska&#x27;. A new ballet &quot;Variations&quot; was staged in 1932, inspired by Beethoven (a selection of his compositions). The dancers followed a difficult theme: the flux in the fate of nations (classical Greece, Russia under Alexander I, France during the early Second Empire). Choreographed primarily as ensemble dances and pantomime, the costumes and decor were by Georges Annenkov.

In 1934 she designed a ballet &quot;Hamlet&quot;, based on Shakespeare&#x27;s play, performed to music by Hungarian composer Franz Liszt. Nijinska played the title role. &quot;Her choreography, however, instead of retelling Shakespeare&#x27;s plot, emphasized the feelings of the tragedy&#x27;s tormented characters.&quot; Nijinska conceived &quot;three aspects for each of the protagonists&quot;. In addition to &quot;the real character&quot; there were &quot;characters representing his soul and his fate&quot; played &quot;by separate groups of dancers&quot; like &quot;a Greek chorus&quot;. A similar &quot;Hamlet&quot; ballet was later staged in London.

There were performances of two of her remarkable ballets from the mid-1920s, &quot;Les Biches&quot; in 1932, and in 1933 &quot;Les noces&quot;. Nijinska&#x27;s Théâtre de la Danse enjoyed ballet seasons in Paris and Barcelona, and toured France and Italy. The company&#x27;s 1934 season at the Théâtre du Châtelet featured the ballets &quot;Etude-Bach, La Princesse Cygne, Les Biches, Bolero, Les Comediens Jaloux,&quot; and &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot;.
In 1934 Nijinska joined her dance company to Wassily de Basil&#x27;s company Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. For the 1934 Opera and Ballet seasons, she directed the Monte Carlo productions of the combined companies in performances of her repertoire.

Later in 1934 &#x27;Théâtre de la Danse Nijinska&#x27; lost its costumes and sets when they were mistakenly seized, for the benefit of unpaid artists of another company, the &#x27;Opera Russe à Paris&#x27;. Although blameless, not until 1937 was Nijinska able to recover them.

Thus she was &quot;forced to cancel all Théâtre de la Danse engagements&quot; scheduled for its autumn tour of France and England. Her dancers then began to accept other work. Nijinska herself was offered a choreographing contract by a film producer, and so left Paris for Hollywood.

===Companies and ballets 1935–1938===

====Max Reinhardt&#x27;s Hollywood film: &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;====
In 1934 Max Reinhardt requested Nijinska to travel to Los Angeles and choreograph the dance scenes for his 1935 film &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;. It was a Hollywood recreation of the William Shakespeare comedy, with music by Felix Mendelssohn. Much of the music was taken from his two compositions about this Shakespeare play. The first was Mendelssohn&#x27;s 1826 concert overture, the second his 1842 incidental music, which incorporated the overture. Apparently Los Angeles agreed with Nijinska, for a few years later she would make it her permanent residence. In 1934 she designed the dances.

Nijinska&#x27;s incidental choreography for &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1935) was as imaginative and magical as everything else in that sumptuously produced film.&quot;

As a one-act ballet in Saint Petersburg &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; had been &quot;first choreographed by Marius Petipa in 1876&quot; and in 1902 by Mikhail Fokine, to Mendelssohn&#x27;s 1842 music. Other versions were later staged by Terpis (Berlin 1927), Balanchine (New York 1962), Ashton (London 1964), and Spoerli (Basle 1975). A staging of Fokine&#x27;s choreography, however, at the Imperial Theatrical School on March 26, 1906, was especially memorable for Nijinska. Not only did she dance in it, but the date marked a visit by her father after a long absence.

The 1935 film was not Nijinska&#x27;s first time in the employ of Max Reinhardt. The well-known impresario&#x27;s practice was to stage a variety of performance arts in theaters across Europe. In 1931, for a Reinhardt production in Berlin, Nijinska had created the ballet scenes for Offenbach&#x27;s opera The Tales of Hoffmann.

====de Basil&#x27;s &#x27;Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo&#x27;: &quot;Les Cent Baisers&quot;====
Nijinska choreographed &quot;Les Cent Baisers&quot; [The hundred kisses] in 1935 for de Basil&#x27;s company. This one-act ballet was set to music by Anglo-French composer Frédéric Alfred d&#x27;Erlanger. It opened in London at Covent Garden.

The libretto by Boris Kochno followed the literary fairy tale &quot;The swineherd and the princess&quot; created by Hans Christian Andersen. Here a disguised prince woos an arrogant princess. Nijinska&#x27;s choreography is considered one of her more classical. Yet she incorporated subtle variations from the usual academic steps, according to Irina Baronova who danced the role of the princess. It gave the piece a special feeling of the East. The prince was played by David Lichine.

====Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires: &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot;, Opera choreographies====
Nijinska had presented at Teatro Colón in 1933 her ballet &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot; [Kiss of the fairy], which she had first staged for Ida Rubinstein&#x27;s Company in 1928. It was based on Hans Christian Andersen&#x27;s 1861 fairy tale &quot;The Ice-Maiden&quot;. Yet, in recreating the tale, music composer Igor Stravinsky had changed the eerie maiden into a fruitful Muse, inverting Andersen&#x27;s original story in which the ice-maiden, disguised as a beautiful woman, attracts young men who are led to their death.

In 1937 Nijinska returned to Buenos Aires for a reprise performance of &quot;Le Baiser de la Fée&quot; at the Stravinsky Festival. Ballet choreography she also created for dance scenes in operatic works that played at Teatro Colón. Accordingly, Nijinska worked with the music of various composers, e.g., Mussorgsky, Verdi, de Falla, and Wagner.

====&#x27;Markova-Dolin Ballet&#x27; in London and Jamaica; (Markova later: &quot;Autumn Song&quot;)====
In 1937 Nijinska reprised her 1924 &quot;Les Biches&quot; for a performance by the Markova-Dolin troupe. &quot;For six months during 1937 the troupe was creatively bolstered by the presence of Nijinska, who took charge of rehearsals and classes in addition to staging &quot;Les Biches&quot; and &quot;La Bien-Aimée&quot;.&quot;

Alicia Markova was a leading ballerina of London. In 1935 she left the Vic-Wells ballet company of Ninette de Valois, where she had excelled in classical roles. She left to &quot;form the Markova-Dolin Company (1935–1938), with Bronislava Nijinsky as chief choreographer.&quot; Irish dancer Anton Dolin had worked with Ballets Russes starting in 1921. Later he was the &#x27;handsome swimmer&#x27; in Nijinska&#x27;s 1924 &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot;. During the 1930s he became a frequent dance partner of Markova. He joined American Ballet Theatre in 1940.

After the war, for the Markova-Dolin company Nijinska choreographed &quot;Fantasia&quot;, music by Schubert and Liszt. A one-act ballet it opened in 1947 at the Ward Theatre, Kingston, Jamaica. Costumes and decor were by Rose Schogel, principal dancers: Bettina Rosay and Anton Dolin.

In the 1930s Nijinska gave Alicia Markova &#x27;creative sessions&#x27; in ballet, including instructions for her own choreographies. In particular she taught Markova an early work of hers from Kiev: &quot;Autumn Song&quot; to music by Tchaikovsky. Nijinska had originally danced it barefoot wearing a tunic of her own design. In 1953 Markova performed this solo ballet for a variety show on NBC television.

====&#x27;Ballet Polonais&#x27; in Warsaw: &quot;Concerto de Chopin&quot;, &quot;La Légende de Cracovie&quot;====
In 1937 Nijinska was asked to become the artistic director and the choreographer for the newly recreated Balet Polski (aka Les Ballets Polonais, or The Polish Ballet). In the revival of this national ballet, among its chief aims: to advance the Polish dance heritage, to train new ballet professionals, and to perform internationally. She signed a 3-year contract. For the company&#x27;s 1937-1938 debut season, she created five new ballets: &quot;Le Chant de la Terre&quot;, &quot;Apollon et la Belle&quot;, &quot;Le Rappel&quot;, &quot;Concerto de Chopin&quot;, and &quot;La Légende de Cracovie&quot;.

For the Exposition Internationale in Paris, the five opened at the Théâtre de Mogador in November 1937. Well received, the Exposition awarded Ballet Polonais the Grand Prix for performance and Nijinska the Grand Prix for choreography. The ballet company then continued on to perform their prize-winning program chiefly in London, Berlin, and Warsaw, also touring other cities in Germany and in Poland.

For &quot;Le Chant de la Terre&quot; (&quot;Pieśń o ziemi naszej&quot;) [Song of the Earth], Nijinska drew in part on a recent folk festival in Vilna featuring dance. She also took inspiration from the drawings of Polish artist Zofja Stryjenska.
&quot;The first scene, &#x27;Little Saturday,&#x27; depicted the spring rituals of sun and fire worship...The customs of the Slavic wedding were represented in the second scene when the celebrants danced &#x27;wild Mazurkas and [steps] of the vital earth-stamping kind with complicated rhythms and...leaps in the air.&#x27;...The final scene, &#x27;Harvest,&#x27; had powerful choreographic images of the ceremonies surrounding the season&#x27;s harvest.&quot; In this powerful climax &quot;a wedge of dancers, wielding curved scythes in great arcing movements, carved their way diagonally across the stage.&quot;
Regarding her ballet &quot;Apollon et la Belle&quot; (&quot;Apolo i dziewczyna&quot;):
&quot;Nijinska ingeniously traced the incarnation of Apollo through five epochs of civilization. In each age, Nijinska&#x27;s Apollo encounters his counterpart, the Dionysian earth element, in the form of a woman.&quot; &quot;Program notes describe the incarnations of Apollo ranging from god of ancient Greece to athlete on a modern beach. In the first scene, Apollo is the celestial charioteer who must descend to earth to receive strength and purpose from the earth-mother feminine character. In successive scenes of inventive and sometimes humorous incarnations Apollo reappears in the guise of a medieval monk, Louis the XIV, a nineteenth-century poet, and finally as a modern-day champion of athleticism.&quot;

&quot;Le Rappel&quot; (&quot;Wezwanie&quot;) [The recall] &quot;begins in a Viennese ballroom of the eighteenth century, where a denationalized young Pole is enjoying the sophisticated society in which he finds himself. Yet the young woman whom he catches in a game of blind man&#x27;s buff is Polish. She recalls for him the simpler manners and the more demonstrative dances of their native countryside. ... A large corps de ballet supports the principals in producing the contrast of the two types of dance, the Viennese and the Polish.&quot;
The &quot;Concerto de Chopin&quot; &quot;follows no plot but tries to reflect the shifting moods of the music.&quot; Baer suggests that the ballet shows Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;feeling of longing, farewell, and sorrow that she had experienced on leaving Russia&quot; in 1921. About the &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; (as later performed in 1944), dance critic Edward Denby wrote of it as &quot;oddly beautiful ... because it is clear and classic to the eye but tense and romantic in its emotion.&quot;

The structure of the piece—like that of much of Mme Nijinska&#x27;s work—is based on a formal contrast: in the background, rigid impersonal groups or clusters of dancers, which seem to have the weight of statues; in the foreground, rapid arrowy flights performed by individual soloists. One appreciates their flashes of lightness and freedom because of the weight they seem to rise over, as if the constraints of the group were the springboard for the soloist&#x27;s release.

Nijinska also staged &quot;La Légend de Cracovie&quot;, &quot;a new ballet of high merit&quot; to music by Michal Kondracki. In plot it is &quot;a medieval Polish variation of the Faust story&quot;. In choreography she employed her &quot;celebrated group architecture&quot; but also fashioned roles open to character dance development. As described by French critic Pierre Michaut, &quot;Les héros et ses compagnons composaient leurs danses avec des éléments de folklore et avec des danses traditionelles polonaises, telles que la Cracovienne. Mais pas et figures étaient déformés, outrés, fortement accentués en burlesque, et ils devenaient une sorte de gesticulation frénétique et d&#x27;ailleurs expressive.&quot;

After Balet Polski&#x27;s 1937-1938 tour, which started with the Grand Prix performances in Paris, Nijinska was &quot;abruptly released&quot; from her leadership position. The cause of her dismissal, most likely according to Baer, was &quot;her insistence upon a full disclosure of the troupe&#x27;s financial records.&quot; Due to the increasing danger of military attack by neighboring countries, the Polish government apparently was seeking to covertly route some of its funds to America. &quot;Characteristically, Nijinska would have refused to become involved with politics or intrigue.&quot; She was replaced by Léon Wójcikowski.

With Ballets Russes since 1916 Leon Wójcikowski (1899-1975) had enjoyed prominent roles in Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;Les noces&quot;, &quot;Les Biches&quot;, and &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot; (as the Golfer). In 1939 he led the Ballet Polonais to the World&#x27;s Fair in New York. &quot;The company returned to Warsaw one day before the German invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939, and was never heard from again.&quot; Wójcikowski himself found work in the Americas during the war. Much later he helped in reconstructing Nijinska&#x27;s 1920s choreographies at Diaghilev&#x27;s &quot;Ballets Russes&quot;.

Yet for Nijinska then in 1938, in pre-invasion Poland, the going became more difficult. The &quot;shock of her dismissal&quot; and &quot;the impending war caused a profound depression.&quot;

===Ballet companies and exemplary ballets 1939–1950s===
Nijinska and her family were in London when World War II started with the combined Nazi and Soviet invasion of Poland (September 1939). She had a contract to &quot;co-direct the dance sequences on a new film, &quot;Bullet in the Ballet&quot;,&quot; but it was cancelled due to war. Fortunately, an offer from promoter de Basil allowed them to make their way back to the United States. She eventually established a new residence in Los Angeles.

====&#x27;Ballet Theatre&#x27; in New York: &quot;La Fille Mal Gardée&quot; of Dauberval====
Nijinska in 1939 began to choreograph a &quot;rustic and comic&quot; two-act ballet of the 18th century, Jean Dauberval&#x27;s &quot;La fille mal gardée&quot; [&#x27;The ill-watched Daughter&#x27; or &#x27;Useless Precautions&#x27;]. For the inaugural season of Ballet Theatre (now ABT), it opened in January 1940 in New York City at the old Center Theatre in Rockefeller Plaza.
&quot;La Fille Mal Gardée&quot; is perhaps &quot;the oldest ballet in the contemporary repertory&quot; whose &quot;comic situations are no doubt responsible for its survival.&quot; Jean Dauberval wrote the libretto and first choreography, the original music being a mix of popular French songs. Premiering at Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux in 1789, the comedy &quot;quickly made the circuit of European stages.&quot; Later in 1864 Taglioni&#x27;s production in Berlin first adopted composite music scored by Hertel, which in 1885 was adopted by Petipa and Ivanov for the Maryinski Theater in Saint Petersburg.

Dauberval&#x27;s plot follows a lively rural romance, the lovers being &quot;the mind-of-her-own Lise and the hard-to-resist Colas&quot;. They are challenged by Lise&#x27;s mother the widow Simone, who prefers Allain, a wealthy but dull suitor.

&quot;In America the most important production was Nijinska&#x27;s for Ballet Theatre in 1940.&quot; Lucia Chase had invited her to mount her own version, which incorporated decor from Mordkin (his company had merged with Ballet Theatre). Nijinska took to revising Petipa&#x27;s Russian version of &quot;La Fille Mal Gardée&quot; and staged the ballet with Irina Baronova and Dimitri Romanoff. This 1940 staging was soon revived, once as &quot;The Wayward Daughter&quot;, with later versions by Romanoff, and in 1946 by Alexandra Balashova. Eventually it entered the repertory of the Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas.

Twenty years later in London, Nijinska&#x27;s former student Frederick Ashton of The Royal Ballet staged it. He refashioned the Dauberval libretto, wrote his choreography to Hertel&#x27;s music as modified by Lanchbery, and provided a revised decor. The result was a popular, and declared a &quot;substantial work&quot;.

Also for Ballet Theatre, in 1951 Nijinska choreographed and staged the &quot;Schumann Concerto&quot;, music by Robert Schumann, with Alicia Alonso and Igor Youskevitch as principal dancers. The music&#x27;s romantic mood frames the abstract ballet in three movements. The couple is joined by a &quot;corps de ballet&quot; of boys and girls. In 1945 Nijinska had choreographed &quot;Rendezvous&quot; with music by Sergei Rachmaninoff (1873-1943), with principal dancers Lucia Chase and Dimitri Romanoff. Both were staged for Ballet Theatre at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City.

==== &#x27;Hollywood Bowl&#x27;: &quot;Boléro&quot;, &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot;, &quot;Etude-Bach&quot;; and Jacob&#x27;s Pillow ====

Later in 1940 she staged three short ballets for a performance at the Hollywood Bowl. For the program with the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra she selected favorites from among her prior choreographies: Ravel&#x27;s &quot;Boléro&quot; (premiered with Rubinstein in 1932, revised), the &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; (from 1937 with the Polish Ballet), and &quot;Etude-Bach&quot; (originally &#x27;Holy Etudes&#x27; done for her own company in 1925, revisions). The event drew an audience of 22,000, and featured dancers Maria Tallchief and Cyd Charisse.

Nijinska revived &quot;Etude-Bach&quot; and &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; again, in 1942, at the Jacob&#x27;s Pillow Dance Festival in the Berkshires. There the cast included dancers Nina Youshkevitch, Marina Svetlova, and Nikita Tallin; while Ann Hutchinson Guest danced in the corps.

====&#x27;Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo&#x27; under Denham in New York: &quot;Snow Maiden&quot;.====
Nijinska choreographed &quot;Snow Maiden&quot; in 1942 with music by Glazunov, for &#x27;Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo&#x27; under Serge Denham as Artistic Director. &quot;Snow Maiden&quot; drew on Russian folklore. The maiden, the Frost King&#x27;s daughter, would melt in the sun&#x27;s heat if she fell in love with a mortal man. The choreography &quot;did not open any new avenues of artistic exploration.&quot; Yet critic Edwin Denby notes that &quot;by preserving just enough independence of rhythm in relation to the sugary Glazounoff score [her groupings and dance phrases] keep a certain acid edge.&quot;

A revision of the &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; was staged by Nijinska also in 1942. Originally written in 1937 for the award-winning Polish Ballet, the influential &quot;New York Times&quot; dance critic John Martin ranked it highly. Yet he considered Chopin (and Tchaikovsky) as no longer current. In 1943 Nijinska choreographed the &quot;Ancient Russia&quot; ballet, music by Tchaikovsky, with memorable visual designs by her theater colleague Nathalie Gontcharova.

For Denham&#x27;s company Nijinska and Balanchine &quot;were well-known choreographers on whom he could call.&quot; It was, however, &quot;not Nijinska but another woman-an American-who revitalized the Ballets Russes in 1942. Agnes de Mille [did it with her] &quot;Rodeo&quot;...&quot;

====&#x27;Ballet International&#x27; in New York: &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;====
During the 1940s and into the 1950s, Nijinska served as the ballet mistress for the International Ballet, later known variously, e.g., the Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas. The company played chiefly in Europe and the Mediterranean until 1961.

In 1944 for an opening at the International Theater in New York she choreographed &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, an 1874 suite of piano pieces by Modest Mussorgsky, later orchestrated by Maurice Ravel, and by Ivan Boutnikov. Mussorgsky wrote no ballet music, but two of his compositions inspired Nijinska: &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot; (Ballets Russes 1924), and here &quot;Pictures&quot;.

Costumes and decor were by Boris Aronson. Aronson was an apprentice of Aleksandra Ekster, Nijinska&#x27;s designer in Kiev and Paris. Evidently Nijinska was the first to choreograph &quot;Pictures&quot;. The next ballet to this music was staged by Erika Hanka at the Vienna State Opera (1947), and then by Lopokov at the Bolshoi in Moscow (1963).

In 1952 also for Marquis de Cuevas&#x27; Grand Ballet de Monte Carlo, Nijinska choreographed &quot;Rondo Capriccioso&quot;. Composed in 1863 by Saint-Saëns, it was originally crafted for the virtuoso violinist Pablo de Sarasate. The 1952 ballet by Nijinska opened in Paris at the Théâtre de l&#x27;Empire, with principal dancers Rosella Hightower and George Skibine.

===Ballet companies: revivals of her early choreographies 1960–1971===
====&#x27;Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas&#x27; in New York: &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot;====

In 1960 the Cuevas Ballet produced a revision of &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot;, which was to have been staged by Nijinska. She was familiar with the ballet from Diaghilev&#x27;s production of 1921. For it she had created several popular dances. In 1922 she and Stravinsky abbreviated it into the successful one-act ballet &quot;Aurora&#x27;s Wedding&quot;.

Long associated with the Cuevas company as ballet mistress, Nijinska began to craft her choreographic revision. A conflict, however, developed over the ballet which involved artistic issues. In discussions she declined to compromise. Nijinska withdrew from the company. Robert Helpmann then came into the process. A dancer, he had also staged ballets, and had long partnered with Fonteyn, namely in The Royal Ballet&#x27;s post-war &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot;. In the end the Cuevas company gave its choreographic credit to both, as Nijinska-Helpmann.

====&#x27;The Royal Ballet&#x27; of London: &quot;Les Biches&quot; and &quot;Les noces&quot;====
In 1964 Frederick Ashton of The Royal Ballet asked Nijinska to stage a revival of her ballet &quot;Les Biches&quot; (1924) at Covent Gardens. Ashton had been resident choreographer for The Royal Ballet since 1935. Then becoming also an associate director in 1952, he was appointed the Royal Ballet&#x27;s director in 1963.

Nijinska first mentored Ashton&#x27;s career from when he was a young ballet student. In 1928 in Paris she&#x27;d been the choreographer for Ida Rubenstein, where he&#x27;d become a dancer in the company. He performed in several of choreographed works by Nijinska under her guidance. Ashton consider her a beneficial influence in the development of ballet. More specifically, her choreography had informed his own progress in that art. The staging of the revived &quot;Les Biches&quot; went well. Two years later, Ashton asked her to return to London and stage her &quot;Les noces&quot; (1923) on his company.

These 1964 London productions, according to dance critic Horst Koegler, &quot;confirmed her reputation as one of the formative choreographers of the 20th century.&quot; In 1934 Ashton had expressed his own opinion:

Her achievements have proved to me time and again that through the medium of classical ballet any emotion may be expressed. She might be called the architect of dancing, building her work brick by brick into the amazing structures that result in masterpieces like &quot;Les noces&quot;.

====Other stagings: &quot;Brahms Variations&quot;, &quot;Le Mariage d&#x27;Aurore&quot;, &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot;====
Following these London events, Nijinska &quot;was repeatedly invited to revive several of her ballets&quot;. She staged &quot;Les Biches&quot; in Rome in 1969, and in Florence and Washington in 1970. Also &quot;Les Biches,&quot; and a revised version of &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; and &quot;Brahms Variations&quot;, for the Center Ballet of Buffalo in 1969.

&quot;Les noces&quot; was staged in 1971 in Venice, where during a rehearsal at the Teatro Fenice, she celebrated her eightieth birthday onstage. &quot;Between 1968 and 1972, Nijinska saw performances of &quot;Les Biches&quot;, &quot;Les noces&quot;, &quot;Brahms Variations&quot;, &quot;Le Mariage d&#x27;Aurore&quot;, and &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; for ballet companies in the United States and in Europe.&quot;

====Irina Nijinska&#x27;s further revivals, and others====

After her death in 1972, her daughter Irina Nijinska (1913-1991) continued this work. A growing number of performances of her mother&#x27;s early ballets were performed. Several entered into the current repertoire of dance companies. Included were works first produced by Ballets Russes.

Irina, a dancer in her own right, had been helping her mother for many years, at her ballet school and as her rehearsal assistant. During the 1970s and 1980s, Irina advanced her legacy. She edited and translated &quot;Early Memoirs&quot; and saw it to publication. In the theatrical world Irina Nijinska associated with ballet companies to facilitate revivals of the choreographies. &quot;Les noces&quot; and &quot;Les Biches&quot; increasingly appeared on stage.

Among others, Irina brought &quot;Les noces&quot; to The Paris Opera Ballet, and &quot;Rondo Capriccioso&quot; to the Dance Theater of Harlem. In collaboration with a dance historian, the French Riviera comedy &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot; was reconstructed; then it was staged by the Oakland Ballet. In 1981 the Dance Theatre of Harlem under Arthur Mitchell &quot;produced an entire Nijinska evening&quot;. After Irina&#x27;s passing in 1991, the Nijinska revivals continued.

Ballerina Nina Youshkevitch, a Nijinska dancer (e.g., at the Jacob&#x27;s Pillow Dance Festival in 1942), revived &quot;Bolero&quot; for the Oakland Ballet in 1995. She also staged &quot;Chopin Concerto&quot; for students at Goucher College in Maryland that same year.

===Commentary by critics, academics, herself===
Instead, she preferred the pre-war Diaghilev who had been &quot;searching for the creation of a new ballet...&quot; Hence regarding &quot;The Sleeping Princess&quot; Nijinska recalled the paradox that &quot;I started my first work full of protest against myself.&quot; &quot;Because she stemmed from the academic ballet tradition, Bronislava Nijinska is often called a Neo-Classicist. But her choreography also has an affinity to such styles of modern art as Cubism, Constructivism and Expressionism.&quot; Over the course of her career Nijinska, in her effort to augment classical ballet with new ideas about the art of movement, neither crossed over to champion a newly fashioned modernity, nor did she accept as timelessly classic the inherited ballet tradition. She declined her brother Nijinsky&#x27;s turn to modern dance. Instead, following the new insights into movement, she initiated &quot;what would be called neoclassical choreography&quot;. She eventually came to admire Petipa&#x27;s work, while pruning its &quot;nondance elements&quot;. A &quot;renewable legacy was at the heart of Nijinska&#x27;s classicism&quot;. As &quot;one of the twentieth-century ballet&#x27;s great innovators ... her repertoire introduced a new classicism that made dance a medium of modern art expression.&quot; Her &quot;Les noces&quot; (1923) bridged the contemporary tensions &quot;between primitivism and mechanization, exoticism and neoclassicism, Russianess and cosmopolitanism, Soviet and émigré. ... The ability of &quot;Les noces&quot; to negotiate so many different boundaries ... accounts in no small measure for its timely, as well as timeless success.&quot;

==Based in Los Angeles, from 1940==
After the start in 1939 of World War II in Europe, Nijinska and her family moved to New York in that October, then to Los Angeles in 1940. &quot;Bronislava Nijinska did not understand Americans, or they her. She was almost deaf by the time she reached the United States, and life (exile, her brother&#x27;s madness, her son&#x27;s death) had let her down badly.&quot;

Yet she continued as a ballet mistress and guest choreographer, work that continued into the 1960s (see section above). In Los Angeles she began to teach ballet in a private studio, and she opened her own school in 1941. Her daughter Irina Nijinska would run the school in her absence. Bronislava became a citizen of the United States in 1949.

===Teaching dance===
Throughout her career, starting earlier than her 1919 &#x27;L&#x27;Ecolé de Mouvement&#x27; in Kiev, Nijinska had taught dance. A ballet role to her colleagues she&#x27;d demonstrate, or to the cast her newly created choreographies. In 1922 she had started teaching at Ballets Russes, taking over from Enrico Cecchetti. Among her earlier students: Serge Lifar in revolutionary Kiev; Anton Dolin, Lydia Sokolova, Frederick Ashton, Alicia Markova, Irina Baronova, David Lichine in interwar Europe; Lucia Chase in New York. Her auditions in the 1930s were conducted in the form of a short class.

In 1935 rehearsals for &quot;Les Cent Baisers&quot;, choreographer Nijinska coached the youthful Irina Baronova in her leading role as the Princess. Already relatively widely experienced in ballet performance, Baronova was developing rapidly into a modern classical ballerina. According to author Vicente García-Márquez, however, Nijinska was key.

Working with Nijinska was a turning point in her artistic growth. Before she had never had the opportunity for careful dissection of her roles. Nijinska&#x27;s approach ... gave the sixteen-year-old Baronova the self-awareness she needed to probe into herself and bring forth her full potential.

In New York Nijinska was invited to come teach in Hollywood. She eventually opened her own ballet studio there in 1941. Required to travel afar to pursue her choreographic work, she frequently left her daughter Irina Nijinska in charge. At her Hollywood studio (soon relocated to Beverly Hills), students included the prima ballerinas Maria Tallchief and Marjorie Tallchief (sisters), as well as Cyd Charisse, and later Allegra Kent.
Maria Tallchief (1925-2013) studied with Nijinska, &quot;all through my high school years&quot;. Everyone, recalled Tallchief, was in awe of her. &quot;She jumped and flashed around the studio. I was under her spell.&quot; Despite &quot;luminous green eyes&quot; she dressed very plainly. Her husband translated. &quot;Madame say when you sleep, sleep like a ballerina. Even on street waiting for bus, stand like a ballerina.&quot; Yet &quot;Madame Nijinska rarely spoke. She didn&#x27;t have to. She had incredible personal magnetism&quot;. From her &quot;I first learned that the dancer&#x27;s soul is in the middle of the body&quot;. When Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo came to perform in Los Angeles, the ballet dancers came to Madame to take lessons. &quot;And the biggest star of all, Alexandra Danilova, gave Nijinska roses when she entered the studio&quot;.

Allegra Kent (born 1937) recalls starting ballet lessons in 1949 when she was twelve. Madame Nijinska was a &quot;nice-looking woman in black lounge pajamas with a long cigarette holder&quot;. She counted time &quot;ras, va, tri&quot; in Russian. &quot;Her husband was simultaneously translating everything she said into English.&quot; Because of her commanding presence in classes, &quot;The world began and ended right there in that moment.&quot; After a year with her daughter Irina Nijinska, Kent studied with &#x27;Madame&#x27; herself. She learned &quot;not to fear competing with men&quot; and that &quot;the light look of dance was merely the surface of a sculpture-there was a mixture of steel and quicksilver at the heart.&quot;

===Work on her &quot;Memoirs&quot;===
The last year of her life Nijinska devoted to finishing memoirs about her early life. She had notebooks of her writings and had kept theatrical programs throughout her career. A manuscript of 180,000 words was left completed. Following her death in early 1972, Bronislava Nijinska&#x27;s daughter Irina Nijinska was named her literary executor. Then she and Jean Rawlingson edited and translated the Russian manuscript into English. They edited the text, and saw it through to publication. The book &quot;Early Memoirs&quot; appeared in 1981. These writings describe in detail her early years traveling in provincial Russia with her dancer parents, her brother Vaslav&#x27;s development as a dancer, her schooling and first years as a professional in the Diaghilev era of Russian ballet, and her work assisting her brother in his choreography. During her life, she had published a book and several articles on ballet.

&quot;The full autobiographical story of her own career, however, is contained in another set of her memoirs, continuing from the 1914 close of [her &quot;Early Memoirs&quot;].&quot; She also left a set of notebooks on ballet and other writings, which remain unpublished. Dance historian and critic Lynn Garafola is said to be currently working on a biography of Bronislava Nijinska.

==As described by others==

Margaret Severn, a dancer who did both vaudeville and classical, was for a time in 1931 a leading dancer in Nijinska&#x27;s Paris-based company. Sometimes she&#x27;d abbreviate Nijinska as &quot;Nij&quot;. Later she wrote an article from her notes at the time:

&quot;I was very favorably impressed with [Nijinska] personality. She is somewhat crazy, of course, but really a great artist. I could tell from the little she showed, and she had a marvelous technique herself. So I would simply adore to be in the company...&quot; &quot;Nij arranged a very short but very snappy little dance for me in the &#x27;Variations&#x27;. ... [T]his half minute is quite likely to bring the house down. ... The dance is one of the most brilliant and most difficult concoctions I have ever seen.&quot;
Lydia Sokolova, an English ballerina, performed in Ballets Russes from 1913 to 1929. Circa 1920 she married Leon Woizikovsky, also a dancer in the company. Her memoirs were edited by Richard Buckle and published in London in 1960.

&quot;Bronislava Nijinska, known as Bronia, was very like her brother Vaslav Nijinsky. She was blonde and wore her straight hair screwed into a tight little roll. She had pale eyes and pouting lips, wore no makeup at all and had not shaved off her eyebrows as most of us had in those days. ... Bronia was obstinate and once she had made up her mind nothing in the world would move her. She was brilliantly clever and inventive. No music seemed to present any difficulties for her, but her style of movement was even more pronounced and idiosyncratic than that of Massine, and she was not an easy person to work for in class or at rehearsal ... Her system of training seemed to depend more on improvisation than on traditional methods of technique ... [T]o watch her devise a sequence of steps and movements for one of her ballets was most interesting. I liked her, in spite of her moodiness and lack of humor.&quot; &quot;There were two of us in the company whom Diaghilev could always make cry whenever he wished, Nijinska and myself.&quot;

As one of the three Russian baby ballerinas the teenager Irina Baronova worked with Nijinska the choreographer in the mid-1930s. She later described the experience.

The ideas were clear from the very beginning; and even though there was obviously a prearranged structure, once she was in the studio she involved the dancers in the creative process. ... Her choreography seemed to flow spontaneously. Even when she was improvising, she always projected the conviction that she knew her ultimate goals, for she was precise and direct in her explanations.

==Personal, family life==
===Mother and father===

After her parents separated, Vaslav had turned against his father Tomasz [Foma] Nijinsky, because of his infidelity. Bronislava, however, remained attached to her absent father, who visited from time to time. She followed his career, championing his times of subsequent success in ballet. With Tomasz her mother eventually reached some understanding. In 1912 her father died in Russia. Her oldest brother Stanislav (Stassik), by a doctor&#x27;s instructions placed in a sanitariums since 1902, died in Russia in 1918.

In 1921 Nijinska with her mother Eleanora Bereda Nijinska and her two children left Russia, a perilous undertaking. They made their way to Austria, to meet her brother, his wife, and children. Nijinska then rejoined Ballets Russes, chiefly in Paris and Monte Carlo, until 1925. Thereafter she worked independently, often on tour. Throughout Bronislava remained close to her mother the retired dancer whom she called &quot;Mamusia&quot;. She wrote her when away and shared her thoughts when near. She cared for her when ill, until she died in 1932.

===Her brother Vaslav===
During her early years and into her mid-twenties, Bronislava Nijinsky was under the strong influence of her older brother Vaslav Nijinsky, whose brilliance became widely celebrated. Both Vatsa and Broni were trained from the start by their dancer parents. She learned from her brother&#x27;s example, as he preceded her in their childhood adventures, in ballet school, and then on the stage. When Nijinsky came to design his first choreographies, Nijinska as a ballet dancer assisted, following his detailed instructions as he tried out new steps and innovative poses. Her 1912 marriage, however, shook the artistic &quot;bond between the brother and sister&quot;. Bronia nonetheless continued her sibling loyalty. She showed her support for Vaslav&#x27;s career, especially during his 1914 production of &quot;Season Nijinsky&quot; in London.

In 1913 Vaslav married Romola de Pulszky suddenly while in Argentina. It was a confounding surprise to his mother and sister. In 1917 his ballet career ended in confusion and controversy. Thereafter he lived with Romola and their children in Switzerland for many years. He died in Sussex, UK, in 1950. Vaslav was survived by his wife and by Kyra and Tamara, their two daughters; and by Tamara&#x27;s daughter, and by Kyra&#x27;s son Vaslav Markevitch. In 1931 Kyra had danced in her aunt Bronia&#x27;s company &#x27;Ballets Nijinska&#x27;.

===Marriages, children===
Nijinska married twice. Her first husband, Alexandre Kochetovsky, was a fellow dancer for Ballets Russes. She calls him &#x27;Sasha&#x27; in her &quot;Early Memoirs&quot;. Married in London in 1912, they soon left for Russia. She gave birth to two children: their daughter Irina Nijinska in 1913 in Saint Petersburg (called &#x27;Irushka&#x27;), and Leon Kochetovsky, their son in 1919 in Kiev (called &#x27;Levushka&#x27;). Their marriage had entered difficult times, first during war and then in revolution. They continuously had worked together in dance productions. After Leon was born, Bronia and Sasha separated. He moved to Odessa. In 1921 Nijinska left Soviet Russia with her children and her mother. After meeting again briefly in 1921 in London, they were divorced in 1924. Their son Leon was killed in a traffic accident in 1935. Their daughter Irina, who&#x27;d become a ballet dancer, was seriously injured in that 1935 traffic collision. In 1946 Irina married Gibbs S. Raetz, and they had two children, Natalie and George. After her mother&#x27;s death in 1972, she edited her &quot;Memoirs&quot; and managed revivals of her ballets. Irina died in 1991.

A love of her life, but whom she did not marry, was also a theatrical personality, the Russian opera singer and renowned basso, Feodor Chaliapin (1873–1938). Their career paths had crossed several times, but for a romance to blossom their circumstances worked against them. Yet their strong artistic link and mutual admiration continued. He remained a treasured source of her musical and theatrical inspiration.

Nijinska&#x27;s second marriage in 1924 was to Nicholas Singaevsky (called &#x27;Kolya&#x27;). A few years her junior, he&#x27;d been a former student and dancer at the &#x27;Ecole de Mouvement&#x27; she had founded in Kiev following the Russian Revolution. He, too, had left Russia. They met again as exiles in Monte Carlo. He became associated with Ballets Russes as a dancer. They were married in 1924. During their four decades together, he often worked in production and management, acting as her business partner in staging her various ballet productions and other projects. In America he also translated for her, especially when she taught at the ballet studio. He died in Los Angeles, California, in 1968, four years before her.

Bronislava Nijinska died on February 21, 1972, in Pacific Palisades, California, after suffering a heart attack. She was 81. She was survived by her daughter, son-in-law, and two grandchildren.

===In fine arts===
On 11 June 2011, a sculpture of the Polish/Russian dancers Vaslav Nijinsky and his sister Bronislava Nijinska was unveiled at the Teatr Wielki, its foyer. See photograph at start of this article. They are portrayed in their roles as Faun and Nymph from the ballet &quot;L’après-midi d’un faune&quot;. Commissioned by the Polish National Ballet, the sculpture was made in bronze by Ukrainian sculptor Giennadij Jerszow.

==See also==
*Buffalo Ballet Theater
*:Category:Ballets by Bronislava Nijinska
*List of dancers
*List of Russian ballet dancers
*Polish National Ballet

==Bibliography==
===Primary===
*Bronislava Nijinska, &quot;On Movement and the School of Movement&quot; from her choreographic notebooks 1919-1925, as translated from Russian original by Anya Lem and Thelwall Proctor, edited by Joan Ross Acocella and Lynn Garafola, text in Baer (1986), pp. 85–87 [cf. p. 88, nn1+3], and apparently in &quot;Ballet Review&quot;, 13/4 (Winter 1986), [cited by Garafola (1989), p. 203, n10]. An &quot;abbreviated and highly revised version&quot; [according to Baer (1986), p. 88, n3] in &quot;Schrifttanz&quot;, Wien 1930. Also: edited by Valerie Preston-Dunlop and Susanne Lahusen in &quot;Schrifttanz: A view of German dance in the Weimar Republic&quot; (London: Dance Books 1990) [cited by Garafola (1989), p. 203, n7].
*Bronislava Nijinska, &quot;Reflections about the production of &quot;Les Biches&quot; and &quot;Hamlet&quot; in Markova-Dolin ballets&quot;, translated by Lydia Lopokova for &quot;Dancing Times&quot; (Feb. 1937), p. 617, [cited by Baer (1986), p. 103].
*Bronislava Nijinska, &quot;Creation of &quot;Les noces&quot;&quot;, translated by Jean M. Serafetinides and Irina Nijinska, for &quot;Dance Magazine&quot;, (Dec. 1974) v.48/no.12, pp. 558–61, [cited by Baer (1986), p. 103].
*Bronislava Nijinska, &quot;The Triumph of Petipa&quot;, in A. Nekhendzi, ed., &quot;Marius Petipa. Materialny, Vospominania, Stat&#x27;i&quot; (Leningrad: Leningrad State Theater Museum, no date), v.I, p. 317, [cited by Garafola (2005), p. 203, n3]. 
*Bronislava Nijinska, &quot;Early Memoirs&quot; (New York: Holt Rinehart Winston 1981; reprint 1992, Duke University), translated and edited by Irina Nijinska and Jean Rawlinson, with an Introduction by and in consultation with Anna Kisselgoff. 
**Irina Nijinska, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska: Highlights of Choreographic Career&quot; at pp. 519–523 in Nijinska (1981).
**Holly Brubach, &quot;A Life in Dance&quot;, book review of Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;Early Memoirs&quot;, in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Sep 20, 1981. Accessed 2017-04-28.

===Secondary===
;Biographies
*Nancy Van Norman Baer, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska. A dancer&#x27;s legacy&quot; (Fine Arts Museum of San Francisco 1986).
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;La Nijinska: Choreographer of the Modern&quot; (Oxford University 2022).
;Articles
*Joan Acocella, &quot;Nijinsky/Nijinska Revivals: The Rite Stuff,&quot; in &quot;Art in America,&quot; October 1991, pp. 128–137 and 167-171.
*Joan Acocella, &quot;Secrets of Nijinsky&quot; in &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, Jan. 14, 1999. Accessed 2017-05-11.
*Jack Anderson, &quot;Preserving Nijinska&#x27;s Ballets. A family affair&quot; in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, August 18, 1991&quot;. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Jack Anderson, &quot;Irina Nijinska, 77, champion of her mother&#x27;s work, is dead&quot;, in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, July 4, 1991&#x27;. Acc&#x27;d 2018-1-18.
*Jack Anderson, &quot;Dance: Spoleto Festival: Nijinska&#x27;s &#x27;Les noces&#x27;&quot;, in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, June 5, 1982. Accessed 2017-6-28,
*Jack Anderson, &quot;La Nijinska&quot; in &quot;The Dancing Times&quot; (April 1972).
*Jack Anderson. &quot;The Fabulous Career of Bronislava Nijinska&quot; in &quot;Dance Magazine&quot;, August 1963, pp. 40–46.
*Lisa C.Arkin. &quot;Bronislava Nijinska and the Polish Ballet, 1937-1938: Missing Chapter of the Legacy,&quot; in &quot;Dance Research Journal,&quot; 24/2, (Fall 1992), pp. 1–16.
*Nancy Van Norman Baer (NVB), &quot;Bronislava Nijinska&quot; at pp. 214–220 in Carnes, editor, &quot;Invisible Giants: Fifty Americans... &quot; (Oxford University 2002).
*Alexandre Benois, &quot;On the origins of Ballets Russes&quot; (1944), in Kochno (1970), pp. 2–21.
*R. C. Elwood, &quot;Nijinska, Bronislava (1891–1972)&quot;, in Anne Commire, ed., &quot;Women in World History&quot; (Gale 2002). Acc&#x27;d 2017-04-29.
*Drue Fergison, &quot;Bringing &quot;Les noces&quot; to the Stage&quot; in Garafola and Baer (1999).
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;An amazon of the avant-garde: Bronislava Nijinska in revolutionary Russia&quot; in &quot;Dance Research&quot; (2011/2012), vol.29, pp. 109–166.
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;Choreography by Nijinska&quot; at pp. 194–204 in her &quot;Legacies of twentieth-century dance&quot; (2005).
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;Rivals for the New. The Ballets Suédois and the Ballets Russes&quot; in Baer, editor, &quot;Paris Modern. The Swedish Ballet 1920-1925&quot; (San Francisco: Fine Arts Museum 1996).
*Marina Harss, &quot;Revisiting &#x27;The Fairy&#x27;s kiss&#x27;, a ballet about an artist&#x27;s destiny&quot;, in &quot;New York Times&quot;, Feb. 7, 2017. Acc&#x27;d 2017-6-28.
*Ruth Eleanor Howard, &quot;Nijinska Visits America: The Sister of the Great Nijinsky Is Interviewed,&quot; in &quot;The American Dancer,&quot; July 1935.
*Robert Johnson. &quot;Ritual and Abstraction in Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;Les noces&quot;,&quot; in &quot;The Dance Chronicle,&quot; Vol. 10, Number 2, 1987, pp. 147–169.
*Robert Johnson, &quot;Go Russes, Young Man,&quot; in Ballet Review, 37.4, Winter 2009/10, pp. 34–42.
*Anna Kisselgoff, &quot;Nijinska, in her time, was a ballet avant gardist&quot; in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, May 11, 1986. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Anna Kisselgoff, &quot;Dance: The 1923 Nijinska-Stravinsky &#x27;Les noces&#x27;&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Dec. 15, 1984. Accessed 2017-6-28.
*Anna Kisselgoff, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska is dead at 81&quot;, obituary in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, February 23, 1972. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Valerie Lawson, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska - &#x27;downright difficult and determined&#x27;&quot;, at Dancelines website (2011). Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Dawn Lille, &quot;Dance: Nijinska, Stravinsky, &quot;Les noces&quot;, Juilliard&quot; in &quot;Art Times Journal&quot; (May/June 2011). Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Maureen E. Maryanski, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska (1891–1972)&quot;, in &quot;Dance Heritage Coalition&quot;, 2013. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Carmen Paris &amp; Javier Bayo, &quot;Nijinska, Bronislava (1891-1972)&quot;, in MCNBiografías. Accessed 2018-4-6.
*Maria Ratanova, &quot;The choreographic avant-garde in Kyiv 1916-1921: Bronislava Nijinska &amp; her Ecole de Mouvement&quot; in Makaryk &amp; Tkacz (2010).
*Octavio Roca, &quot;Passion, Possession in Stunning &quot;Bolero&quot;, Oakland revives steamy Nijinska ballet&quot;, in &quot;SF Gate&quot;, Oct. 23, 1995. Accessed 2018-1-18.
*Lorna Sanders, &quot;Les noces (Svadebka/The Wedding)&quot; in &quot;Dancing Times,&quot; vol. 95 (Oct. 2004), pp. 48–53.
*Margaret Severn, &quot;Dancing with Nijinska&quot; in &quot;Dance Chronicle&quot; (1988), reprinted at pp. 690–697 in Gottlieb (2008).
*Steve Shelokhonov, &quot;Bronslava Nijinska Biography&quot; at IMDb. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Maria Tallchief with Larry Kaplan, &quot;Maria Tallchief. America&#x27;s Prima Ballerina&quot; in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, 1997. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*David Vaughan, &quot;Classicism and Neoclassicism&quot; in Garafola and Baer (1999).
**Obituary: &quot;Irina Nijinska; Restaged historic ballets&quot; in &quot;The Los Angeles Times&quot;, July 6, 1991. Accessed 2018-3-15.
**Dance Heritage Coalition, Bronislava Nijinska books and articles. Accessed 2017-04-28.
;Media
*The Paris Opera Ballet, &quot;Paris dances Diaghilev&quot; (Elektra Nonsuch 1991), VHS [includes &quot;Les noces&quot;).
*The Paris Opera Ballet, &quot;Picasso and Dance&quot; (Kultur 1994), DVD (includes &quot;Le Train Bleu&quot;).
**Joffrey Ballet, &quot;Les noces&quot; (The Wedding) , [program] premier: Oct 6, 1989, Washington, D.C. Accessed 2017-6-28.
**Library of Congress, Bronislava Nijinska Collection. Accessed 2017-04-28.
**Unedited photographs, including of Nijinska&#x27;s &quot;Les noces&quot; (brown and white costumes), at Google (n.d.).
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;Bronislava Nijinska: A choreographer&#x27;s journey&quot;, audio of lecture (1:13:47) at the National Gallery of Art, July 7, 2013. Accessed 2017-04-28.
*Alison Gibson, producer, &quot;Nijinska: A legend in dance&quot; , KQED-TV, 1990 Emmy Award.
;Books
*Jack Anderson, &quot;The One and Only. The Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo&quot; (New York: Dance Horizons 1981).
*George Balanchine, &quot;Balanchine&#x27;s complete stories of the great ballets&quot; (New York: Doubleday 1954).
*Alexander Bland, &quot;The Royal Ballet. The first 50 years&quot; (New York: Threshold/Doubleday 1981), foreword by Ninette de Valois.
*Mary Clarke and Clement Crisp, &quot;Ballet. An illustrated history&quot; (London: A &amp; C Black 1973; rev&#x27;d 1992, Hamish Hamilton, London).
*Agnes de Mille, &quot;The Book of the Dance&quot; (London: Paul Hamlyn 1963).
*Agnes de Mille, &quot;Portrait Gallery&quot; (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin 1990).
*Michel Fokine, &quot;Memoirs of a ballet master&quot; (Boston: Little, Brown 1961), translated by Vitale Fokine.
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;Legacies of twentieth-century dance&quot; (Wesleyan University 2005).
*Lynn Garafola, &quot;Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes&quot; (Oxford University 1989, reprint Da Capo Press).
*Vincente García-Márquez, &quot;The Ballets Russes. Colonel de Basil&#x27;s Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo 1932–1952&quot; (NY: Knopf 1990).
*Robert Gottlieb, &quot;George Balanchine. The ballet maker&quot; (New York: Harper Perennial 2004).
*Robert Greskovic, &quot;Ballet. A complete guide&quot; ([NY: Hyperion 1998], London: Robert Hale 2000).
*Arnold L. Haskell with Walter Nouvel, &quot;Diaghileff. His artistic and private life&quot; (New York: Simon and Schuster 1935).
*Jennifer Homans, &quot;Apollo&#x27;s Angels. A history of ballet&quot; (New York: Random House 2010).
*Allegra Kent, &quot;Once a Dancer. An autobiography&quot; (New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press 1997).
*Boris Kochno, &quot;Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes&quot; (New York: Harper and Row 1970).
*John Martin, &quot;The Dance. The story of the dance told in pictures and texts&quot; (New York: Tudor 1946),
*John Martin, &quot;The Modern Dance&quot; (New York: A. S. Barnes 1933, reprint: Dance Horizons, New York 1990).
*Léonide Massine, &quot;My Life in Ballet&quot; (London: Macmillan 1968).
*Lucy Moore, &quot;Nijinsky&quot; (London: Profile Books 2013, 2014).
*Romola Nijinsky, &quot;Nijinsky&quot; (New York: Simon and Schuster 1934, reprint Pocket Books 1972).
*Peter Ostwald, &quot;Vaslav Nijinsky. A leap into madness&quot; (New York: Lyle Stuart 1991).
*Nancy Reynolds and Malcolm McCormick, &quot;No Fixed Points. Dance in the twentieth century&quot; (Yale University 2003).
*Lydia Sokolova, &quot;Dancing for Diaghilev. Memoirs ... &quot; (London: John Murray 1960, reprint San Francisco 1989), Richard Buckle, ed.
*Igor Stravinsky, &quot;Chroniques de ma vie&quot; (Paris 1935), transl. as &quot;Stravinsky: An autobiography&quot; (NY: Simon &amp; Schuster 1936).
*Igor Stravinsky, &quot;Poetics of Music&quot; (1940; London: Geoffrey Cumberlege 1947).
*Igor Stravinsky and Robert Craft, &quot;Exposition and Development&quot; (London: Faber &amp; Farver 1962)
*Eric Walter White, &quot;Stravinsky: The composer and his work&quot; (Berkeley: University of California 1966).
*Vicki Woolf, &quot;Dancing in the Vortex: The Story of Ida Rubinstein&quot; (Routledge 2001).
;reference books or edited books
*Willi Apel, et al., &quot;Harvard Dictionary of Music&quot; (Harvard University 1944, 2d ed. 1969, 1972).
*Lynn Garafola and Nancy Van Norman Baer, editors, &quot;The Ballets Russes and its World&quot; (Yale University 1999).
*Robert Gottlieb, editor, &quot;Reading Dance&quot; (New York: Pantheon 2008).
*Horst Koegler, &quot;The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Ballet&quot; ([1972]; Oxford University 1977).
*Irena Rima Makaryk and Virlana Tkacz, editors, &quot;Modernism in Kiev: Jubilant Experimentation&quot; (University of Toronto 2010).
;Inspired by Nijinska
*Eva Stachniak, &quot;The Chosen Maiden&quot; (Penguin Random House 2017) [historical novel].
*Kate Westbrook, &quot;The Nijinska Chamber&quot;, K W Recordings, 2006 [audio].

==References==
==External links==
* Timeline of Life and Work
* Letter from Nijinska to Diaghilev (1921)
* &quot;Bolero&quot; choreographed by Nijinska, youtube.com (Bolero - Maria Alexandrova). 2017-5-19.
* &quot;Le train bleu&quot; choreographed by Nijinska, youtube.com (Le train bleu - Juan Mtz. de lejarza). 2017-5-19.
* &quot;Les Biches&quot; by B. Nijinska, youtube.com (Teatro dell&#x27;Opera di Roma, Ballets Russes Festival 2014). 2017-8-19.
* &quot;Les noces&quot; by Nijinska, youtube.com &lt;starts at 1:27&gt; (Les noces - Sladobka: Oakland Ballet). 2017-6-28.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235209" start="0" end="19" title="Bronislava Nijinska" label="Bronislava Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="114" end="127" title="choreographer" label="choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="218" end="234" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="252" end="266" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="296" end="301" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="336" end="345" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="378" end="382" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342373" start="621" end="637" title="classical ballet" label="classical ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q603137" start="740" end="752" title="neoclassical ballet" label="future works"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="1012" end="1021" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043820" start="1105" end="1125" title="Carnaval (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Carnaval&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="1160" end="1173" title="Michel Fokine" label="Michel Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="1208" end="1223" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637772" start="1281" end="1314" title="Afternoon of a Faun (Nijinsky)" label="L&amp;#x27;Après-midi d&amp;#x27;un faune"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="1437" end="1455" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="2055" end="2070" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521679" start="2111" end="2120" title="Les noces" label="Les noces"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="2690" end="2706" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="3084" end="3089" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3131" end="3137" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="3169" end="3184" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q376169" start="3309" end="3321" title="Teatr Wielki, Warsaw" label="Teatr Wielki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="3433" end="3437" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="3542" end="3546" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929552" start="3617" end="3632" title="premier danseur" label="premier danseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q805253" start="3637" end="3650" title="ballet master" label="ballet master"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558519" start="3766" end="3779" title="first soloist" label="first soloist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="3945" end="3954" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209102" start="4046" end="4074" title="The Fountain of Bakhchisarai (ballet)" label="The Fountain of Bakhchisarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="4103" end="4110" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065252" start="5572" end="5579" title="Pension (lodging)" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="7774" end="7789" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="8017" end="8022" title="Vilno" label="Vilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357677" start="8177" end="8203" title="Imperial Ballet School" label="Imperial Theatrical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357677" start="8411" end="8453" title="Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet" label="state-sponsored school for performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="8518" end="8534" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="8840" end="8853" title="Marius Petipa" label="Marius Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749277" start="8903" end="8915" title="Sergei Legat" label="Sergei Legat"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="10391" end="10412" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637772" start="10518" end="10563" title="Afternoon of a Faun (Nijinsky)" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;#x27;Après-midi d&amp;#x27;un Faune&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="10762" end="10780" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q545154" start="11578" end="11595" title="Romola de Pulszky" label="Romola de Pulszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188223" start="12688" end="12698" title="dance hall" label="dance hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592132" start="12704" end="12725" title="London Palace Theatre" label="London Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529152" start="13102" end="13123" title="Le Spectre de la rose" label="Le Spectre de la rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722394" start="13401" end="13412" title="Alfred Butt" label="Alfred Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="14132" end="14147" title="Imperial Ballet" label="Imperial Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206595" start="14280" end="14295" title="corps de ballet" label="corps de ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="14329" end="14342" title="Michel Fokine" label="Michel Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630831" start="14356" end="14369" title="Les Sylphides" label="Les Sylphides"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="14622" end="14631" title="Diaghilev" label="Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="15310" end="15337" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Sergei Pavlovitch Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="15473" end="15487" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="15584" end="15589" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206595" start="15637" end="15652" title="corps de ballet" label="corps de ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="15955" end="15961" title="Michel Fokine" label="Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043820" start="15969" end="15989" title="Carnaval (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Carnaval&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="16092" end="16103" title="prestissimo" label="prestissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="16147" end="16156" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q165721" start="16160" end="16178" title="Vsevolod Meyerhold" label="Vsevolod Meyerhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q942236" start="16220" end="16229" title="Petrushka" label="Petruchka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359804" start="16323" end="16327" title="Tutu (clothing)" label="tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222310" start="16568" end="16580" title="Le Dieu bleu" label="Le Dieu bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171405" start="16685" end="16697" title="Scheherazade (Rimsky-Korsakov)" label="Scheherazade"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602344" start="16732" end="16753" title="Cléopâtre (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Cléopâtre&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q231316" start="16854" end="16863" title="Tamara Karsavina" label="Karsavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381161" start="17185" end="17189" title="Jeux" label="Jeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="17278" end="17296" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="18923" end="18929" title="Marius Petipa" label="Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="18951" end="18972" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="19260" end="19268" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637772" start="19282" end="19315" title="Afternoon of a Faun (Nijinsky)" label="L&amp;#x27;Après-midi d&amp;#x27;un Faune"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="19633" end="19646" title="choreographer" label="choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773642" start="19924" end="19934" title="Les Biches" label="Les Biches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227754" start="20030" end="20043" title="Le Train Bleu (ballet)" label="Le Train Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="20769" end="20784" title="Achilles tendon" label="Achilles tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="21061" end="21074" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497031" start="21190" end="21207" title="Frederic Franklin" label="Frederic Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="21414" end="21428" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="21773" end="21787" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q621802" start="21791" end="21815" title="prima ballerina absoluta" label="prima ballerina absoluta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="21959" end="21974" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="22284" end="22302" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="22732" end="22740" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="22969" end="22976" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077014" start="22981" end="22993" title="Olga Spessivtseva" label="Spessivtseva"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="23258" end="23271" title="Marius Petipa" label="Marius Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q518945" start="23311" end="23327" title="Enrico Cecchetti" label="Enrico Cecchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="24908" end="24921" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="25198" end="25213" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="25303" end="25315" title="socialist realism" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="25342" end="25357" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q518945" start="25927" end="25936" title="Enrico Cecchetti" label="Cecchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="26100" end="26113" title="Michel Fokine" label="Michel Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231316" start="26118" end="26134" title="Tamara Karsavina" label="Tamara Karsavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071719" start="26167" end="26182" title="Mikhail Mordkin" label="Mikhail Mordkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="26664" end="26688" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q348282" start="26722" end="26736" title="Anatoly Liadov" label="Anatoly Liadov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="27143" end="27147" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="27691" end="27697" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="27886" end="27904" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q603137" start="28434" end="28446" title="neoclassical ballet" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="28605" end="28617" title="modern dance" label="modern dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q242121" start="28932" end="28947" title="Alexandra Exter" label="Alexandra Exter"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="28963" end="28969" title="Moscow" label="Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="29014" end="29028" title="constructivism (art)" label="constructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="29399" end="29405" title="cubist" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="29410" end="29418" title="futurism" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q981151" start="29552" end="29568" title="Alexander Tairov" label="Alexander Tairov"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="30008" end="30015" title="Curator" label="Curator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406209" start="30160" end="30170" title="Les Kurbas" label="Les Kurbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q154659" start="30210" end="30227" title="Theater in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973237" start="30241" end="30245" title="Cinema of Ukraine" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q360420" start="32178" end="32189" title="Serge Lifar" label="Serge Lifar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="32380" end="32391" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="32405" end="32414" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="32446" end="32452" title="Marius Petipa" label="Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282950" start="32457" end="32463" title="Lev Ivanov" label="Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="32918" end="32935" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q203023" start="33045" end="33050" title="Cheka" label="Cheka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="33703" end="33708" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="33840" end="33849" title="Bug River" label="Bug River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="33855" end="33861" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="33962" end="33968" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q545154" start="33979" end="33985" title="Romola de Pulszky" label="Romola"/>
<link wikidata="Q25706663" start="34005" end="34009" title="Kyra Nijinsky" label="Kyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="34709" end="34725" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Sergei Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="35369" end="35379" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="35829" end="35846" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="35928" end="35939" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="36132" end="36136" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="36173" end="36179" title="Marius Petipa" label="Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282950" start="36180" end="36186" title="Lev Ivanov" label="Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="36201" end="36210" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="36230" end="36241" title="Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342373" start="36947" end="36954" title="Classical ballet" label="classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="36961" end="36980" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="37165" end="37168" title="First World War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="37257" end="37263" title="Marius Petipa" label="Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="37410" end="37420" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="37437" end="37453" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="37494" end="37518" title="Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q214666" start="37609" end="37619" title="Léon Bakst" label="Léon Bakst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230604" start="37917" end="37931" title="divertissement" label="divertissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139098" start="37965" end="37970" title="hopak" label="hopak"/>
<link wikidata="Q603137" start="40786" end="40797" title="Neoclassical ballet" label="middle path"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="41098" end="41119" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555728" start="41867" end="41881" title="Vera Trefilova" label="Vera Trefilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387325" start="41905" end="41922" title="Pierre Vladimirov" label="Pierre Vladimirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="42240" end="42255" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="42376" end="42389" title="Ancien régime" label="Ancien régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q151152" start="42595" end="42604" title="Juan Gris" label="Juan Gris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="43685" end="43698" title="baroque music" label="baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="43961" end="43976" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496677" start="44251" end="44271" title="Stanislas Idzikowski" label="Stanislas Idzikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q38785" start="44369" end="44384" title="Michel Larionov" label="Michel Larionov"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675513" start="44667" end="44682" title="Reynard the Fox" label="Reynard the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="44714" end="44724" title="con-artist" label="con-artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="45439" end="45445" title="Michel Fokine" label="Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609528" start="47001" end="47014" title="Sydney Schiff" label="Sydney Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="47254" end="47265" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="47497" end="47504" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521679" start="47773" end="47782" title="Les noces" label="Les noces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="47930" end="47945" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="48825" end="48836" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="49866" end="49875" title="conductor (music)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380024" start="49876" end="49888" title="Robert Craft" label="Robert Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="49985" end="49992" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="50308" end="50315" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="50624" end="50633" title="C. G. Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058142" start="50671" end="50695" title="cell (music)" label="musical &amp;quot;cell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q845756" start="50823" end="50829" title="kairos" label="kairos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590" start="50846" end="50859" title="Mircea Eliade" label="Mircea Eliade"/>
<link wikidata="Q232391" start="51208" end="51226" title="Natalia Goncharova" label="Natalia Goncharova"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="51493" end="51503" title="George Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805240" start="52225" end="52234" title="en pointe" label="en pointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998617" start="52288" end="52301" title="Russian icons" label="Russian icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="53488" end="53505" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Wassily Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="53851" end="53858" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="54990" end="55010" title="The Rite of Spring" label="&amp;quot;The Rite&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848168" start="55256" end="55270" title="André Levinson" label="André Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="55546" end="55562" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608836" start="55942" end="55957" title="Ballets suédois" label="Ballets suédois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609138" start="55982" end="55994" title="Rolf de Maré" label="Rolf de Maré"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="56081" end="56092" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246961" start="56779" end="56790" title="John Martin (dance critic)" label="John Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381161" start="56966" end="56970" title="Jeux" label="Jeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="56987" end="57005" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="57203" end="57216" title="baroque music" label="baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q487175" start="57229" end="57249" title="Michel de Montéclair" label="Michel de Montéclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197441" start="57298" end="57313" title="Henri Casadesus" label="Henri Casadesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151152" start="57355" end="57364" title="Juan Gris" label="Juan Gris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773642" start="58137" end="58147" title="Les Biches" label="Les Biches"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="58307" end="58322" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q233088" start="58392" end="58407" title="Marie Laurencin" label="Marie Laurencin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="59197" end="59211" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis Quatorze"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="59364" end="59381" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="59412" end="59431" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Ballet" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="62677" end="62692" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="63240" end="63250" title="Georges Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="63736" end="63750" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="64108" end="64121" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="65840" end="65850" title="George Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66429" end="66444" title=":fr:Les Fâcheux" label=":fr:Les Fâcheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="66509" end="66519" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="66521" end="66531" title="librettist" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="66568" end="66575" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384975" start="66630" end="66646" title="Pierre Beauchamp" label="Pierre Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="66651" end="66670" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Jean-Baptiste Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q153793" start="66963" end="66977" title="Georges Braque" label="Georges Braque"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="66991" end="67003" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q588942" start="67143" end="67154" title="Anton Dolin (ballet dancer)" label="Anton Dolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251818" start="67540" end="67553" title="Georges Auric" label="Georges Auric"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="67598" end="67613" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="67615" end="67629" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q123164" start="67635" end="67650" title="Arthur Honegger" label="Arthur Honegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q841212" start="67675" end="67682" title="Les Six" label="Les Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608836" start="67804" end="67819" title="Ballets suédois" label="Ballets suédois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="68047" end="68060" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q271920" start="68365" end="68379" title="Lydia Lopokova" label="Lydia Lopokova"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="68642" end="68649" title="Leonide Massine" label="Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="68892" end="68906" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="68980" end="68997" title="Modest Petrovich Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q242121" start="69274" end="69289" title="Alexandra Exter" label="Alexandra Exter"/>
<link wikidata="Q285976" start="69967" end="70005" title="Night on bald mountain" label="&amp;quot;La Nuit sur le Mont chauve&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="70064" end="70077" title="Nikolai Gogol" label="Nikolai Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110170" start="70085" end="70104" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Eve (short story)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q471725" start="70230" end="70250" title="Sorochintsy Fair" label="Sorochintsy yarmarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4429330" start="70415" end="70424" title="The Fair at Sorochyntsi (short story)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="70532" end="70547" title="Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227754" start="70621" end="70646" title="Le Train Bleu (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Le train blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="70694" end="70708" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="70757" end="70769" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q45661" start="70835" end="70858" title="Gabrielle Bonheur Chanel" label="&amp;#x27;Coco&amp;#x27; Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q738892" start="70944" end="70957" title="Henri Laurens" label="Henri Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q588942" start="70996" end="71007" title="Anton Dolin (ballet dancer)" label="Anton Dolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="71027" end="71041" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q639365" start="71175" end="71185" title="Le Train Bleu" label="Train Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="71209" end="71225" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="71267" end="71278" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="72806" end="72815" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="73431" end="73438" title="Leonide Massine" label="Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="74158" end="74175" title="George Balanchine" label="George Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242121" start="74596" end="74611" title="Alexandra Exter" label="Alexandra Exter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="75540" end="75550" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="75580" end="75601" title="Brandenburg Concertos" label="Brandenburg Concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521679" start="76432" end="76441" title="Les noces" label="Les noces"/>
<link wikidata="Q805240" start="76477" end="76486" title="en pointe" label="en pointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381161" start="77353" end="77357" title="Jeux" label="Jeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773642" start="77387" end="77397" title="Les Biches" label="Les Biches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227754" start="77414" end="77427" title="Le Train Bleu (ballet)" label="Le Train Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="77481" end="77496" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="78238" end="78244" title="Kabuki" label="Kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277633" start="78266" end="78280" title="Leighton Lucas" label="Leighton Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44927" start="78788" end="78801" title="Joseph Lanner" label="Joseph Lanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q893693" start="80027" end="80033" title="Boris Kochno" label="Kochno"/>
<link wikidata="Q708863" start="80044" end="80051" title="Henri Sauguet" label="Sauguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="80324" end="80332" title="Franz Schubert" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="80337" end="80342" title="Franz Liszt" label="Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319861" start="80366" end="80372" title="Alexandre Benois" label="Benois"/>
<link wikidata="Q237149" start="80395" end="80409" title="Ida Rubinstein" label="Ida Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="80589" end="80603" title="Ballet Theatre" label="Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q731407" start="80845" end="80861" title="Constant Lambert" label="Constant Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="80902" end="80909" title="Leonide Massine" label="Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231316" start="81115" end="81124" title="Tamara Karsavina" label="Karsavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q360420" start="81129" end="81134" title="Serge Lifar" label="Lifar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="81193" end="81202" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="81220" end="81230" title="Georges Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114795" start="81234" end="81248" title="entr&amp;#x27;acte" label="entr&amp;#x27;acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q827401" start="81528" end="81540" title="Teatro Colón" label="Teatro Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824739" start="81969" end="81980" title="Adolph Bolm" label="Adolph Bolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="82044" end="82048" title="J. S. Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="82484" end="82505" title="Brandenburg Concertos" label="Brandenburg Concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="82561" end="82571" title="J. S. Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="83050" end="83056" title="Michel Fokine" label="Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221648" start="83090" end="83106" title="Daphne and Chloe" label="Daphnis et Chloë"/>
<link wikidata="Q740162" start="83130" end="83140" title="Petrouchka" label="Petrouchka"/>
<link wikidata="Q237149" start="83281" end="83295" title="Ida Rubinstein" label="Ida Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="83414" end="83427" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327331" start="83602" end="83608" title="Boléro" label="Boléro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081111" start="83979" end="83992" title="Spanish dance styles" label="Spanish dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q171405" start="84151" end="84163" title="Scheherazade (Rimsky-Korsakov)" label="Scheherazade"/>
<link wikidata="Q776559" start="84713" end="84721" title="La valse" label="La valse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="84993" end="85008" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="85183" end="85194" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="85241" end="85264" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741258" start="85298" end="85312" title="The Ice-Maiden" label="The Ice-Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="85606" end="85610" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061014" start="85842" end="85858" title="Ludmila Schollar" label="Ludmila Schollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="86011" end="86017" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="86081" end="86091" title="George Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="86366" end="86374" title="Jules Massenet" label="Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984218" start="86416" end="86432" title="Wassily de Basil" label="Wassily de Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="86477" end="86489" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="86510" end="86517" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="86534" end="86550" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Sergei Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034946" start="87003" end="87021" title="Capriccio Espagnol" label="Capriccio Espagnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="87042" end="87065" title="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="87185" end="87199" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896236" start="87560" end="87569" title="René Blum (ballet)" label="René Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18434" start="87604" end="87613" title="Léon Blum" label="Léon Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="87667" end="87688" title="Casino de Monte Carlo" label="Casino de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102516" start="87801" end="87830" title="Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo" label="Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="88079" end="88089" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150726" start="88233" end="88264" title="Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo" label="a successor to Blum&amp;#x27;s half"/>
<link wikidata="Q872222" start="89069" end="89082" title="Opéra-Comique" label="Opéra-Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q726531" start="89104" end="89130" title="Théâtre des Champs-Elysées" label="Théâtre des Champs-Elysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="89762" end="89771" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362480" start="90053" end="90069" title="Georges Annenkov" label="Georges Annenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="90150" end="90154" title="Hamlet" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="90197" end="90208" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984218" start="91235" end="91251" title="Wassily de Basil" label="Wassily de Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150726" start="91267" end="91294" title="Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo" label="Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="91352" end="91363" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="92136" end="92149" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305191" start="92245" end="92287" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1935 film)" label="&amp;quot;A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="92326" end="92345" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="92346" end="92352" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="92368" end="92385" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305214" start="92420" end="92440" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (Mendelssohn)" label="his two compositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="92508" end="92524" title="concert overture" label="concert overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="92546" end="92562" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="93048" end="93061" title="Marius Petipa" label="Marius Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="93091" end="93105" title="Mikhail Fokine" label="Mikhail Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="93608" end="93618" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="93795" end="93804" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q335012" start="93818" end="93839" title="The Tales of Hoffmann" label="The Tales of Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471429" start="94110" end="94141" title="Frédéric Alfred d&amp;#x27;Erlanger" label="Frédéric Alfred d&amp;#x27;Erlanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="94166" end="94179" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="94186" end="94194" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q893693" start="94198" end="94210" title="Boris Kochno" label="Boris Kochno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196800" start="94244" end="94286" title="The Swineherd" label="&amp;quot;The swineherd and the princess&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="94298" end="94321" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342373" start="94433" end="94442" title="classical ballet" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467415" start="94527" end="94541" title="Irina Baronova" label="Irina Baronova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018300" start="94653" end="94666" title="David Lichine" label="David Lichine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="94958" end="94981" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741258" start="95011" end="95025" title="The Ice-Maiden" label="The Ice-Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="95077" end="95092" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="96070" end="96084" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="96141" end="96150" title="Vic-Wells" label="Vic-Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="96169" end="96186" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q588942" start="96361" end="96372" title="Anton Dolin (ballet dancer)" label="Anton Dolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227754" start="96498" end="96511" title="Le Train Bleu (ballet)" label="Le Train Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="96593" end="96616" title="American Ballet Theatre" label="American Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="96802" end="96819" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="97215" end="97220" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="97305" end="97308" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209948" start="97627" end="97642" title="Polish National Ballet" label="national ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165755" start="98049" end="98074" title="Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne" label="Exposition Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="98588" end="98593" title="Vilnius" label="Vilna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346354" start="101009" end="101021" title="Edward Denby" label="Edward Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="101669" end="101677" title="Kraków" label="Cracovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="101809" end="101814" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063002" start="101936" end="101951" title="character dance" label="character dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946001" start="102965" end="102981" title="Leon Woizikovsky" label="Léon Wójcikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="103227" end="103256" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984218" start="104154" end="104162" title="Wassily de Basil" label="de Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685475" start="104479" end="104493" title="Jean Dauberval" label="Jean Dauberval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798800" start="104507" end="104526" title="La fille mal gardée" label="La fille mal gardée"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="104636" end="104650" title="American Ballet Theatre" label="Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059357" start="104716" end="104730" title="Center Theatre (New York City)" label="Center Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541186" start="105062" end="105087" title="Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux" label="Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q805253" start="105179" end="105187" title="Paul Taglioni" label="Taglioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q878400" start="105256" end="105262" title="Peter Ludwig Hertel" label="Hertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="105293" end="105299" title="Marius Petipa" label="Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282950" start="105304" end="105310" title="Lev Ivanov" label="Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832943" start="105706" end="105717" title="Lucia Chase" label="Lucia Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071719" start="105790" end="105797" title="Mikhail Mordkin" label="Mordkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467415" start="105962" end="105976" title="Irina Baronova" label="Irina Baronova"/>
<link wikidata="Q52008200" start="106125" end="106144" title="Alexandra Balashova" label="Alexandra Balashova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183811" start="106189" end="106222" title="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas" label="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="106286" end="106302" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="106306" end="106322" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101303" start="106434" end="106443" title="John Lanchbery" label="Lanchbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="106658" end="106673" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q236013" start="106680" end="106693" title="Alicia Alonso" label="Alicia Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4535568" start="106698" end="106714" title="Igor Youskevitch" label="Igor Youskevitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="106960" end="106979" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="107343" end="107357" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q315715" start="107384" end="107418" title="Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="107793" end="107808" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q62558" start="107813" end="107825" title="Cyd Charisse" label="Cyd Charisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118219" start="107923" end="107957" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Pillow Dance" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Pillow Dance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929954" start="108009" end="108026" title="Nina Youshkevitch" label="Nina Youshkevitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763920" start="108028" end="108043" title="Marina Svetlova" label="Marina Svetlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850398" start="108070" end="108090" title="Ann Hutchinson Guest" label="Ann Hutchinson Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="108281" end="108289" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346354" start="108637" end="108648" title="Edwin Denby (poet)" label="Edwin Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246961" start="109028" end="109039" title="John Martin (dance critic)" label="John Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232391" start="109270" end="109290" title="Natalia Goncharova" label="Nathalie Gontcharova"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="109332" end="109342" title="George Balanchine" label="Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q394670" start="109519" end="109533" title="Agnes de Mille" label="Agnes de Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821898" start="109552" end="109569" title="Rodeo (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Rodeo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q805253" start="109732" end="109747" title="ballet mistress" label="ballet mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183811" start="109811" end="109844" title="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas" label="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q724981" start="110006" end="110031" title="Pictures at an Exhibition" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="110072" end="110089" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="110113" end="110126" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069851" start="110349" end="110362" title="Boris Aronson" label="Boris Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q242121" start="110393" end="110410" title="Aleksandra Ekster" label="Aleksandra Ekster"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="110589" end="110607" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q891586" start="110643" end="110650" title="Bolshoi Ballet" label="Bolshoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279714" start="110769" end="110786" title="Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso" label="Rondo Capriccioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="110814" end="110825" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q204503" start="110880" end="110897" title="Pablo de Sarasate" label="Pablo de Sarasate"/>
<link wikidata="Q442839" start="110999" end="111016" title="Rosella Hightower" label="Rosella Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653639" start="111021" end="111035" title="George Skibine" label="George Skibine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183811" start="111221" end="111234" title="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas" label="Cuevas Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="111258" end="111289" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;The Sleeping Beauty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="111372" end="111381" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="111472" end="111482" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="111839" end="111854" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="111949" end="111956" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="111968" end="111984" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="112231" end="112247" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="112251" end="112267" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="112349" end="112363" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q237149" start="112688" end="112702" title="Ida Rubenstein" label="Ida Rubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629587" start="113215" end="113228" title="Horst Koegler" label="Horst Koegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="114657" end="114671" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="115426" end="115448" title="The Paris Opera Ballet" label="The Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215207" start="115491" end="115514" title="Dance Theater of Harlem" label="Dance Theater of Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073970" start="115654" end="115668" title="Oakland Ballet" label="Oakland Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753500" start="115712" end="115727" title="Arthur Mitchell (dancer)" label="Arthur Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929954" start="115857" end="115874" title="Nina Youshkevitch" label="Nina Youshkevitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="116980" end="116992" title="modern dance" label="modern dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="118469" end="118483" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q518945" start="118903" end="118919" title="Enrico Cecchetti" label="Enrico Cecchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q360420" start="118949" end="118960" title="Serge Lifar" label="Serge Lifar"/>
<link wikidata="Q588942" start="118984" end="118995" title="Anton Dolin (ballet dancer)" label="Anton Dolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="118997" end="119011" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="119013" end="119029" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="119031" end="119045" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018300" start="119063" end="119076" title="David Lichine" label="David Lichine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832943" start="119097" end="119108" title="Lucia Chase" label="Lucia Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292520" start="119126" end="119135" title="auditions" label="auditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467415" start="119292" end="119306" title="Irina Baronova" label="Irina Baronova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766339" start="120196" end="120214" title="Marjorie Tallchief" label="Marjorie Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q62558" start="120237" end="120249" title="Cyd Charisse" label="Cyd Charisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="120275" end="120290" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102516" start="120917" end="120946" title="Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo" label="Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q263798" start="121065" end="121083" title="Alexandra Danilova" label="Alexandra Danilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731397" start="121141" end="121153" title="Allegra Kent" label="Allegra Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="122216" end="122230" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759884" start="123251" end="123266" title="Margaret Severn" label="Margaret Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="123290" end="123300" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="123305" end="123314" title="Ballet" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="124039" end="124053" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946001" start="124147" end="124163" title="Leon Woizikovsky" label="Leon Woizikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324426" start="124222" end="124236" title="Richard Buckle" label="Richard Buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="124341" end="124356" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="124834" end="124841" title="Leonide Massine" label="Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838192" start="125342" end="125357" title="Baby Ballerinas" label="baby ballerinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467415" start="125371" end="125385" title="Irina Baronova" label="Irina Baronova"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="126655" end="126669" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="127135" end="127150" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q545154" start="127881" end="127898" title="Romola de Pulszky" label="Romola de Pulszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q25706663" start="128199" end="128203" title="Kyra Nijinsky" label="Kyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="128698" end="128712" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596090" start="129681" end="129701" title="Russian opera singers" label="Russian opera singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27911" start="129715" end="129720" title="Bass (voice type)" label="basso"/>
<link wikidata="Q189164" start="129722" end="129738" title="Feodor Chaliapin" label="Feodor Chaliapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q376169" start="131089" end="131101" title="Teatr Wielki, Warsaw" label="Teatr Wielki"/>
<link wikidata="Q31948" start="131107" end="131112" title="foyer" label="foyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637772" start="131229" end="131252" title="Afternoon of a Faun (Nijinsky)" label="L’après-midi d’un faune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611280" start="131359" end="131376" title="Giennadij Jerszow" label="Giennadij Jerszow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001918" start="131393" end="131415" title="Buffalo Ballet Theater" label="Buffalo Ballet Theater"/>
<link wikidata="" start="131417" end="131457" title=":Category:Ballets by Bronislava Nijinska" label=":Category:Ballets by Bronislava Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615651" start="131459" end="131474" title="List of dancers" label="List of dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793467" start="131476" end="131506" title="List of Russian ballet dancers" label="List of Russian ballet dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209948" start="131508" end="131530" title="Polish National Ballet" label="Polish National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q271920" start="132442" end="132456" title="Lydia Lopokova" label="Lydia Lopokova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069889" start="133161" end="133175" title="Irina Nijinska" label="Irina Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767165" start="133245" end="133260" title="Anna Kisselgoff" label="Anna Kisselgoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204798" start="133958" end="133971" title="Joan Acocella" label="Joan Acocella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111000" start="134087" end="134100" title="Jack Anderson (dance critic)" label="Jack Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319861" start="135142" end="135158" title="Alexandre Benois" label="Alexandre Benois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="135497" end="135510" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="135794" end="135807" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767165" start="136603" end="136618" title="Anna Kisselgoff" label="Anna Kisselgoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="138304" end="138319" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="139339" end="139352" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111000" start="139615" end="139628" title="Jack Anderson (dance critic)" label="Jack Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="139726" end="139743" title="George Balanchine" label="George Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="139958" end="139975" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801206" start="139978" end="139989" title="Mary Clarke (dance critic)" label="Mary Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q394670" start="140127" end="140141" title="Agnes de Mille" label="Agnes de Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q314312" start="140286" end="140299" title="Michel Fokine" label="Michel Fokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709029" start="140400" end="140413" title="Lynn Garafola" label="Lynn Garafola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157324" start="140741" end="140756" title="Robert Gottlieb" label="Robert Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795079" start="140947" end="140964" title="Arnold L. Haskell" label="Arnold L. Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731397" start="141180" end="141192" title="Allegra Kent" label="Allegra Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q893693" start="141281" end="141293" title="Boris Kochno" label="Boris Kochno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246961" start="141374" end="141385" title="John Martin (dance critic)" label="John Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="141599" end="141614" title="Léonide Massine" label="Léonide Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q545154" start="141743" end="141758" title="Romola Nijinsky" label="Romola Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733152" start="141941" end="141955" title="Nancy Reynolds" label="Nancy Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791379" start="142064" end="142078" title="Lydia Sokolova" label="Lydia Sokolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324426" start="142184" end="142198" title="Richard Buckle" label="Richard Buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="142205" end="142220" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380024" start="142464" end="142476" title="Robert Craft" label="Robert Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q215916" start="142793" end="142803" title="Willi Apel" label="Willi Apel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157324" start="143020" end="143035" title="Robert Gottlieb" label="Robert Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q923499" start="143357" end="143370" title="Eva Stachniak" label="Eva Stachniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735715" start="143451" end="143465" title="Kate Westbrook (musician)" label="Kate Westbrook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780189" wikidata="Q6392052" url="?curid=780189" title="Kentland crater">
<text>The Kentland structure, also known as the Kentland crater or the Kentland disturbed area, is an impact structure located near the town of Kentland in Newton County, Indiana, United States.

It was discovered about 1880 when two farmers began to quarry crushed rock there. The presence of shatter cones and deformed bedrock led geologists to conclude by the late 1960s that the Kentland structure is a deeply eroded impact structure, rather than volcanic in origin. Deformation at the site is so great that vertical contacts between normally horizontal rock formations of different ages are common.

The structure itself is a circular dome, about in diameter, deeply eroded and buried in glacial debris. Its age is estimated to be less than 97 million years (Cretaceous or younger). The Shakopee dolomite at the center of the structure is about 450 million years old (Ordovician period) and is uplifted about 2,000 feet higher than the level of the same rock in the surrounding area. The entire disturbed area is about in diameter.

The estimated age is in dispute.
* ‘&quot;97 MYA‘&quot; Late Cretaceous Period of the Mesozoic Era
* ‘&quot;300 MYA‘&quot;= Bzhelian or Late Pennsylvanian Epoch (Carboniferous Period) of the Paleozoic Era

This impact structure was studied in 1978. John Weber and his associates presented fission track dating of apatite from this impact structure. Coesite and shatter cones are found in the uplift near its center. The impact structure is exposed to the surface, resulting in erosion. It is currently being worked as a quarry.

== Description ==

The impact site is located east of Kentland, Indiana, in Newton County. The disturbance is in diameter. The bedrock has a thin layer of glacial till, with a maximum depth of in the depression ring. The bedrock around the impact structure is generally flat with a slight dip towards the southwest and the Illinois Basin. The upper layers are Lower Mississippian from the Carboniferous period and Upper Devonian are relatively flat throughout this area of Indiana with the exception of impact site.
The core of the site is Ordovician rocks in the Prairie du Chien through Maquoketa Groups. Surrounding the core is Silurian rocks of Sexton Cr Dolomite and Kokomo Limestone. This uplifted core pierces the New Albany Shale of the Devonian age and the Mississippian age New Providence Shale and Rockford Limestone. Prior to quarry operations, research estimates that there has been of erosion since the initial event, followed by a shallow deposit of glacial till during the Wisconsin Glacial Period. The quarry operations have extracted the upper Ordovician carbonates of the Platteville and Galena (Prairie due Chien) groups along the northern edge since 1906.

==Structure==
The structure is a deeply eroded complex crater. Since the original impact, the structure has eroded over , eliminating the crater and other surface elements.
; Ring anticline
The ring surrounds the impact site, separating it from the surrounding flat-lying regional bedrock. The ring is about in radius around the central disconformity.
; Ring depression
The ring depression is the result of the displacement of materials at lower levels to fill the void created as the central uplift rose. Studies at other sites similar to the Kentland structure have found the depression to be the equivalent of the material that would have moved under the uplift as it occurred.
; Central Uplift
A cross section of the uplift, beginning on the outer edge, moving towards the middle, is shown in the image above.

==See also==
*List of impact craters on Earth

==References==
==Additional sources==
*Cohen, A.J., Bunch, T.E., and Reid, 1961, Coesite discoveries establish cryptovolcanics as fossil meteorite craters: Science, v.134, p. 1624-1625.
* Collet, J., 1883, Geological survey of Newton County: Ind. Dept Geol. and Nat. Hist., 12th Ann. Report, p. 58-59.
*Dietz, R.S., 1947, Meteorite impact suggested by orientation of shatter cones at the Kentland, Indiana, disturbance: Science, v.105, n.2714, p. 42-43.
*Dietz, R.S., 1960, Meteorite impact suggested by shatter cones in rock: Science, v.131, n.3416, p. 1781-1784.
*Dietz, R.S., 1963, Cryptoexplosion structures-a discussion: Am. Jour. Sci., v.261, p. 650-664.
*Dietz, Robert S.; Shatter Cones in Cryptoexplosion Structures (Meteorite Impact?); The Journal of Geology; Vol. 67, No. 5 (Sep., 1959), pp. 496–505
*Gutschick, R. C., Geology of the Kentland dome structurally complex anomaly, northwestern Indiana (Field Trip 5). Field trip in Midwestern Geology, Annual Meeting, Geological Society of America, Indianapolis, v. 1, pp. 105–138. 1983.
*Gutschick, R. C., Geology of the Kentland structural anomaly, northwestern Indiana—update. Purdue University, Department of Geosciences, and Geological Society of America, North-central Section, Guidebook 4, 38 p. 1982.
*Gutschick, R.C., 1976, Geology of the Kentland structural anomaly, northwestern Indiana: Guidebook for 1976, North-Central GSA Meeting, 59 p.
*Gutschick, R. C., Geology of the Kentland impact structural anomaly. Meteoritical Society, 35th Annual Meeting, Guidebook for Field Trip. 1972.
*Gutschick, R. C., Geology of the Kentland impact structural anomaly, northwestern Indiana. Shaver, R.H. and Sunderman, J.A., eds., Field Guide for the National Association of Geology Teachers, East-central Section, 20 p. 1971.
*Gutschick, R. C., The stratigraphy and structure of the Kentland impact anomaly, Indiana (abstract). The Geological Society of America, v. 2, pp. 564–565. 1970.
*Gutschick, R. C., The Kentland structural anomaly, Indiana. Geology from Chicago to Cincinnati, Geological Society of America Guidebook for Field Trips, v. 2, pp. 12–17. 1961.
* Laney, R.T., and W.R. Vanschmus, 1978. &quot;A structural study of the Kentland, Indiana impact site&quot; in &quot;Lunar and Planetary Science&quot; 9, pp 627–629.
* Mark J. Camp and Graham T. Richardson, &quot;Roadside Geology of Indiana&quot;, (Mountain Press Publishing Co.: Missoula, Montana, 1999), pp. 215–216. 

==External links==
*Archived Bibliography for Kentland Crater
*Abstract: Geochemical Study of Rocks from the Kentland, Indiana, Impact Structure
*Abstract: Structural Study of the Kentland, Indiana, Impact Site
*Abstract: John C. Weber et al., &quot;The Kentland Impact Crater, Indiana (USA): An Apatite Fission-Track Age Determination Attempt&quot;, in Christian Koeberl and Herbert Henkel (eds.) &quot;Impact Tectonics&quot;, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, 2005, pp. 447-466. 
*United States Meteorite Impact Craters: Kentland Crater, Indiana
*Interview with Purdue University Professor Jay Melosh about Kentland Crater
*Kentland Quarry photos
*Exploration of the Kentland Impact Structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6392052" start="4" end="22" title="Kentland crater" label="Kentland structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392052" start="42" end="57" title="Kentland crater" label="Kentland crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392052" start="65" end="88" title="Kentland crater" label="Kentland disturbed area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="96" end="112" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916654" start="138" end="146" title="Kentland, Indiana" label="Kentland"/>
<link wikidata="Q367632" start="150" end="172" title="Newton County, Indiana" label="Newton County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="245" end="251" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="288" end="300" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="315" end="322" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="415" end="431" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="445" end="453" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="634" end="638" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="687" end="694" title="glacier" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="758" end="768" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="867" end="877" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="1093" end="1103" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="1118" end="1126" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="1173" end="1186" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1194" end="1207" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="1223" end="1232" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420956" start="1321" end="1341" title="fission track dating" label="fission track dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="1345" end="1352" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424335" start="1381" end="1388" title="Coesite" label="Coesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="1393" end="1405" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916654" start="1615" end="1623" title="Kentland, Indiana" label="Kentland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="1625" end="1632" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q367632" start="1637" end="1650" title="Newton County, Indiana" label="Newton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199344" start="1884" end="1898" title="Illinois Basin" label="Illinois Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="1927" end="1940" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1950" end="1963" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="1981" end="1989" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="2101" end="2111" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="2192" end="2200" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="2220" end="2228" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="Dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2240" end="2249" title="Limestone" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="2293" end="2298" title="Shale" label="Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="2306" end="2314" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="2327" end="2344" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian age"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="2550" end="2574" title="Wisconsin Glacial Period" label="Wisconsin Glacial Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156574" start="2786" end="2800" title="complex crater" label="complex crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q791776" start="3568" end="3599" title="List of impact craters on Earth" label="List of impact craters on Earth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780209" wikidata="Q595619" url="?curid=780209" title="Midleton">
<text>Midleton (; , meaning &quot;monastery at the weir&quot;) is a town in south-eastern County Cork, Ireland. It lies approximately 16 km east of Cork City on the Owenacurra River and the N25 road, which connects Cork to the port of Rosslare. A satellite town of Cork City, Midleton is part of Metropolitan Cork. It is the central hub of business for the East Cork Area. The town is in the civil parish of Middleton. Midleton is within the Cork East Dáil constituency.

==History==

In the 1180s advancing Normans led by Barry Fitz Gerald established an abbey at a weir on the river to be populated by Cistercian Monks from Burgundy. The abbey became known as &quot;Chore Abbey&quot; and &quot;Castrum Chor&quot;, taking its name from the Irish word (weir), although some say that &quot;Chor&quot; comes from &quot;Choir&quot; or &quot;Choral&quot;. The abbey is commemorated in the Irish name for Midleton, , or &quot;Monastery at the Weir&quot;, and of the local river Owenacurra or meaning &quot;River of the Weirs&quot;. St John the Baptist&#x27;s Church, belonging to the Church of Ireland was erected in 1825 and today still stands on the site of the abbey.

The town gained the name Midleton or &quot;Middle Town&quot; as the main midway town, 10 miles between Cork and Youghal. It was incorporated as a market town and postal depot in 1670, receiving its charter from Charles II, as the &quot;borough and town of Midleton&quot;.

Alan Brodrick, Speaker of the Irish House of Commons and Lord Chancellor of Ireland was made the first Baron and Viscount Midleton in 1715 and 1717, respectively. Midleton Market House, now Midleton Library, in Main Street was completed in 1789.

The town is home to the Old Midleton Distillery which was established by James Murphy in 1825. The distillery operated independently until 1868, when it became part of the Cork Distilleries Company, which was later amalgamated into Irish Distillers in 1967. In 1988, Irish Distillers was the subject of a friendly takeover by the French drinks conglomerate Pernod Ricard. The Old Midleton Distillery, which boasts the world&#x27;s largest pot still – a copper vessel with a capacity of 140,000 litres, was in operation until 1975 when production was transferred to a new purpose-built facility, the New Midleton Distillery. The New Midleton Distillery produces a number of Irish whiskeys, including Jameson Whiskey, Redbreast, and Paddy. It also produces vodka and gin. In 1992, the old distillery was restored and reopened as a visitor centre. Known as the Jameson Experience, the visitor centre hosts a number of attractions, including Ireland&#x27;s largest working water-wheel (with a diameter of 7m).
At the top of the main street stands a monument to 16 Irish Republican Army men killed on 20 February 1921 during the Irish War of Independence. Twelve IRA personnel were killed during an unsuccessful ambush of British forces at the nearby town of Clonmult, while four more were captured and two of those later executed.

Two houses designed by Augustus Pugin, later the architect of the Houses of Parliament in London, stand at the bottom of Main Street. They now form one building and house a public bar.

In 2015, a large steel sculpture called &quot;Kindred Spirits&quot; was installed in Bailick Park. This sculpture commemorates a famine relief donation, made in 1847 by Native American Choctaw people, during the Great Famine.

In December 2015 (during Storm Frank) and in October 2023 (during Storm Babet) a number of businesses were flooded in Midleton, including on the town&#x27;s main street.

==Education==
Elizabeth Villiers, former mistress of William of Orange, founded the private school named Midleton College in 1696. The school is traditionally associated with the Church of Ireland. Past pupils include Isaac Butt, founder of the Home Rule League, Reginald Dyer, perpetrator of the Amritsar Massacre and John Philpot Curran, lawyer.

==Economy==
Local employers include retail, light manufacturing, food production, tourism and whiskey distilling industries. At nearby Whitegate is the state&#x27;s first gas-fired power station as well as Ireland&#x27;s only oil refinery. Many Midleton residents also commute to jobs in Cork city, Carrigtwohill or Little Island.

Traditionally the main commercial and retail area of the town was on Main Street and this continues to provide shopping – primarily with local ownership. The commercial part of Midleton has also expanded to the old site of Midleton Mart, now called Market Green. A number of multinational retailers have outlets in Midleton, including Tesco, Lidl, Boots and Aldi. The Market Green shopping centre is located at the northern end of the town. This development includes a five-screen cinema, Tesco and other stores and there is a hotel nearby. A SuperValu supermarket is also located at the northern end of the town opposite the so-called &#x27;Gooses Acre&#x27;. On Saturdays, the park next to SuperValu is the site for the Midleton Farmers&#x27; Market.

Midleton is also the home of the Old Midleton Distillery, a tourist attraction which includes the largest pot-still in the world.

==Geography==
The town is located in a fertile valley below hills to the north with Cork Harbour and the coast to the south. In times past, the channel from the Harbour to nearby Ballinacurra (, meaning &quot;Town at the Weir&quot;), was navigable by barges up to 300 tonnes. Due to silting over the years, the channel is now extremely shallow.

==Demographics==
In the 20 years between the 1996 and 2016 census, the population of the Midleton area effectively doubled, from 6,209 to 12,496 people.

As of the 2022 census, of Midleton&#x27;s 13,906 inhabitants, 71.01% were white Irish, less than 0.5% white Irish travellers, 16.30% other white ethnicities, 3.36% black, 3.11% Asian, 2.45% other ethnicities, and 3.35% did not state their ethnicity. In terms of religion the area was 67.12% Catholic, 10.36% other stated religions, 18.47% with no religion, and 4.05% not stated.

==Transport==

===Rail===

Midleton railway station is on the Cork Suburban Rail network and is one of two termini (the other being Cobh) into and out of Cork Kent railway station. Passengers interchange at Cork Kent for trains to Dublin and Tralee.

The railway line to Midleton was opened on 10 November 1859 by the Cork &amp; Youghal Railway, a company that was later taken over by the Great Southern &amp; Western Railway. Midleton was the location of the railway works for this company.

The line between Midleton and Cork was closed for regular use between 1963 and 2009. Occasional use (mainly transport of beet from Midleton to the Mallow Sugar Factory) continued for many years after 1963, but even the sporadic usage of the line came to an end in 1988, with the final train to use the track being a passenger excursion for Midleton GAA supporters to Dublin for the final of the All Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship (in which Midleton played). The reopening of the line was completed by Iarnród Éireann on 30 July 2009.

===Air===
The nearest airport is Cork Airport.

===Bus===
Bus Éireann run bus services to and from Midleton, including to Cork City Bus Station, Whitegate, Waterford, Ballinacurra, Carrigtwohill, Little Island, Glounthaune and Tivoli.

==Sport==
Midleton GAA is the local Gaelic Athletic Association club, and Midleton RFC the local rugby club. Martial arts groups include the Midleton Aikido Club [which has been teaching Aikido in East Cork since 2006] and Midleton Taekwondo Club. Midleton F.C. is the local soccer team, and there is also a cricket club.

==Notable people==

* Richard Bettesworth, lawyer and politician
* Edward Bransfield, reputed (disputed) discoverer of Antarctica, was born in Ballinacurra near Midleton
* Alan Brodrick, lawyer and politician
* Tom Horan, Australian cricketer
* James Martin, Australian politician and judge
* Colm O&#x27;Neill, Gaelic footballer
* Shane O&#x27;Neill, professional soccer player
* David Stanton, politician
* Nora Twomey, Academy Award nominated director and animator
* Elizabeth Villiers, English-born courtier who founded Midleton College

==See also==
* List of abbeys and priories in Ireland (County Cork)
* List of towns and villages in Ireland
* Market Houses in Ireland
* Midleton (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
* Midleton Very Rare

==References==
==External links==
* Midleton Chamber of Commerce website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595619" start="0" end="8" title="Midleton" label="Midleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="84" end="95" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="142" end="151" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="229" end="237" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825057" start="290" end="307" title="Metropolitan Cork" label="Metropolitan Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328166" start="351" end="360" title="East Cork" label="East Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="386" end="398" title="Civil parishes in Ireland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951667" start="436" end="445" title="Cork East (Dáil constituency)" label="Cork East"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="502" end="509" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="598" end="614" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="620" end="628" title="Burgundy (region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="1073" end="1090" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="1273" end="1280" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1372" end="1382" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706248" start="1434" end="1447" title="Alan Brodrick, 1st Viscount Midleton" label="Alan Brodrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948400" start="1464" end="1486" title="Irish House of Commons" label="Irish House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846056" start="1491" end="1517" title="Lord Chancellor of Ireland" label="Lord Chancellor of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935806" start="1547" end="1564" title="Viscount Midleton" label="Viscount Midleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55049136" start="1624" end="1640" title="Midleton Library" label="Midleton Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324713" start="1705" end="1728" title="Old Midleton Distillery" label="Old Midleton Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401182" start="1853" end="1878" title="Cork Distilleries Company" label="Cork Distilleries Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q837049" start="2038" end="2051" title="Pernod Ricard" label="Pernod Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312688" start="2280" end="2303" title="New Midleton Distillery" label="New Midleton Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482" start="2380" end="2395" title="Jameson Whiskey" label="Jameson Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305495" start="2397" end="2406" title="Redbreast (whiskey)" label="Redbreast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508768" start="2412" end="2417" title="Paddy Whiskey" label="Paddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="2741" end="2762" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="2805" end="2830" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135055" start="2875" end="2912" title="Clonmult ambush" label="unsuccessful ambush of British forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q23490309" start="3241" end="3256" title="Kindred Spirits (sculpture)" label="Kindred Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="3380" end="3394" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw people"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="3407" end="3419" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21856004" start="3447" end="3458" title="Storm Frank" label="Storm Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q123145292" start="3488" end="3499" title="Storm Babet" label="Storm Babet"/>
<link wikidata="Q275268" start="3607" end="3625" title="Elizabeth Villiers" label="Elizabeth Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="3634" end="3642" title="Mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="3646" end="3663" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="3772" end="3789" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141134" start="3811" end="3821" title="Isaac Butt" label="Isaac Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q476840" start="3838" end="3854" title="Home Rule League" label="Home Rule League"/>
<link wikidata="Q560470" start="3856" end="3869" title="Reginald Dyer" label="Reginald Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="3890" end="3907" title="Amritsar Massacre" label="Amritsar Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182298" start="3912" end="3931" title="John Philpot Curran" label="John Philpot Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468449" start="4077" end="4086" title="Whitegate, County Cork" label="Whitegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566363" start="4241" end="4254" title="Carrigtwohill" label="Carrigtwohill"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="4609" end="4614" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q151954" start="4616" end="4620" title="Lidl" label="Lidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123139" start="4622" end="4627" title="Boots Group" label="Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="4632" end="4636" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642081" start="4817" end="4826" title="SuperValu (Ireland)" label="SuperValu"/>
<link wikidata="Q932369" start="5243" end="5255" title="Cork Harbour" label="Cork Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076772" start="5338" end="5350" title="Ballinacurra, County Cork" label="Ballinacurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030587" start="5669" end="5680" title="2022 census of Ireland" label="2022 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5950" end="5958" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970107" start="6066" end="6090" title="Midleton railway station" label="Midleton railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693608" start="6101" end="6119" title="Cork Suburban Rail" label="Cork Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969483" start="6193" end="6218" title="Cork Kent railway station" label="Cork Kent railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969483" start="6246" end="6255" title="Cork Kent railway station" label="Cork Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="6368" end="6375" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="7043" end="7058" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345361" start="7110" end="7122" title="Cork Airport" label="Cork Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="7135" end="7146" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386772" start="7199" end="7220" title="Parnell Place Bus Station" label="Cork City Bus Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468449" start="7222" end="7231" title="Whitegate, County Cork" label="Whitegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="7233" end="7242" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076772" start="7244" end="7256" title="Ballinacurra" label="Ballinacurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566363" start="7258" end="7271" title="Carrigtwohill" label="Carrigtwohill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918707" start="7273" end="7286" title="Little Island, Cork" label="Little Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572131" start="7288" end="7299" title="Glounthaune" label="Glounthaune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810423" start="7304" end="7310" title="Tivoli, Cork" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842562" start="7323" end="7335" title="Midleton GAA" label="Midleton GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="7349" end="7376" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312695" start="7387" end="7399" title="Midleton RFC" label="Midleton RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="7410" end="7415" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q74123372" start="7561" end="7574" title="Midleton F.C." label="Midleton F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q104857421" start="7658" end="7677" title="Richard Bettesworth" label="Richard Bettesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q731890" start="7703" end="7720" title="Edward Bransfield" label="Edward Bransfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q722537" start="7741" end="7765" title="History of Antarctica" label="discoverer of Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706248" start="7808" end="7821" title="Alan Brodrick, 1st Viscount Midleton" label="Alan Brodrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816232" start="7847" end="7856" title="Tom Horan" label="Tom Horan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398237" start="7881" end="7893" title="James Martin (premier)" label="James Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147705" start="7929" end="7946" title="Colm O&amp;#x27;Neill (Midleton Gaelic footballer)" label="Colm O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488211" start="7968" end="7986" title="Shane O&amp;#x27;Neill (soccer)" label="Shane O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777612" start="8017" end="8030" title="David Stanton (politician)" label="David Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15438228" start="8045" end="8056" title="Nora Twomey" label="Nora Twomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q275268" start="8106" end="8124" title="Elizabeth Hamilton, Countess of Orkney" label="Elizabeth Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8193" end="8245" title="List of monastic houses in Ireland#County Cork" label="List of abbeys and priories in Ireland (County Cork)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113044" start="8248" end="8285" title="List of towns and villages in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of towns and villages in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257857" start="8288" end="8312" title="List of market houses in the Republic of Ireland" label="Market Houses in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842561" start="8315" end="8360" title="Midleton (Parliament of Ireland constituency)" label="Midleton (Parliament of Ireland constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329675" start="8363" end="8381" title="Midleton Very Rare" label="Midleton Very Rare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780212" wikidata="Q7278854" url="?curid=780212" title="Raccoon Creek (New Jersey)">
<text>Raccoon Creek is a tributary of the Delaware River in Gloucester County, New Jersey.

==Location==
Raccoon Creek rises to the west of Glassboro, and flows west, meeting Cartwheel Brook at Wrights Mill. Just below, it is impounded to form Gilman Lake. It turns to the north and is again dammed to form Ewan Lake. Clems Run and Miery Run empty into the stream, which is steeply banked on the east side. It flows through Mullica Hill (formerly the head of navigation), where it is dammed to form Mullica Hill Pond, and turns west again, flowing through a wide but steep valley. The South Branch (of the creek) joins it about east of the town. Flowing along the north side of Swedesboro, the creek becomes tidal and passes under the Locke Avenue Bridge, a swing bridge replaced in 2002 by a fixed span. The creek turns north again and meanders through the marshlands, passing under the (fixed) Interstate 295 bridge and running along the west side of the Pureland Industrial Complex, one of the largest industrial parks in the United States. A tangle of marshy channels leads to the west side of Bridgeport, where the creek passes under moveable spans of the Conrail&#x27;s Penns Grove Secondary and U.S. Route 130. It empties into the Delaware River just south of the Commodore Barry Bridge where it crosses Raccoon Island, (now connected to the mainland by fill).

==History==
During the 17th century, Swedish settlers from the Swedish colony of New Sweden came upstream along Raccoon Creek to found and settle the communities of Bridgeport (originally called New Stockholm) and Swedesboro.

==Tributaries==
* South Branch (Raccoon Creek)
* Miery Run
* Clems Run
* Cartwheel Brook

==See also==
* List of rivers of New Jersey

==References==
==External links==
*Jordan, John W. &quot;A History of Delaware County, Pennsylvania&quot;. (Lewis Historical Publishing Company, New York. 1914)
* U.S. Geological Survey: NJ stream gaging stations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7278854" start="0" end="13" title="Raccoon Creek (New Jersey)" label="Raccoon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="19" end="28" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="36" end="50" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502463" start="54" end="83" title="Gloucester County, New Jersey" label="Gloucester County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083910" start="134" end="143" title="Glassboro, New Jersey" label="Glassboro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="184" title="Cartwheel Brook" label="Cartwheel Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238180" start="238" end="249" title="Gilman Lake" label="Gilman Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="310" title="Ewan Lake" label="Ewan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="312" end="321" title="Clems Run" label="Clems Run"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="326" end="335" title="Miery Run" label="Miery Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087457" start="418" end="430" title="Mullica Hill, New Jersey" label="Mullica Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="493" end="510" title="Mullica Hill Pond" label="Mullica Hill Pond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="579" end="591" title="South Branch (Raccoon Creek)" label="South Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088764" start="672" end="682" title="Swedesboro, New Jersey" label="Swedesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665346" start="729" end="748" title="Locke Avenue Bridge" label="Locke Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q798013" start="890" end="904" title="Interstate 295 (Delaware-New Jersey)" label="Interstate 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261172" start="951" end="978" title="Pureland Industrial Complex" label="Pureland Industrial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="999" end="1014" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477884" start="1092" end="1102" title="Bridgeport, New Jersey" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="1155" end="1162" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983455" start="1170" end="1191" title="Penns Grove Secondary" label="Penns Grove Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q811453" start="1196" end="1210" title="U.S. Route 130" label="U.S. Route 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740124" start="1265" end="1287" title="Commodore Barry Bridge" label="Commodore Barry Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q322187" start="1444" end="1454" title="New Sweden" label="New Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477884" start="1528" end="1538" title="Bridgeport, New Jersey" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088764" start="1577" end="1587" title="Swedesboro, New Jersey" label="Swedesboro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1608" end="1636" title="South Branch (Raccoon Creek)" label="South Branch (Raccoon Creek)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1639" end="1648" title="Miery Run" label="Miery Run"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1651" end="1660" title="Clems Run" label="Clems Run"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1678" title="Cartwheel Brook" label="Cartwheel Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636662" start="1695" end="1723" title="List of rivers of New Jersey" label="List of rivers of New Jersey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780214" wikidata="Q1476939" url="?curid=780214" title="Keurusselkä">
<text>Keurusselkä is a lake in Central Finland between the towns of Keuruu to the north and Mänttä to the south. It covers an area of . Its average depth is with a maximum depth of . The surface lies at above sea level. The lake is long and is a part of the Kokemäenjoki River basin. Keurusselkä gained international publicity in 2004 when a pair of amateur geologists discovered an ancient impact structure on the western shore of the lake.

== Etymology ==
Keurusselkä was originally only the name of the largest fjard of the lake, while the lake was known as &quot;Väärinkeuru&quot; or &quot;Keuruvesi&quot;. The element &quot;keuru&quot; is a dialectal word meaning &quot;crooked&quot;, in this context referring to the shape of the lake. The older names were displaced by the name Keurusselkä in the 19th century. The name of Keuruu is derived from the lake&#x27;s name.

==Environmental issues==
In 1986, the Keurusselkä region was heavily contaminated (70 kBq/m2) by radioactive caesium, , from the Chernobyl disaster fallout. In 2003, some fish near Mänttä still had caesium concentrations several times higher than in Olkiluoto and Loviisa, which host the only two nuclear plants of Finland. This is due to the difference between the uptake of caesium in fresh water and brackish or saline water. However, the concentration levels are so small that eating the fish is not considered a health risk.

Apart from radioactivity, the water quality is also weakened by humic substances and local sewage. Despite that, the water quality is generally good, and the central part of the lake is in almost pristine condition. The lake is considered good for fishing, and the pike (&quot;Esox lucius&quot;) and perch (&quot;Perca fluviatilis&quot;) populations are especially large.

==Keurusselkä impact structure==
Keurusselkä covers an ancient impact crater remnant, which was discovered in 2003 by amateur geologists. Shatter cones, horsetail-shaped formations in rocks specifically formed in meteor impacts, have been found in an wide area, but it is possible that the area containing shatter cones may be only the central uplift of the crater. Weak traces based on digital elevation data suggest possible ring structures from to as wide as about in diameter. This would make Keurusselkä the largest impact structure in Finland surpassing the Lappajärvi crater. In addition to the shatter cones, microscopic studies of samples from a breccia boulder have revealed shock metamorphic features, (planar fractures and planar deformation features) in quartz grains, which formed when the rock underwent extreme shock pressures of between .

Argon-argon dating of a pseudotachylitic breccia from the central uplift of the Keurusselkä impact structure yielded a late Mesoproterozoic age of 1.14-1.15 Ga (thousand million years) for the impact., which makes Keurusselkä one of the oldest impact structures known in Europe. The age of the local granite bedrock of the Central Finland Granite Complex is 1.88 Ga (Paleoproterozoic). Since the impact, 7–8 km of rock has eroded away, leaving no visible depressions (compare, in contrast, Iso-Naakkima, Lumparn).

Sparse gravity data shows a negative anomaly (an area of lower gravity) in the area of the impact structure. However, there are other negative gravity anomalies nearby which are not believed to be related to the impact event. In addition, there are less dense felsic rocks in the western shore of the lake, which can contribute to the gravity low. The anomaly will be mapped in a much greater detail to determine if it is related to the impact event.

Airborne magnetic data show a strikingly circular magnetic anomaly, but for a reason not yet known it is slightly east from the gravity low area as well as the region where the shatter cones are found. It is possible that the ring was created for example by a granitic intrusion instead of the impact event. No specific anomalies have been found from radiometric or electromagnetic data. Paleomagnetic data will be collected to define the age of the structure.

Only some east from the centre of the Keurusselkä impact structure is Karikkoselkä, a much smaller and younger impact crater.

==See also==
*Impact craters in Finland

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1476939" start="0" end="11" title="Keurusselkä" label="Keurusselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="17" end="21" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697" start="25" end="40" title="Central Finland" label="Central Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q742854" start="62" end="68" title="Keuruu" label="Keuruu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001762" start="86" end="92" title="Mänttä" label="Mänttä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329599" start="252" end="270" title="Kokemäenjoki" label="Kokemäenjoki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="271" end="276" title="drainage basin" label="basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="385" end="401" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9258947" start="509" end="514" title="fjard" label="fjard"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="957" end="960" title="Becquerel" label="kBq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="968" end="979" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="980" end="987" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="1000" end="1018" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="1019" end="1026" title="nuclear fallout" label="fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412996" start="1121" end="1130" title="Olkiluoto" label="Olkiluoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q748513" start="1135" end="1142" title="Loviisa" label="Loviisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="1168" end="1182" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1258" end="1269" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="1274" end="1282" title="brackish water" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="1286" end="1298" title="saline water" label="saline water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152088" start="1466" end="1471" title="humic" label="humic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="1667" end="1671" title="Northern Pike" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q166812" start="1702" end="1707" title="European Perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="1901" end="1910" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="1913" end="1925" title="Shatter cone" label="Shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q891569" start="2339" end="2349" title="Lake Lappajärvi" label="Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="2430" end="2437" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660224" start="2460" end="2477" title="Shock metamorphism" label="shock metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="2489" end="2504" title="Fault (geology)" label="planar fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200957" start="2510" end="2537" title="planar deformation features" label="planar deformation features"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2542" end="2548" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="2632" end="2650" title="Argon-argon dating" label="Argon-argon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541604" start="2656" end="2680" title="pseudotachylite" label="pseudotachylitic breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="2756" end="2771" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="2789" end="2791" title="annum" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="2932" end="2939" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="2940" end="2947" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="2999" end="3015" title="Paleoproterozoic" label="Paleoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270248" start="3122" end="3134" title="Iso-Naakkima" label="Iso-Naakkima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877311" start="3136" end="3143" title="Lumparn" label="Lumparn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="3210" end="3217" title="gravitation" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="3407" end="3413" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="3608" end="3616" title="magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="3868" end="3877" title="intrusion" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="3950" end="3961" title="radiometric" label="radiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3965" end="3980" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="3987" end="4000" title="Paleomagnetism" label="Paleomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628462" start="4131" end="4143" title="Karikkoselkä" label="Karikkoselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614344" start="4202" end="4227" title="Impact craters in Finland" label="Impact craters in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780218" wikidata="Q568383" url="?curid=780218" title="Kgagodi crater">
<text>Kgagodi is an exposed meteorite crater in Botswana, roughly 7 kilometres south of the village of Kgagodi, where it got its name.

It is 3.5 km in diameter and the age is roughly less than 180 million years. It is estimated to be from the late Cretaceous to early Tertiary Period. The crater is best known for being Botswana’s first recognised impact structure.

==History==
The Kgagodi crater first came to attention in 1997, when a Botswana water-drilling expedition came across an elliptical-shaped structure. It was filled with sediment. The Geological Survey of Botswana then drilled a core sample that was 274 meters deep. The core sample suggested that it may be an impact structure, but there was no definite evidence for it. It was during another study of the structure that yielded the answer. Impact breccia were soon discovered, confirming Kgagodi as an impact crater.

== See also ==
* List of impact craters in Africa

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Brandt, D., Holmes, H., Reimold, W. U., Paya, B. K., Koeberl, C. and Hancox, P. J., Kgagodi Basin: The first impact structure recognized in Botswana, Meteoritics and Planetary Science. 2002, v. 37, n. 12, p. 1765. 2002
* Brandt, D., Holmes, H., Reimold, W.U., Paya, B.K., Koeberl, C., Hancox, P.J., Kgagodi Basin: The first impact recognized in Botswana, Meteoritics &amp; Planetary Science 37, 1765 - 1779. 2002
* Reimold, W. U., Paya, B.K., Holmes, H., Brandt, D., Koeberl, C., Dladla, C. and Hancox, P.J., Kgagodi Basin, Botswana: Origin by meteorite impact confirmed! 63rd Annual Meteoritical Society Meeting. Abs. No. 5009. 2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q568383" start="0" end="7" title="Kgagodi crater" label="Kgagodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="22" end="31" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="32" end="38" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="42" end="50" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="243" end="253" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="263" end="278" title="Tertiary Period" label="Tertiary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942237" start="590" end="601" title="core sample" label="core sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="803" end="817" title="Impact breccia" label="Impact breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511743" start="898" end="930" title="List of impact craters in Africa" label="List of impact craters in Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780220" wikidata="Q1405793" url="?curid=780220" title="Kursk crater">
<text>Kursk is an impact crater located in Kursk Oblast of the Central Federal District, Russia.

It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 250 ± 80 million years old (Carboniferous to Early Jurassic). The crater is not exposed to the surface.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1405793" start="0" end="5" title="Kursk crater" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="12" end="25" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178" start="37" end="49" title="Kursk Oblast" label="Kursk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190778" start="57" end="81" title="Central Federal District" label="Central Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="83" end="89" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="169" end="182" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q284787" start="186" end="200" title="Early Jurassic" label="Early Jurassic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780222" wikidata="Q379670" url="?curid=780222" title="José Félix Estigarribia">
<text>José Félix Estigarribia Insaurralde (21 February 1888 – 7 September 1940) was a Paraguayan military officer and politician who served as the 34th President of Paraguay from 1939 until his death in a plane crash on September 7, 1940. He is most remembered for his previous role as commander in chief of the Paraguayan Army during the Chaco War, which resulted in an upset victory for Paraguay.

He is recognized for being one of the military officers of the Paraguayan Army who led Paraguay to victory in the Chaco War against Bolivia, having been a prominent military strategist during the armed conflict and considered a war hero. In his life he reached the rank of lieutenant general, being posthumously promoted to field marshal shortly after his death.

In the late 1930s, Estigarribia was courted by both the Colorado Party and Liberal Party to run for president. He decided to join the liberals, who were more dominant at the time. As president he suspended the constitution and replaced it with a new one which gave him dictatorial powers. His authoritarian rule ended after only a year, when he and his wife were killed in a plane crash. He was succeeded by his Minister of War, Higinio Morínigo, who used Estigarribia&#x27;s constitution to establish his own dictatorship.

==Early life==
José Félix Estigarribia Insaurralde was born on 21 February 1888 in Caraguatay, Cordillera, to Mateo Estigarribia and Casilda Insaurralde, who were both peasants of Basque ancestry.

He went to the elementary school of his hometown and, in 1908, he went to study at Trinity College of Agriculture. However, after he had obtained his diploma, Estigarribia switched careers and in 1910 joined the army with the rank of lieutenant of infantry.

==Early career==
Educated as an agronomist, he joined the National Army in 1910 and spent time in Chile and in Saint Cyr&#x27;s military academy in France for additional training. He commanded the First Infantry Division during the Chaco War and was promoted successively to brigadier, division general, and commander-in-chief of the armed forces. In 1935, he made a victorious return to Asunción as &quot;Hero of the Chaco War&quot; and was awarded a lifetime pension of 1,000 gold pesos a month. He was dismissed from the position of armed forces chief after President Eusebio Ayala was overthrown in the Febrerista Revolution by Rafael Franco, but served as Paraguay&#x27;s ambassador to the United States.

He completed courses in Chile, from 1911 to 1913, the Military School of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins. In 1917 he was promoted to captain. He played an important role in the revolution of 1922 in Paraguay and was later promoted to Major. For their skills was selected to attend the course staff, three-year at the École Supérieure de Guerre at Paris, where he was a disciple of General Maurice Gamelin and Marshal Foch. Estigarribia graduated there with top notes. On his return in 1928 was appointed Chief of Staff of the Army. Less than a year after being named was removed from office because of disagreements with the government regarding the strategy for defending the Chaco, &quot;The Chaco should be advocated abandoning it,&quot; he argued, that is, the point was not occupy the land but to destroy the enemy. However, as the war against Bolivia seemed inevitable, the government decided that Lieutenant Colonel Estigarribia was the man who was needed in the Chaco. He was then 44 years old.

==Chaco War==
The definition of the Chaco War would be a war of communications in which the handling of space and time would be essential. He was determined for the Paraguayan government to accept its general mobilization plan and the beginning of the first offensive surprise Paraguay (September-December 1932) before Bolivia could mobilize its resources.

As commander-in-chief of the army and the conductor of operations, Estigarribia had a brilliant participation in the Chaco War (1932–1935). His strategy and tactics have since attracted the interest and the study of military academies around the world. He managed to stop the Bolivian advance towards the Paraguay River and destroyed powerful enemy divisions by flexibly using positional combat and guerrilla warfare techniques.

Since the army was under his command, Paraguay&#x27;s maximum effort clearly led a successful military campaign against the Bolivian army, superior in men and resources, making back to the Rio Parapiti. His strategic thinking about the war of movement, the importance of logistics (especially water), concentration of forces surprise, the passage from the defensive to the offensive, and the thorough knowledge of the enemy and the terrain of operations placed him in a privileged among military drivers between the two world wars. He made the most of the officers under his command and was believed to exhibit the combative and moral virtues of a Paraguayan soldier.

He directed the Paraguayan Army during the first year of war with the rank of colonel. He was promoted to general after the victory of Campo Grande and Pozo Favorite. In recognition of services rendered to the defending the Chaco, he was promoted to the rank of marshal after his death in 1940.

==Postwar==
Estigarribia was elected president for a four-year term in 1939 and assumed office on August 15. Six months later on February 19, 1940, Estigarribia dissolved the legislature, seized emergency powers, and suspended the Constitution. Declaring that &quot;our nation is on the edge of horrible anarchy&quot;, he announced that democracy would be restored as soon as a workable constitutional framework could be designed. 

It turned out to be an empty promise; within five months, he recast the constitution into a severely authoritarian document. The president was vested with sweeping powers to act for what he deemed to be the good of the state, codifying Estigarribia&#x27;s emergency powers. At the same time, the legislature&#x27;s powers were significantly curtailed. The constitution, approved in an August referendum, transformed Estigarribia&#x27;s presidency into a legal dictatorship.

On September 7, 1940, Estigarribia and his wife, First Lady Julia Miranda Cueto, were on a tour of the Paraguayan interior. On a trip from Altos to his country residence in San Bernardino, his plane crashed in Agapuey and all those on board were killed. Estigarribia was succeeded by Higinio Morínigo and was posthumously promoted to the rank of marshal. His authoritarian constitution would remain in effect until 1967, when it was replaced with what many deemed an equally authoritarian document that remained in effect until 1992.

==References==
==External links==
* Biography (Presidency of the Republic of Paraguay)
* Jose Felix Estigarribia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379670" start="0" end="35" title="José Félix Estigarribia" label="José Félix Estigarribia Insaurralde"/>
<link wikidata="Q34071" start="146" end="167" title="President of Paraguay" label="President of Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="199" end="210" title="Aviation accidents and incidents" label="plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="280" end="298" title="Commander-in-chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447368" start="306" end="321" title="Paraguayan Army" label="Paraguayan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q223126" start="333" end="342" title="Chaco War" label="Chaco War"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="526" end="533" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="559" end="578" title="Military strategy" label="military strategist"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="590" end="604" title="War" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="622" end="630" title="Hero" label="war hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="667" end="685" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="718" end="731" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928949" start="814" end="828" title="Colorado Party (Paraguay)" label="Colorado Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540713" start="833" end="846" title="Liberal Party (Paraguay)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1051" end="1064" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q887269" start="1187" end="1203" title="Higinio Morínigo" label="Higinio Morínigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639192" start="1366" end="1376" title="Caraguatay, Paraguay" label="Caraguatay"/>
<link wikidata="Q755121" start="1378" end="1388" title="Cordillera Department" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="1451" end="1459" title="Peasant" label="peasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="1463" end="1469" title="Basques" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="1772" end="1782" title="agronomist" label="agronomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1838" end="1843" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1888" end="1894" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q223126" start="1972" end="1981" title="Chaco War" label="Chaco War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="2015" end="2024" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487961" start="2026" end="2042" title="division general" label="division general"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="2048" end="2066" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q559950" start="2311" end="2324" title="Eusebio Ayala" label="Eusebio Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340151" start="2347" end="2368" title="Febrerista Revolution" label="Febrerista Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654212" start="2372" end="2385" title="Rafael Franco" label="Rafael Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147509" start="2620" end="2650" title="Paraguayan Civil War (1922-1923)" label="revolution of 1922 in Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2790" end="2795" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329286" start="6018" end="6035" title="1940 Paraguayan constitutional referendum" label="August referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453161" start="6157" end="6167" title="First Lady of Paraguay" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6168" end="6187" title="Julia Miranda Cueto" label="Julia Miranda Cueto"/>
<link wikidata="Q388644" start="6281" end="6295" title="San Bernardino, Paraguay" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q887269" start="6392" end="6408" title="Higinio Morínigo" label="Higinio Morínigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="6454" end="6461" title="marshal" label="marshal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780225" wikidata="Q952515" url="?curid=780225" title="Harringay">
<text>Harringay (pronounced ) is a district of north London, England, within the London Borough of Haringey. It is centred on the section of Green Lanes running between the New River, where it crosses Green Lanes by Finsbury Park, and Duckett&#x27;s Common, near Turnpike Lane.

==Location==
The boundaries of Harringay form a rough boot shape in the extreme southern centre of the borough of Haringey. The western boundary of Harringay is formed by the East Coast Main Line. The northern boundary is to the south of Turnpike Lane, running parallel to it, somewhere between Sydney Road and Fairfax Road. In the northeast, the boundary roughly corresponds with a line drawn between the south of Duckett&#x27;s Common and the north end of Warwick Gardens. A line due south of this point, as far as Eade Road, forms the eastern boundary. Southeast of here a line to Finsbury Park completes the southeastern limits. Finsbury Park is officially part of Harringay and forms the south western boundary.

From north to south, between the tip of Finsbury Park and the top of Ducketts Common, Harringay measures about . At its widest point, from east to west, it measures about .

==Locale==

Harringay&#x27;s main shopping street, Green Lanes, is a busy, cosmopolitan high street. Some shops have a long-established presence. Others reflect the more cosmopolitan nature of Green Lanes and include a large number of Turkish bakeries, grocers, cafes and a growing cluster of restaurants. There are several pubs including the Grade II listed and Pevsner-noted &#x27;Salisbury&#x27;. Parts of the 1980 film &quot;The Long Good Friday&quot; and the 1992 film &quot;Chaplin&quot; were shot there. Towards the southern end stands the well-preserved, Victoriana-laden &#x27;Beaconsfield&#x27; public house. Opposite is the Arena Shopping Park which contains a handful of national multiples outlets, a Sainsbury&#x27;s supermarket, and one of Britain&#x27;s first &quot;drive-thru&quot; McDonald&#x27;s restaurants.

A large section of the eastern side of Green Lanes is called Grand Parade. Interrupted only by the gaps introduced by the residential roads running eastwards, Grand Parade runs for nearly half a kilometre from just north of Harringay Green Lanes railway station to St Ann&#x27;s Road.

The streets to the west of Green Lanes are known as the &#x27;Harringay Ladder&#x27; (due to their similarity to a ladder when seen on a map). The streets to the east behind Grand Parade are known as &#x27;The Gardens&#x27;. To the south of &#x27;The Gardens&#x27; and Sainsbury&#x27;s is Harringay&#x27;s &#x27;Warehouse District&#x27;; to the north is &#x27;Woodlands Park&#x27;.

==Geography and geology==
Harringay is just under from the centre of London sitting on a chalk bed covered by a thick layer of London Clay. The western part of the district is hilly, rising to at its highest. Further to the west, beyond Harringay, the ground rises steadily to one of the highest points in London at Hampstead Heath, about away. The eastern part of Harringay is low-lying, at between 60 and 90 feet, as the land descends towards the Lea Valley, to the east.

Harringay covers an area of approximately . The land use for the area is shown in the table below.
The only waterway still running above ground is the man-made New River, constructed in 1619 to bring water into London from Hertfordshire. However, two natural rivers still flow through Harringay beneath the ground. These are just two of the many springs and streams that used to flow through this part of London from the high ground to the west, down into the River Lea. Stonebridge Brook ran above ground meandering eastwards just to the north of the old Harringay House. It crossed the estate, running roughly beneath present-day Effingham and Fairfax Roads, ran along Green Lanes for a short way, and then eastwards north of St Ann&#x27;s Road and on to the River Lea. Although still flowing underground today, the Harringay section was fully culverted by 1885. Hermitage Brook flowed roughly along the southern boundary of the western part of Harringay and then, staying close to its southern edge, under where the Arena Shopping Park stands today. It was eventually culverted, and now flows underground just to the south of the shopping park.

==History==
===Historical outline===
In the Ice Age Harringay was on the edge of a huge glacial mass that reached as far south as Muswell Hill. The area was then largely covered with forest until the Middle Ages when it was developed as agricultural land. From 1750 to 1880 Harringay experienced the pressures of the burgeoning population in London. Gradually inroads into the pastoral landscape were made, first for the leisure and then for the settlement of Londoners. By 1900 Harringay had become a respectable outer London suburb with all the land built over and only Finsbury Park remaining as a hint of its former character. It remained part of Middlesex and was not within the jurisdiction of the County of London until 1965. Identified as a single unified urban area from 1900, Harringay was originally split between the old boroughs of Hornsey and Tottenham with the boundary between the two running slightly to the west of Green Lanes The unification of the two boroughs in 1965, as the London Borough of Haringey, brought all Harringay under the control of a single unit of local governance for the first time in more than a thousand years. On many of the roads in West Harringay, it is still possible to see the old Tottenham - Hornsey boundary where the paving stones give way to tarmacked pavement. The old parish / borough boundary markers are also still in place on some roads (see picture, right).

===Etymology===

The name &quot;Harringay&quot; has its origin in the Saxon period and is derived from the name of a Saxon chieftain called Haering. &quot;Haering&#x27;s Hege&quot; meant Haering&#x27;s enclosure. The earliest written form of the name was recorded as &quot;Harenhg’&quot; in about 1195. Its development thereafter gave rise to the modern-day names of Harringay (the district of London), the London Borough of Haringey and Hornsey (another nearby district of London).

:&quot;Sources:&quot;

===Entertainment===

From 1750 until the second half of the 20th century, Harringay became a destination for Londoners seeking to relax. Hornsey Wood House, Finsbury Park, Harringay Stadium and Harringay Arena were all hugely popular leisure destinations in their day. The stadium and arena site is now occupied by Sainsbury&#x27;s and the Arena Shopping Park. In the 21st century, Harringay continues to attract visitors from across London and beyond to visit the ever-growing number of popular restaurants, bars, festivals and live music venues. In the years since 2010 the festivals, bar and music studios of the creative hub in the Harringay Warehouse District is also attracting people to Harringay as an entertainment centre.

===Transport and communications history===

There is little doubt that the history of transport communications through Harringay had a significant effect on its shape today. In Roman times, a great roadway through the area to the north was established. This roadway endured as a great communication passage to the north and brought much activity through the heart of the area. It also acted as the rough dividing line for land ownership, identifying Harringay&#x27;s position on the edge of manorial and subsequently borough boundaries.

In the mid-19th century, the arrival of the Great Northern Railway (GNR) cleaved western Harringay from the rest of the Borough of Hornsey and set it fair for its subsequent union with the southwesternmost slice of the Borough of Tottenham. The subsequent construction of the Tottenham &amp; Hampstead Junction Railway (THJR) almost defined Harringay&#x27;s present-day southern boundary.

==Demographics==

At the 2011 census, the population of Harringay was about 22,136.

The ethnic breakdown is: 64% white, 12% black, 12% Asian, 6% Mixed and 5% other. 71% of its inhabitants were born in Europe, with 12% in Asia, 7% in Africa (mainly eastern &amp; southern), and 1% in North America. Within this mix 3% were born in Turkey.

About 41% of the population report themselves as Christian, 14% as Muslim, 1% as Jewish and 40% as not religious or no religion stated.

60% of residents are classified as being in the A/B &amp; C1 NRS social grades.

Of a total of around 9,199 dwellings in Harringay, approximately 39% are owner-occupied and about 44% are privately rented accommodation. 14% are public or other council housing. About 40% of the dwellings are houses, with the remainder being flats, most often converted from the largely Victorian housing stock.

==Education==

There are four generally well regarded schools located within Harringay. These are shown below together with the number of places available in 2018:

*North Harringay Primary (460)
*South Harringay Infants (241)
*South Harringay Junior (218)
*Chestnuts Primary (461)

Inspection reports on Harringay&#x27;s four schools are available at the Ofsted website.

==Sport==

Harringay became both nationally and internationally famous for the sporting events that were held in the Harringay Stadium and the Harringay Arena from the late 1920s until the 1980s. Greyhound racing, boxing and speedway were the main attractions. Today, Harringay is home to the London Meteors who are based in the former cricket pitch in Finsbury Park, at the corner of Endymion Road and Green Lanes.

==Green Harringay==

22.5% of Harringay is open space:

*Finsbury Park - officially part of Harringay
*The Green Flag awarded Railway Fields Local Nature Reserve, near Harringay Green Lanes Station
*The New River Path, accessible from Wightman Road and from Green Lanes opposite Finsbury Park
*Ducketts Common, opposite Turnpike Lane station
* A very small area of open land called &quot;Harringay Stadium Slopes&quot; to the south and east of Sainsbury&#x27;s car park, above Hermitage Road, accessible from Surrey Gardens, off Finsbury Park Avenue
*Fairland Park, Falkland Road, N8
*The roof garden at North Harringay Primary School
*A small, but very well kept and award-winning, community garden in Doncaster Gardens (off Stanhope Gardens)

Also close by are:
*The Parkland Walk, running through nearby Stroud Green up to Highgate
*Alexandra Park
*Queen&#x27;s Wood
*Woodberry Wetlands (formerly known as &#x27;East Reservoir&#x27; between Harringay &amp; Stoke Newington)
*Highgate Wood
*Chestnuts Park, by St Ann&#x27;s Road
*Priory Park, at the end of Hornsey High Street

==People from Harringay==

:&quot;See :Category:People from Harringay&quot;

==Harringay on film and television==

Films shot in part or in their entirety in Harringay include:
*&quot;London River&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Broken Lines&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Jhoom Barabar Jhoom&quot; (2006)
*&quot;The Lives of the Saints&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Spider&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Face&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Chaplin&quot; (1992)
*&quot;The Fourth Protocol (film)&quot; (1987)
*&quot;The Long Good Friday&quot; (1980)
*&quot;The Angel Who Pawned her Heart&quot; (1954)

TV productions in Harringay include:

*Harringay Arena was the home of the Horse of the Year Show for its first ten years, from 1947 onwards. In 1958, the show featured in the first broadcast of the BBC&#x27;s new Saturday afternoon sports programme &quot;Grandstand&quot;.
*Harringay Stadium was the home of Greyhound racing on London Weekend Television&#x27;s &quot;World of Sport&quot; between 1972 and 1982.
*&quot;Murder Prevention&quot; (2004; Channel 5) – shot in and around Harringay, Stroud Green and Crouch End

== Transport and local area ==

===Nearest places===
* Stroud Green
* Crouch End
* Muswell Hill
* Stoke Newington
* Hornsey
* Turnpike Lane
* Wood Green
* St Ann&#x27;s
* West Green
* Finsbury Park
* Manor House

===Places of interest===
* St Paul&#x27;s Church – striking modernist church on Wightman Road
* The Salisbury – well-preserved Victorian pub; listed by English Heritage
* Hornsey Church – 13th-century church tower
* See also &quot;Green Harringay&quot; above
*Harringay Warehouse District

===Nearest railway stations===
* Harringay Green Lanes
* Harringay
* Hornsey

===Nearest Underground stations===
* Manor House
* Turnpike Lane

===Buses===
There are three bus routes that connect Green Lanes with the City and the West End: the 29, 141, and 341. The nearby Turnpike Lane bus station offers further connection to the west, east and north.

==See also==
*Langham Working Men&#x27;s Club
*Harringay Racers - a speedway team based at Harringay Stadium
*Harringay Greyhounds - an ice hockey team based at Harringay Arena
*Maynards - a sweet factory in Vale Road

==References==
== External links ==
* Harringay Online – double award-winning neighbourhood network for Harringay residents.
* Google map showing Harringay&#x27;s boundaries
* Harringay Online&#x27;s Harringay Timeline
* Flickr Photo Pool on Harringay
* BBC h2g2 Article, &quot;Harringay, Haringey - So Good they Named it Twice?&quot;
* Wymondham Learning Centre, &quot;Bombs over Harringay&quot;. 9 March 2005.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q952515" start="0" end="9" title="Harringay" label="Harringay"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="41" end="53" title="north London" label="north London"/>
<link wikidata="Q213560" start="75" end="101" title="London Borough of Haringey" label="London Borough of Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602778" start="135" end="146" title="Green Lanes (London)" label="Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579962" start="167" end="176" title="New River (London)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="210" end="223" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311517" start="229" end="250" title="Ducketts Common" label="Duckett&amp;#x27;s Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q650552" start="257" end="270" title="Turnpike Lane, Haringey" label="Turnpike Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q213560" start="387" end="395" title="London Borough of Haringey" label="Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="448" end="468" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="857" end="870" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="906" end="919" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="1031" end="1044" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311517" start="1060" end="1075" title="Ducketts Common" label="Ducketts Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602778" start="1216" end="1227" title="Green Lanes (London)" label="Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1400" end="1407" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q274393" start="1408" end="1416" title="bakeries" label="bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="1418" end="1424" title="grocer" label="grocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741434" start="1427" end="1431" title="British cafe" label="cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="1458" end="1468" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="1489" end="1492" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1508" end="1523" title="Listed building" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="1528" end="1535" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762114" start="1548" end="1557" title="The Salisbury" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055796" start="1594" end="1614" title="The Long Good Friday" label="The Long Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q556967" start="1645" end="1652" title="Chaplin (film)" label="Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927392" start="1728" end="1738" title="Victoriana" label="Victoriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q507619" start="1857" end="1866" title="Chain store" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="1878" end="1894" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q14253958" start="1946" end="1956" title="drive-thru" label="drive-thru"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="1963" end="1978" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286575" start="2217" end="2254" title="Harringay Green Lanes railway station" label="Harringay Green Lanes railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2751" end="2756" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733342" start="2789" end="2800" title="London Clay" label="London Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622438" start="2950" end="2974" title="List of highest points in London" label="highest points in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570958" start="2978" end="2993" title="Hampstead Heath" label="Hampstead Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508236" start="3111" end="3121" title="Lea Valley" label="Lea Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579962" start="3297" end="3306" title="New River (London)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="3360" end="3373" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="3483" end="3489" title="Spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="3495" end="3501" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602778" start="3808" end="3819" title="Green Lanes (London)" label="Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4330" end="4337" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="4374" end="4381" title="glacial" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432670" start="4416" end="4428" title="Muswell Hill" label="Muswell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4486" end="4497" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="4858" end="4871" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="4937" end="4946" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137312" start="4990" end="5006" title="County of London" label="County of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952832" start="5131" end="5138" title="Municipal Borough of Hornsey" label="Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278079" start="5143" end="5152" title="Municipal Borough of Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602778" start="5219" end="5230" title="Green Lanes (London)" label="Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213560" start="5283" end="5309" title="London Borough of Haringey" label="London Borough of Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="5607" end="5613" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="5616" end="5623" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q921099" start="5624" end="5639" title="boundary marker" label="boundary marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="5772" end="5777" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213560" start="6109" end="6135" title="London Borough of Haringey" label="London Borough of Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454407" start="6140" end="6147" title="Hornsey" label="Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="6366" end="6379" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664526" start="6381" end="6398" title="Harringay Stadium" label="Harringay Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664507" start="6403" end="6418" title="Harringay Arena" label="Harringay Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="6524" end="6540" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="7119" end="7130" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="7433" end="7441" title="manorial" label="manorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="7459" end="7466" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q181811" start="7524" end="7546" title="Great Northern Railway (Great Britain)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952832" start="7600" end="7618" title="Municipal Borough of Hornsey" label="Borough of Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278079" start="7699" end="7719" title="Municipal Borough of Tottenham" label="Borough of Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828463" start="7756" end="7798" title="Tottenham &amp;amp; Hampstead Junction Railway" label="Tottenham &amp;amp; Hampstead Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="7895" end="7906" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="7984" end="7989" title="White people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="7995" end="8000" title="Black people" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="8006" end="8011" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="8016" end="8021" title="Multiracial" label="Mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="8259" end="8268" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8277" end="8283" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8291" end="8297" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170224" start="8408" end="8425" title="NRS social grade" label="NRS social grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q98108964" start="8501" end="8515" title="owner occupier" label="owner-occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="8534" end="8550" title="Renting" label="privately rented"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="8590" end="8605" title="council housing" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="8716" end="8725" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="8924" end="8931" title="Primary school" label="Primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131293161" start="8955" end="8962" title="Infant school" label="Infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313551" start="8986" end="8992" title="Junior school" label="Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="9010" end="9017" title="Primary school" label="Primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664526" start="9232" end="9249" title="Harringay Stadium" label="Harringay Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664507" start="9258" end="9273" title="Harringay Arena" label="Harringay Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345388" start="9311" end="9327" title="Greyhound racing" label="Greyhound racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="9329" end="9335" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="9340" end="9348" title="Motorcycle speedway" label="speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258969" start="9408" end="9422" title="London Mets" label="London Meteors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="9468" end="9481" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="9589" end="9602" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602556" start="9639" end="9649" title="Green Flag award" label="Green Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284158" start="9658" end="9672" title="Railway Fields" label="Railway Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457526" start="9673" end="9693" title="Local Nature Reserve" label="Local Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286575" start="9700" end="9729" title="Harringay Green Lanes railway station" label="Harringay Green Lanes Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011251" start="9735" end="9749" title="New River Path" label="New River Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602778" start="9790" end="9801" title="Green Lanes (London)" label="Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311517" start="9826" end="9841" title="Ducketts Common" label="Ducketts Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757107" start="9852" end="9873" title="Turnpike Lane tube station" label="Turnpike Lane station"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="9976" end="9992" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661835" start="10301" end="10314" title="Parkland Walk" label="Parkland Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976133" start="10339" end="10351" title="Stroud Green, London" label="Stroud Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918203" start="10368" end="10382" title="Alexandra Park, London" label="Alexandra Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270149" start="10384" end="10401" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758569" start="10510" end="10523" title="Highgate Wood" label="Highgate Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094022" start="10525" end="10539" title="Chestnuts Park" label="Chestnuts Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245507" start="10564" end="10575" title="Priory Park, Haringey" label="Priory Park"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10650" end="10681" title=":Category:People from Harringay" label=":Category:People from Harringay"/>
<link wikidata="Q477839" start="10796" end="10808" title="London River" label="London River"/>
<link wikidata="Q576941" start="10862" end="10881" title="Jhoom Barabar Jhoom" label="Jhoom Barabar Jhoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q930777" start="10946" end="10952" title="Spider (2002 film)" label="Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064058" start="10973" end="10977" title="Face (1997 film)" label="Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q556967" start="10998" end="11005" title="Chaplin (film)" label="Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171720" start="11026" end="11052" title="The Fourth Protocol (film)" label="The Fourth Protocol (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055796" start="11073" end="11093" title="The Long Good Friday" label="The Long Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664507" start="11198" end="11213" title="Harringay Arena" label="Harringay Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q238715" start="11234" end="11256" title="Horse of the Year Show" label="Horse of the Year Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407317" start="11415" end="11425" title="Grandstand (BBC)" label="Grandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664526" start="11434" end="11451" title="Harringay Stadium" label="Harringay Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="11488" end="11520" title="London Weekend Television" label="London Weekend Television&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036633" start="11527" end="11541" title="World of Sport (UK TV series)" label="World of Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976133" start="11736" end="11748" title="Stroud Green, London" label="Stroud Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q24502" start="11751" end="11761" title="Crouch End" label="Crouch End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432670" start="11764" end="11776" title="Muswell Hill" label="Muswell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="11779" end="11794" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454407" start="11797" end="11804" title="Hornsey" label="Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q650552" start="11807" end="11820" title="Turnpike Lane, Haringey" label="Turnpike Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992780" start="11823" end="11833" title="Wood Green" label="Wood Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592452" start="11836" end="11849" title="St Ann&amp;#x27;s (Neighbourhood of Haringey)" label="St Ann&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019077" start="11852" end="11862" title="West Green, London" label="West Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q122566" start="11865" end="11878" title="Finsbury Park (area)" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780499" start="11881" end="11892" title="Manor House, London" label="Manor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595130" start="11921" end="11942" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Harringay" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="11954" end="11963" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762114" start="11990" end="12003" title="The Salisbury" label="The Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12119" end="12146" title="#Green Harringay" label="&amp;quot;Green Harringay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711269" start="12154" end="12182" title="Harringay Warehouse District" label="Harringay Warehouse District"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286575" start="12217" end="12238" title="Harringay Green Lanes railway station" label="Harringay Green Lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241512" start="12241" end="12250" title="Harringay railway station" label="Harringay"/>
<link wikidata="Q600848" start="12253" end="12260" title="Hornsey railway station" label="Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549573" start="12299" end="12310" title="Manor House tube station" label="Manor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757107" start="12313" end="12326" title="Turnpike Lane tube station" label="Turnpike Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="12401" end="12405" title="City of London" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="12414" end="12422" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670053" start="12424" end="12430" title="London Buses route 29" label="the 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669951" start="12432" end="12435" title="London Buses route 141" label="141"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12441" end="12444" title="London Buses route 341" label="341"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757107" start="12457" end="12482" title="Turnpike Lane bus station" label="Turnpike Lane bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486075" start="12553" end="12584" title="Langham Working Men&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Langham Working Men&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664520" start="12586" end="12602" title="Harringay Racers" label="Harringay Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664526" start="12630" end="12647" title="Harringay Stadium" label="Harringay Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664516" start="12649" end="12669" title="Harringay Greyhounds" label="Harringay Greyhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664507" start="12700" end="12715" title="Harringay Arena" label="Harringay Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797447" start="12717" end="12725" title="Maynards" label="Maynards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512410" start="12796" end="12812" title="Harringay Online" label="Harringay Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780229" wikidata="Q888085" url="?curid=780229" title="Bob Lutz (tennis)">
<text>Robert Lutz (born August 29, 1947) is an American former amateur and a professional tennis player of the 1960s and 1970s. He and Stan Smith were one of the best doubles teams of all time. Bud Collins ranked Lutz as world No. 7 in singles in 1972. From 1967 to 1977, he was ranked amongst the top-10 American players eight times, with his highest ranking being No. 5 in both 1968 and 1970.

==Career==
Lutz won the 1967 NCAA singles title, and with Stan Smith, won the NCAA doubles crown in 1967 and 1968. He won the men&#x27;s singles in the Ojai Tennis Tournament in 1966.

During his career, he won 11 singles titles, the most important being the U.S. Pro Tennis Championships in 1972 and the Paris Masters in 1978. He reached 15 other singles finals, including Cincinnati in 1974. He won 43 doubles titles, 37 of which were won with Stan Smith, and he reached 30 other doubles finals. With Smith, he formed the only team to win the doubles title at U.S. Championships on four different surfaces (clay, grass, hard and indoor). His doubles titles include the US Open in 1980, 1978, 1974, and 1968; the Australian Open in 1970 and Cincinnati in 1969. In addition, he played on five winning Davis Cup teams between 1968 and 1981 and had a 14–2 record playing doubles. Lutz was nominated for the ITF Tennis Hall of Fame thanks to these achievements.

==Honors and personal life==
He was inducted into the Collegiate Tennis Hall of Fame in 1984. Lutz, a 1971 graduate of the University of Southern California, was inducted into the school&#x27;s Hall of Fame in 2009. He has been living in San Clemente, California since 1973 with his wife Sharon and their daughters Samantha and Allison.

==Career finals==
===Singles===
===Doubles===
==Grand Slam finals==
===Doubles===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q888085" start="0" end="11" title="Bob Lutz (tennis)" label="Robert Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="84" end="90" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54657" start="129" end="139" title="Stan Smith" label="Stan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967745" start="161" end="168" title="doubles (tennis)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000491" start="188" end="199" title="Bud Collins" label="Bud Collins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="419" end="437" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Tennis Championship#Singles" label="NCAA singles title"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="468" end="486" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Tennis Championship#Doubles" label="NCAA doubles crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848643" start="542" end="564" title="Ojai Tennis Tournament" label="Ojai Tennis Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001662" start="649" end="678" title="1972 U.S. Pro Tennis Championships" label="U.S. Pro Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230166" start="695" end="708" title="Paris Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="764" end="774" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="1061" end="1068" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="1104" end="1119" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="1191" end="1200" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780230" wikidata="Q738355" url="?curid=780230" title="Dumarsais Estimé">
<text>Dumarsais Estimé (April 21, 1900 – July 20, 1953) was a Haitian politician and President of the Haitian Republic from August 16, 1946, to May 10, 1950. 

Previously, he was a member of the Parliament for Verrettes for 16 years, as well as President of the Chamber and Minister (Secretary of State) for Public Education, Agriculture, and Labour.

The memory of his presidency remains very prominent among many Haitians due to the reforms undertaken and the undeniable economic and social progress that the Republic of Haiti experienced during this era. Among his more notable achievements are things such as the International Exhibition organized in 1949 to commemorate the bicentenary of the founding of Port-au-Prince in 1749 by the French colonists from the island of Santo Domingo (Le Livre Bleu), the expansion of the city of Belladère along the Dominican Republic border as a symbol of development, and the construction of a suspension bridge over the Grande-Anse River which still continues to serve region as river crossing to this day. It is important to also remember the laws passed and the investments made for the development of rural areas, the construction of many schools and the modernisation of the whole education system, as well as the protection of workers’ rights through the Labor Code and ultimately the creation of proper conditions for economic growth, mostly in tourism and small industry sectors. During this period, there was also significant improvement in the living conditions of the Haitian population.

In May 1950, a coup d’état organized by a military junta overthrew the government of Estimé and placed its leader, Paul Magloire, as head of the country, where he would be elected to the presidency in October 1950. Estimé was shortly deposed and exiled by the Haitian army led by Franck Lavaud. After travelling in France, Jamaica, and the USA, he died in New York on July 20, 1953. Estimé was the last president to be constitutionally elected to office by the Chamber of Deputies, whereas Magloire was the first to be elected to office by universal adult male suffrage. 

==Youth and education==
Estimé was born on April 21, 1900, in Verrettes, a Haitian town located in the Artibonite Province, into a landowner’s family. His father, Alciné Estimé, was the son of Sara Dorval (1845–1938) and Estimé Pierre (1851–1904), among a group of siblings consisting of four boys and six girls. His mother, Fleurencia Massillon, was described as caring and made a deep impression on her son throughout his life, just as much as the death of his father did when Dumarsais was still a child. 

His uncle, Estilus Estimé, mayor of Verrettes (1936) and senator of the Republic (1938), ensured his education and exercised a great deal of influence over Dumarsais. Estilus attempted to make Dumarsais aware of the Haitian social reality of the time and convinced him of the need for greater integrity in public affairs. 

Estilus Estimé sent the young Dumarsais to the friars of Saint-Louis de Gonzague in St Marc; he then attended Collège Pinchinat and went to Lycée Alexandre-Pétion in Port-au-Prince until his baccalaureate. At these institutions it is reported he was taught by masters such as Jean Price-Mars, Catts Pressoir and Jean-Chrysostome Dorsainvil. Dumarsais was fifteen when the American Occupation of Haiti began in July 1915 and this period would profoundly influence his teenage years along with his future career. In 1920, he was appointed as a tutor at Lycée Pétion while still attending law school. He taught mathematics there until 1926, also graduating during this time. Dumarsais was dismissed from his position after publicly expressing his opposition to the government of President Louis Borno and the then ongoing United States occupation of Haiti. Dumarsais was described as a scholar (passionate about French literature and philosophy) with a fierce desire to liberate Haiti from foreign influence and change Haitian society. It was necessary, according to him, to fight against the abuses of the traditional elite and educate the masses.

==Early political career==
===Election to the Chamber of Deputies===
As a lawyer, he first practised in St. Marc before entering politics and being elected deputy in 1930 in the constituency of Verrettes. On February 21, 1935, he won the confidence of his colleagues who elected him President of the Chamber of Deputies with 27 votes out of 28.

Minister of Public Instruction, Agriculture and Labour
In 1937 he joined President Sténio Vincent’s government and was nominated Minister (Secretary of State, after the former terminology) for Public instruction, Agriculture and Labour, while he kept his seat at the Parliament. 

During his two years as the Minister overseeing education, he showed a desire to extend education and culture to all Haitian people, in particular the underprivileged. Pursuing his goal, Estimé cared to improve the level and quality of teachers’ training, to raise the salaries of teachers and professors, to reorganize high schools, and to reform the Haitian baccalaureate and the organization of exams, as well as the introduction of Bachelor of Letters and Bachelor of Sciences university programs. The aim of Dumarsais was a system of education equal to the level of foreign universities which were then offering scholarships for studies abroad to young Haitian men and women. During this time he also ordered the construction of more schools in rural areas and organized the National Library of Port-au-Prince along with its local branches. The Normal School of Female Teachers was created in Port-au-Prince, responding to an important need to promote the socio-economic role of women in Haitian society. 

Knowing the importance of the agricultural sector in the national economy, Estimé made sure to provide the Ministry of Agriculture with competent counsellors. The stated objective was to strengthen food crops, but also to develop the cultivation of foodstuffs for export to balance the trade market.

When President Vincent proposed his secretary, Élie Lescot, to the National Assembly as a potential successor in 1941, Estimé voted in his favour and Lescot was elected President. However, on April 19, 1944, Estimé opposed Lescot’s re-election, disapproving of the partial revision of the Constitution undertaken by the president, and voted against him. The latter was, however, re-elected by a majority.

===Election to the presidency===
As a deputy, Estimé observed the events of 1946 closely – the economic crisis and a serious social crisis induced by the legitimate demands of the underprivileged classes –which led to the resignation of President Lescot. The provisional government, led by Franck Lavaud, set up for new elections. 

While communists and nationalists wanted a regime change, Estimé presented himself to voters as a moderate candidate and was re-elected in the legislative elections of 1946.

On August 16, with the moderates having obtained a majority in the Chamber of Deputies, Estimé was nominated as a candidate. He was then elected President of the Republic for four years after a second vote by deputies, with 31 votes out of 58. His first gesture as the newly elected president was to greet his opponents: Dantès Louis Bellegarde, Edgard Numa, and Demosthenes Calixte.

His ascension to the presidency in 1946 came in the wake of a long period of great effervescence, the culmination of social, political and cultural movements involving students, women, unions and political parties. At the time Haiti was trying to get out of the social and coloured cleavages which have continued to dominate politics since independence and particularly after the American Occupation (1915–1934). The political and economic powers were dominated by a mulatto bourgeoisie which did not favour social mixing. The so-called “Révolution de 1946” was, above all, an attempt to transform Haitian society, but it had to face a lot of resistance.

As a deputy, Estimé observed the events of 1946 closely – the economic crisis and a serious social crisis induced by the legitimate demands of the underprivileged classes –which led to the resignation of President Lescot. The provisional government, led by Franck Lavaud, set up for new elections. 

On August 16, with the moderates having obtained a majority in the Chamber of Deputies, Estimé was nominated as a candidate. He was then elected President of the Republic for four years after a second vote by deputies, with 31 votes out of 58. His first gesture as the newly elected president was to greet his opponents: Dantès Louis Bellegarde, Edgard Numa, and Demosthenes Calixte.

==Presidency==
Dumarsais Estimé was elected President of the Haitian Republic on August 16, 1946. 5, 

In his speech addressed to the National Assembly, Estimé had these words: ‘It is the great family of the masses of which I am a representative that you wanted to honour.’ However, he appealed to everyone’s unity and goodwill: ‘This is the hour when each of us must demonstrate that the Nation is the first and most sacred of concerns.’ 

Estimé urged morality within the government: ‘If we, the shepherds of the flock, become wolves […] then it will be time to be judged and held accountable.’ 

His arrival to power was not well received, but over time public opinion rallied, appreciating the gathering of a government of national unity – a rare occurrence in the history of Haiti – bringing together former opponents who were invited to bury the hatchet, such as Georges Rigaud and Daniel Fignolé, and representatives of all social and political tendencies except the communists. The rapid implementation of an ambitious social and economic program which met the needs of the majority, then further finalized public support.

===1946 Constitution===

On November 22, 1946, the National Constituent Assembly, under the chairmanship of Senator Jean Bélizaire, voted on the new Constitution of the Republic of Haiti, following the previous 1935 Constitution. 

This new constitution protected fundamental freedoms and guaranteed the rights of the Haitian people. It also established a presidential system under which the President of the Republic, elected for six years, was endowed with a field of competence ranging from the definition of major political orientations to the control of government actions, diplomacy and the army.

The 1946 Constitution introduced the habeas corpus principle. This principle guaranteed that a person under arrest had the right to a quick presentation before a judge, so they could rule on the validity of their arrest. This provision is the basis for the rule of law. This constitution also prohibited extradition for political reasons. It made the separation of the army and the police, as well as annual paid leave, compulsory. 

The Constitution of 1946, unlike that of 1935, did not grant the executive power a hand on Legislature, the Judiciary, nor the title of Chief of the Armed Forces for the acting President of the Republic of Haiti. 

===Economic and social reforms===

Poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, deficient and under-exploited agricultural systems, financial difficulties, endemic diseases, deeply rooted social divisions – these are the difficulties which the government of 1946 had to tackle in the aftermath of the Second World War, which had further worsened Haiti’s economic situation.

It was necessary first to clean up the financial situation and free the Republic of Haiti from financial supervision imposed by the United States following the conventions and protocols forced by the American occupier (1915, 1917 and 1922), and from the 1922 loan, contracted to balance previous loans with the French in 1875, 1896, and 1910. In December 1946, Estimé dispatched to President Harry Truman in Washington a ‘goodwill mission’ composed by the Minister of Finance, Gaston Margron; the Minister of External Relations, Jean Price-Mars; the Minister of Commerce, Georges Rigaud; and the Haitian Ambassador to Washington, Joseph D. Charles. Their objective was to negotiate the terms of a new loan ‘guaranteed by funds set aside by the Tax Department to repay the holders of the 1922–23 loan’. The US government rejected the Haitian request.

In a radio speech on March 25, 1947 (which has gone down in history under the title ‘happy miscounts’), President Estimé called on the Haitian people to help unblock the situation and contribute to the payment of the debt. Some ‘Bons de Libération Financière’ were issued and subscriptions flowed nationwide. Thanks to this popular mobilisation and to a 10-year domestic loan at 5%, the American loan of 1922–23 was repaid and on July 10, 1947, the Republic of Haiti put an end to the financial control of the United States. On October 1, 1947, the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti became a Haitian entity with an entirely Haitian board of directors.

===Economic development and employment===

Fighting catastrophic unemployment and raising the standard of living and education for the underprivileged Haitian population was a great priority for Estimé. 

With the Haitian State freed from its debt, Estimé embarked on a policy of reviving the economy (Law of July 12, 1947) and administrative and fiscal reforms intended to continue financial consolidation and increase revenue for the State (Law of September 15, 1947, specifying the modalities of budget execution and public accounting; Law of June 23, 1947, establishing a Chamber of Accounts; Law of November 7, 1948, on rental taxes; Law of August 29, 1949, on custom taxation; etc.). 

Estimé asked the UN Secretary-General to send a technical mission to assess the general situation of the country and make recommendations in the areas of economics and finance, education, health and culture. The Commission submitted the report (which was published by the UN) so that the government could incorporate the policies into its development plan.

The increase in exports and the prices of agricultural raw materials during this post-war period, notably coffee, sisal and bananas, helped to improve the country’s financial situation. Between 1946 and 1949, the Haitian state budget increased from 46 million to 73 million gourdes, thanks to new tax revenues and profits generated by cement and sugar. At the same time, the public debt fell from 42 million gourdes in 1946 to 40 million gourdes in 1949. 

===Agriculture and rural development===
The disastrous state of agriculture in Haiti, linked to unfavourable structural factors (small size of family farms, inadequate cultivation methods, deforestation and soil exhaustion, absenteeism of the large landowners who represented about 3% of the population and owned nearly 70% of cultivable land, climatic hazards, etc.) and administrative neglect, was made worse by rural overpopulation, more than three quarters of whom lived below the poverty line.

Aware of the need to fundamentally improve the situation of the agricultural sector and ensure a fresh start for the Haitian economy, and to find solutions to the landless problem, Estimé implemented an integrated approach to agricultural and rural development. 
Starting in the summer of 1946, many studies were undertaken and over the following years many projects were carried out, in particular the ODVA (Organisme de Développement de la Vallée de l&#x27;Artibonite) financed mainly by a loan of $4 million from the EXIM Bank of the United States. This project was to use the waters of the Artibonite River for methodical agricultural development based on the modern techniques of this region (in particular, rice fields) and the improvement of living for local populations. This development of land, including land suitable for cultivation, also had a positive impact on the exports of certain agricultural goods and therefore on the country’s trade balance. This project continued beyond Estimé’s presidency, after May 1950. 

Among the many projects implemented were irrigation and drainage works in the rich valley of the Estère River and others (Los Pozos, Blue Lagoon, Limbé plain, etc.); repair work on certain networks (Momance-Léogâne-Rivière Grise, Plaine du Cul-de-sac, Matheux, Corail Canal, etc.); soil conservation and reforestation projects (La Vallée project, Morne de l&#x27;Hôpital project, Mapou-Périsse project, etc.); and the preservation of forest estates . 

In 1947 the National Coffee Board was created with the mission to support the activities of small farmers and promote coffee exports. While particular attention was focused on the general improvement of cultivation methods in rural Haiti (i.e. under the Law of October 8, 1949, the possibility to import duty-free, tools, instruments and fertiliser), the promotion and organisation of agricultural cooperatives, and the improved training of agronomists and technicians (National School of Agriculture), Estimé did not have the time to undertake an in-depth agrarian reform to let Haitian peasants own the land.

===Labour and social affairs===

While resolutely encouraging private investment to develop the Haitian economy and employment, Estimé attached the utmost importance to a modern and fair labour policy. The Estimé government created the Ministry and the Labour Office in 1946. The increase in the minimum wage level (despite the reluctance of the commercial sector) and the promulgation of the first Labour Code in 1947 are among the notable advances in workers’ rights, alongside the support to create trade unions (law of July 17, 1947) regulating the functioning of trade union associations. 

===Public works===

Estimé showed his desire to provide the country with the basic infrastructure necessary for its economic development as well as launching a policy of major public works, stimulating job creation: the construction of a new town at the border, Belladère, as a symbol of development facing the Dominican Republic; the construction and repair of roads, bridges (including the suspension bridge of the Grand ’Anse), markets, and drinking water fountains; public buildings; development of provincial towns; and town planning work undertaken in the capital to prepare for the International Exhibition to commemorate the bicentenary of the founding of Port-au-Prince. The lighting of towns became widespread: the Croix-des-Bouquets power plant was inaugurated in 1948, followed by those of Belladère, Port-de-Paix, Jérémie and other cities.

===1949 international exhibition===
The law of July 14, 1948, stipulated that it was necessary for the country to greatly commemorate the bicentenary of the founding of Port-au-Prince in 1949, and to this end that &quot;it was necessary to ensure the execution of the project conceived by the Head of the Executive Power to organise an International Exhibition to be inaugurated in Port-au-Prince in December 1949’. This law specified ‘that from a touristic, agricultural and industrial point of view, the execution of this project (would) be entirely favourable to the country’. This International Exhibition was to promote the rebirth and strengthening of ties between peoples and to stimulate the resumption and development of economic relations between countries, especially since it would be located in &quot;a place in America considered as one of the most important crossroads on the major maritime and air routes on the Atlantic&quot;. 

The International Exhibition was to have an area of 30 hectares and cover most of the capital’s waterfront by cleaning up this swampy and slum-occupied part of the coast (les Palmistes, Nan Pisquette, Wharf-aux-Herbes) and gaining land on the sea, thanks to the most modern techniques of the time and the collaboration of Haitian, American and Belgian engineers. 

Taking only 18 months to organise, which was considered an extraordinary performance, the Exhibition opened on December 8, 1949. It consisted of 56 pavilions and a casino, divided into four sections: National, International, heavy industry and machinery, and attractions. Eighteen countries and nations were represented , to which must be added the United Nations (UN) and the Organization of American States (OAS). 

In his inaugural speech of December 8 President Estimé declared: ‘I greet with the deepest sympathy the representatives of these friendly nations, as well as the delegations that have specially come to take part in this feast of peace, and publicly ask them to trust the recognition from the Haitian government and people…’ He further underlined: ‘Although it (the Exhibition) is one of the first stones of a new Haiti, the representation in clear lines and happy images of what we want to do with this country…’ and also added that: ‘It is the work of patience and the skill of hundreds of intellectual and manual workers, both foreigners and Haitians, to whom it is necessary to pay a fair homage, and of the enthusiastic multitudes who animate and support it with their understanding and their passion…’

Foreign firms also participated in the International Exhibition of 1949 in Port-au-Prince. During the preparation of the event, a new legislation was passed to attract foreign direct investment. The law of June 24, 1948, stated that all materials needed for the construction and final installation of hotels would be exempt from import duties for five years. The law of October 8, 1949, granted total or partial tax exemptions to new industries for a maximum of five years, and to industrial companies in general for a maximum of two years, exempting them from the license, the patent, the income tax and the customs duties on import and export. 

The economic, cultural and social benefits of the Exhibition were undoubtedly significant. In the tourism sector in particular the number of visitors increased rapidly, from around 2,000 annually before the Exhibition to more than 240,000 in the 1950s. 

===Education===
The fight against illiteracy, known under the name ‘Program Dumarsais Estimé’, highlighted the presidential desire to educate the urban and rural masses to make them instruments of national development. By virtue of the laws promulgated on August 8, 1947, and November 11, 1949, respectively, the government of the Republic proceeded to reorganise the Department (Ministry) of National Education by creating the positions of Director General and Deputy Director General, following the powers assigned to an Under Secretary of State for National Education under the law of November 23, 1946.
The salaries of teachers and professors were adjusted according to the cost of living. The minimum salary of a teacher, 70 gourdes per month in October 1946, was raised to 100 gourdes in January 1947, reaching the sum of 140 gourdes in October 1947 and 200 gourdes in October 1948. The aim was to make rural education an attractive career for teachers who were trained and capable of handling the problems of rural life.

Under the law of September 29, 1946, the government of the Republic levied 10% of municipal revenue for the construction of public schools. Between February 1947 and May 1949, 23 public schools were built by order of the Head of State, while development and expansion works were carried out on school buildings in the capital and the province.

In October 1946 there were only 623 teachers for 362 rural schools. By May 1949, the number of teachers assigned to rural education had reached 823, an increase of 34% which clearly reflected ‘the special attention to proletarian and peasant youth’ according to the outline of the presidential speech of August 16, 1946. During this same period, more than forty schools and farm schools had been built in rural areas, allowing several thousand Haitians to benefit from education and therefore shape the goals of the president’s education policy for children in need. 

In the same vein, secondary education was not neglected, as proved by the founding of the Lycee Toussaint Louverture in the Morne-à-Tuff area in the capital and the opening of a high school in Hinche and the Faustin Soulouque high school in Petit-Goâve, in accordance with the laws of September 9 and 30, 1946. The high schools of the capital, Cayes and Cap-Haitien, were also renovated. In 1947, the executive passed the law of July 24, authorising the creation of the Ecole Normale Supérieure, a public utility institution dedicated to the intellectual training of secondary school teachers. 

Less than two months later, the government of the Republic created the Ecole Polytechnique d’Haiti, a higher education institution dedicated to the training of engineers and architects, deemed essential for the construction and renovation of national structures. 

===Health===

Along with education, the government of Estimé wanted to remove the obstacles towards primary health care for the population. 

A vast and comprehensive plan was gradually implemented involving the equipping of hospitals and laboratories, the multiplication of health centres, the development of rural medicine and hygiene, the reorganisation of the Faculty of Medicine, dentistry and pharmacy. Thanks to a cooperation agreement with France, a number of French medical professors came to teach at the Faculty of Medicine to make up for the lack of Haitian professors who had resigned following the events of early 1946. 
Campaigns against yaws, malaria, child and endemic diseases were also launched, along with projects to improve public hygiene and fight against malnutrition and tuberculosis. The laws of September 27 and October 8, 1949, provided for the training of managers and technical staff, as well as the organisation of public health services throughout the country. 

===Foreign policy===

The Haitian foreign policy of President Estimé can be described with five main focus points:

* The alliance with the United States
* Inter-American solidarity
* The firm adherence of the Republic of Haiti to the principles set out by the United Nations (UN) and the Organization of American States (OAS)
* Support for decolonisation and the rights of peoples to self-determination 
* Respect for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of 
other countries 
By a law dated November 27, 1946, the government of Estimé reorganised the diplomatic and consular service of Haiti, as well as strengthening the relations with the other countries on the American continent. On July 15, 1948, the Haitian government signed a trade agreement with its Venezuelan counterpart, which defined the broad lines of economic cooperation between the two. With the law of September 6, 1949, Haiti established formal diplomatic relations with Guatemala. On August 22, 1947, diplomatic and consular relations were established between Haiti and the Republic of Panama. In September 1947, the Haitian representatives signed in Rio de Janeiro, then the capital of Brazil, the Inter-American Treaty of Mutual Assistance. In April 1948 the plenipotentiary envoys of Haiti signed in Washington, D.C. the Charter of the Organization of American States, which promoted new relations between the nations of this continent.

Historical ties were strengthened with the United States of America, for bilateral relations. The government of Dumarsais Estimé had signed the decree of May 13, 1949, authorising the presence of an American Naval Mission in Haiti. A contract favourable to the exploitation of bauxite was signed on November 12, 1946, between representatives of the Haitian government and those of the Reynolds Refining Corp, an American mining company.
As a testament to the interest shown in Haitian-Dominican relations, the government of Estimé raised the Haitian diplomatic representation in the Dominican Republic to the rank of an embassy (law of April 25, 1947). On August 22, 1947, Estimé elevated the Haitian representation to the Holy See to the rank of a diplomatic mission.

On the instructions of President Estimé, Emile St.-Lot, at the time permanent representative of the Republic of Haiti to the UN, voted in favour of the creation of the State of Israel on November 29, 1947. Haiti also became an active member of UNESCO and joined the GATT (General Agreement on Customs Tariff and Trade) in 1947. 

===Extension of presidential mandate===

On July 1, 1949, the legislature approved a law completely revising the Constitution. One of the articles to be amended, concerned the end of the president’s term fixed on May 15, 1952. This article caused much controversy. The opposition understood that the real purpose of the draft amendment was to extend the term of office of the head of state, contrary to the provisions of the 1946 Constitution, which stipulated that the president ‘could not under any circumstances benefit from extension of the mandate’. This constitutional provision ensured political alternations while reducing presidential power. 
The legislative elections had been set for January 10, 1950. Public opinion began to stir, and tension mounted as the date approached. A decree on November 14, 1949, re-established the state of siege which had been in effect from March to October. This measure was considered contrary to the Constitution, which only authorised it ‘in cases of civil disturbance, or imminent invasion by a foreign force.’ 
The same day, students of the Faculty of Medicine and Polytechnic began a strike for the restoration of public freedoms which they considered compromised. The government attributed this movement to the subversive activities of the People’s Socialist Party (PSP) and the Popular Workers’ Movement (MOP), allied to the Social Christian Party (PSC), declared the dissolution of these parties, and closed their newspapers. 

===Senate sack===

The newly elected deputies showed themselves willing to support the plans of the executive, while the Senate still refused any form of constitutional revision. It was a stand-off between the upper house, the Senate, and the executive allied to the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies. The head of state and his supporters could not agree to see their plan thwarted. On the morning of May 8, 1950, a crowd invaded the Senate chamber, ransacking it. The crowd then took to the streets, uttering death threats against some senators and personalities accused of treason. In his message to the people that same evening, the president did not explicitly disavow the demonstrators: ‘Your eloquent attitude this morning […] testifies to your political maturity and your direct participation in your affairs. However, he invited them ‘to calm, order and respect the law.’ 
==Military coup and exile==

The army was quick to react. Two days later, on May 10, it made a declaration signed by General Franck Lavaud and Colonels Antoine Levelt and Paul-Eugène Magloire: ‘The President of the Republic has lost control of events […]. By unanimous agreement of the officers, the members of the 1946 junta were asked to once again agree to devote themselves to the sake of the Nation.’ It was the end of the government of Dumarsais Estimé.

A commando of officers and heavily armed soldiers infested the National Palace. ‘The High Staff preceded by Colonel Magloire and his officers from the Dessalines Barracks, armed with machine guns, entered the president’s office and asked him to sign his letter of resignation” which they had previously prepared. President Estimé complied.

Assigned to residence with his family for ten days in a villa made available to him in Port-au-Prince, he was forced to leave. The couple and their three young children took the path of exile.

==Life in exile and death==

After a brief stay in the United States, the family moved to France and stayed there for a few months. To get closer to Haiti, Estimé then opted for Jamaica, which he reached with his family on January 23, 1951, via ‘Colombia’, a liner belonging to the Compagnie Générale Transatlantique. 

On their arrival at the port of Kingston, the Jamaican Immigration Service forbid them to put foot on land, at the request of the Haitian government chaired since October 1950 by Paul Magloire, on the pretext that the ex-president could cause troubles in Jamaica. In fact, Magloire feared the presence of Estimé so close to Haiti and had sent his henchmen (including a certain Lucien Chauvet) to convince the British and Jamaican authorities (Jamaica was not yet independent) to refuse ex-President Estimé and his family refuge in Jamaica.

However, WA Bustamante, head of the Jamaica Labour Party (PLP), mayor of Kingston [and unofficial head of government until his official appointment in 1953 as the first Chief Minister of Jamaica], outraged to see his country let its conduct be dictated in matters of asylum and reception of foreigners by a foreign government, intervened quickly with the British Governor of Jamaica and the Chief of Police to have this ban lifted. Mr. Bustamante boarded the Colombia to greet ex-President Estimé, whom he knew, and to assure him that he would be protected in Jamaica. When he got off the boat with his family, he was driven to the hotel and, a few days later, they were invited to stay in Bustamante’s home on Tucker Avenue where they resided for several weeks . 

After a year spent in Jamaica, Estimé returned to France where he lived until November 1952. He then left France for New York where he died on July 20, 1953, in Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.

==References==

* Bicentenary of the Foundation of Port-au-Prince, February 17, 1950, Speech Delivered at the City Hall of Port-au-Prince by Mr. Jacques de Lacretelle, Delegate of the French Academy 

* Dr. Augustin Mathurin, MD, “Bicentenary of the Foundation of Port-au-Prince, 1749–1949: International Exhibition, December 8, 1949 – June 8, 1950 – In memory of the great President Léon Dumarsais Estimé” (Imprimerie des Antilles – Port- au-Prince, Haiti, June 1975)





* The Daily Gleaner, Thursday, January 25, 1951, and The Daily Gleaner, Saturday, February 3, 1951, Kingston, Jamaica, upon arrival of President Estime on January 25, 1951 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q738355" start="0" end="16" title="Dumarsais Estimé" label="Dumarsais Estimé"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="56" end="63" title="Haiti" label="Haitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221815" start="830" end="839" title="Belladère" label="Belladère"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595294" start="957" end="974" title="Grande-Anse River" label="Grande-Anse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q707178" start="1651" end="1664" title="Paul Magloire" label="Paul Magloire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442445" start="1816" end="1829" title="Franck Lavaud" label="Franck Lavaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q777676" start="2655" end="2664" title="Verrettes" label="Verrettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q886472" start="3729" end="3740" title="Louis Borno" label="Louis Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="3762" end="3795" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="United States occupation of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="33403" end="33433" title="Columbia Presbyterian Hospital" label="Columbia Presbyterian Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780234" wikidata="Q37978" url="?curid=780234" title="Hamiltonstövare">
<text>The Hamiltonstövare (or Hamilton Hound) is a breed of scenthound originally developed by the founder of the Swedish Kennel Club, Count Adolf Hamilton. Its ancestors include several German hounds as well as English Foxhounds and Harriers. The breed is recognized by the Swedish Kennel Club, Federation Cynologique Internationale (FCI) and the American Kennel Club&#x27;s Foundational Stock Service.

==Appearance==

=== Characteristics ===
The Hamiltonstövare is a medium-sized dog with a well-balanced and muscular frame. It has a short, dense coat that is tri-colored, typically featuring a combination of black, tan, and white markings. The breed&#x27;s distinctive appearance, coupled with its elegant gait, reflects both its functional capabilities and aesthetic appeal. Male dogs should be between and females between tall. Generally they weigh between .

=== Temperament ===
Known for its keen sense of smell and hunting skills, the Hamiltonstövare is bred for hunting hare and fox, especially in tracking scents alone over the varied Swedish terrains, including dense forests, open fields, or rugged mountains. The Hamiltonstövare&#x27;s acute sense of smell allows it to excel in most hunting tasks; however, they have been bred to refuse to track deer.

The Hamiltonstövare is friendly and has a sociable nature. While it possesses a strong hunting instinct, it is also a loyal and affectionate companion. The breed tends to form strong bonds with its family members and is generally good with children. However, the breed can be stubborn and early socialization and training are crucial to ensure that the dog&#x27;s hunting instincts are appropriately channeled.

== History ==

The use of scenthounds in Sweden dates back at least to the 1500s when it is thought that Eastern European hounds were brought to Scandinavia. There is some disagreement as to the ancestors of the Hamiltonstövare, and various authorities have proposed native Swedish hounds, Swiss and German hounds such as the Holstein hound or the Hanover hound, Latvia&#x27;s now extinct Curland hound, the English foxhound and harrier. In the late 19th century, Count Adolf Patrick Hamilton, a Swedish cavalry officer and the Swedish Kennel Club&#x27;s first president, dedicated his efforts to developing a breed that would excel in hunting and tracking and at an 1886 dog show, he presented two dogs which would be considered the first Hamiltonstövare. The result was a dog with a robust build, well-suited for navigating the diverse terrains of the Swedish countryside. 
While a popular hound in Sweden, the breed is rare outside of Scandinavia. Originally simply called the Swedish hound, like the Schillerstövare and the Hygen hund, the breed was later renamed Hamiltonstövare after its creator in 1921 when it was recognized by the Swedish Kennel Club in 1921. The Federation Cynologique Internationale (FCI) recognized the Hamiltonstövare in 1955, and the breed is currently part of the American Kennel Club&#x27;s Foundational Stock Service.

== Popular culture ==
According to Swedish folklore, the elf Tomten is assisted by a Hamiltonstövare named Karo.

==See also==
* List of dog breeds

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37978" start="4" end="19" title="Hamiltonstövare" label="Hamiltonstövare"/>
<link wikidata="Q37978" start="24" end="39" title="Hamiltonstövare" label="Hamilton Hound)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="45" end="50" title="dog breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q39401" start="54" end="64" title="Scent hound" label="scenthound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37789" start="206" end="222" title="English Foxhound" label="English Foxhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38107" start="228" end="236" title="Harrier (dog)" label="Harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685078" start="269" end="288" title="Svenska Kennelklubben" label="Swedish Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="290" end="327" title="Fédération Cynologique Internationale" label="Federation Cynologique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="342" end="362" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="975" end="979" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="984" end="987" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q38041" start="2023" end="2036" title="Hanover Hound" label="Hanover hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37789" start="2083" end="2099" title="English Foxhound" label="English foxhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38107" start="2104" end="2111" title="Harrier (dog)" label="harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38728" start="2679" end="2694" title="Schillerstövare" label="Schillerstövare"/>
<link wikidata="Q38016" start="2703" end="2713" title="Hygen Hound" label="Hygen hund"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685078" start="2815" end="2834" title="Svenska Kennelklubben" label="Swedish Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="2848" end="2885" title="Fédération Cynologique Internationale" label="Federation Cynologique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="2971" end="2991" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078" start="3157" end="3175" title="List of dog breeds" label="List of dog breeds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780238" wikidata="Q64101996" url="?curid=780238" title="La Moinerie crater">
<text>La Moinerie is an impact crater in Quebec, Canada. It is 8 km in diameter and the age is estimated to be 400 ± 50 million years (Silurian or Devonian). The crater is exposed to the surface and filled with water, forming Lac La Moinerie. Glaciers have eroded many of La Moinerie crater&#x27;s original physical features, including much of the central uplift. It is located in Rivière-Koksoak, in the Kativik territory.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Gold, D.P. Tanner, J.G. and Halliday, D.W. (1978) &quot;The Lac La Moinerie crater: A probable impact site in New Quebec&quot; (abstract). &quot;Geological Society of America&quot;, v. 10, p. 44.

== External links ==
* Aerial Exploration of the La Moinerie Structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64101996" start="0" end="11" title="La Moinerie crater" label="La Moinerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="18" end="31" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="35" end="41" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="129" end="137" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="141" end="149" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q64101996" start="220" end="235" title="La Moinerie crater" label="Lac La Moinerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433564" start="375" end="390" title="Rivière-Koksoak, Quebec" label="Rivière-Koksoak"/>
<link wikidata="Q766068" start="399" end="406" title="Kativik, Quebec" label="Kativik"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780239" wikidata="Q1066442" url="?curid=780239" title="Charles Moore (architect)">
<text>Charles Willard Moore (October 31, 1925 – December 16, 1993) was an American architect, educator, writer, Fellow of the American Institute of Architects, and winner of the AIA Gold Medal in 1991. He is often labeled as the father of postmodernism. His work as an educator was important to a generation of American architects who read his books or studied with him at one of the several universities where he taught.

==Education==

Moore graduated from the University of Michigan in 1947, where he was one of the top students in his class. After graduating, he worked for several years as an architect, served in the Army, and studied with Professor Jean Labatut at Princeton University, where he earned a master&#x27;s degree and a PhD (1957). He remained for an additional year as a post-doctoral fellow, and as a teaching assistant to the architect Louis Kahn, who was teaching a design studio. While at Princeton, he met and befriended the architect Robert Venturi.

While at Princeton, Moore developed relationships with fellow students Donlyn Lyndon, William Turnbull Jr., Richard Peters, and Hugh Hardy. All remained lifelong friends and adherents to a view of architecture as a joyful, humanistic, pursuit that promised to make people happier and healthier. During his Princeton years, Moore designed and built a house for his mother in Pebble Beach, California, and worked during the summers for architect Wallace Holm of neighboring Monterey. Moore&#x27;s Master&#x27;s thesis explored ways to preserve and integrate Monterey&#x27;s historic adobe dwellings into the fabric of the city. His Doctoral dissertation, &quot;Water and Architecture&quot;, was a study of the importance of water in shaping the experience of place. The dissertation is significant for being one of the first pieces of architectural scholarship to draw from the work of Gaston Bachelard. Moore used some of the material in his later book, &quot;The Poetics of Gardens.&quot;

==Career==
In 1959, Moore left Princeton to take a teaching position at the University of California, Berkeley. There he teamed with Donlyn Lyndon, William Turnbull Jr. and Richard Whittaker to form a new and influential firm: MLTW. They were among the first American architects to favor contextual designs—fitting well with the urban fabric of San Francisco—over harsh Modernist buildings that were alien to the texture of the city. When hired to design an innovative, environmentally sensitive condominium complex on the north coast, they applied some of their sensitivity to &quot;place&quot; to the project. Sea Ranch became one of the most admired, influential, and beloved works of the late twentieth century. Moore rose to become chairman and professor of architecture at Berkeley in five years. His work was featured in the seminal &quot;Forty Under Forty&quot; exhibition at New York&#x27;s Architectural League that established the &quot;Whites and the Grays&quot; as competing camps of avant garde designers. Curated by Robert A.M. Stern, the show eventually became a book in 1969.

When Paul Rudolph resigned as Dean of the Yale School of Architecture, a nationwide search finally settled on Moore as his successor in 1965. As Stern observed in his history of the school, Moore was an energetic though often controversial leader who managed to steer the program through some of its most tumultuous, but also creative years. He served in that capacity for five years, leaving in 1970.

With Kent Bloomer, Moore founded the Yale Building Project in 1967 as a way both to demonstrate social responsibility and demystify the construction process for first-year students. He also pushed Yale president Kingman Brewster to hold a competition for a new mathematics building on the historic campus. The results of the contest were divisive, since Moore was seen as a champion of the winning architect, Robert Venturi. Many of Moore&#x27;s students became leading architects of the next generation, including Mark Simon, Buzz Yudell, Gerald Allen, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, Andrés Duany, David Sellers, and Turner Brooks. An innovator in practice who often held design &quot;charettes&quot; to gain insights from clients, Moore also pioneered multi-partner, &quot;suitcase&quot; firms with his former students: Centerbrook Architects (Connecticut), Moore Ruble Yudell (Los Angeles) and Moore/Andersson (Austin, Texas). The constant changes resulted, in part, from Moore&#x27;s extensive worldwide travel and his moves to California and then to Austin, Texas.

While at Yale Moore wrote a useful residential design book: &quot;The Place of Houses&quot;. Clients and designers loved its easy going style and beautiful drawings, but especially its commitment to &quot;placemaking.&quot; With Donlyn Lyndon, Moore also founded the journal &quot;Places&quot; in Berkeley to expound ideas about the &quot;genius loci&quot;. He continued to write essays and books for the remainder of his career, including the influential &quot;You Have To Pay for the Public Life,&quot; in &quot;Perspecta,&quot; one of the first predictors of suburban sprawl and the rise of the theme park in America. In 1975, Moore moved to the University of California, Los Angeles where he continued teaching. Finally, in 1985, he became the O&#x27;Neil Ford Centennial Professor of Architecture at the University of Texas at Austin. He died at home of a heart attack on December 16, 1993.

One of his last books, &quot;Body, Memory and Architecture,&quot; not only introduced new psychological and anthropological ideas into design theory, it also anticipated today&#x27;s revolution in neuroscience, and the theory of &quot;embodied cognition.&quot;

==Buildings and legacy==

Moore preferred bold, colorful design elements, including striking color combinations, supergraphics, stylistic eclecticism, and the use of non-traditional materials such as plastic, (aluminized) PET film, platinum tiles, and neon signs. His work often provokes arousal, challenges norms, and can lean toward kitsch. His mid-1960s New Haven residence, published in &quot;Playboy&quot;, featured several plywood towers, each of which cut through one or more stories and featured large, graphical cutouts. His house in Orinda, California was also unconventional; in lieu of interior walls, two interior aediculae focus the space, one over a sitting area and the other over a bathtub set into the ground. He made no bones about his love for roadside vernacular buildings in places like San Miguel Allende, the Sunset Strip, and Main Street in Disneyland.

His early work with MLTW was noted for the invention of a west coast regional vernacular in residential architecture that featured steeply pitched roofs, shingled exteriors, and bold areas of glass, including skylights. Moore and his partners always cited the influence of their predecessors in California, particularly Bay Area pioneers such as Bernard Maybeck, William Wurster, and Joseph Esherick. A whole school of west coast designers followed their lead in designing shed-like, wooden residences for their newly affluent clients.

Moore was also sensitive to the needs of clients, building an innovative house for a blind man and his wife, and designing several churches. His urban design schemes were tailored to context and history, and his books are full of sophisticated scholarship on such things as Renaissance gardens, English Georgian houses, and Italian piazzas. His travels were always documented by color slides, sketches, and souvenirs, which he displayed prominently in his residences. Moore&#x27;s Piazza d&#x27;Italia (1978), an urban public plaza in New Orleans, made prolific use of his exuberant design vocabulary and is frequently cited as the archetypal postmodern project. His university work includes the Hood Museum of Art at Dartmouth, the Williams College Museum of Art in Williamstown, Massachusetts, the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Faculty Club at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Kresge College, at UC Santa Cruz, (demolished in 2020) was one of the most innovative residence hall buildings in America at the time of its construction. The main campus of National Dong Hwa University is his latest university work, finished in 1992.

Such design features (historical detail, ornament, fictional treatments, ironic significations) made Moore one of the chief proponents of postmodern architecture, along with Robert Venturi, Michael Graves, Stanley Tigerman, and Charles Jencks.

The Charles W. Moore Foundation was established in 1997 in Austin, Texas to preserve Moore&#x27;s last home and studio. Its non-profit programs include residencies, conferences, lectures, and publication of PLACENOTES, a travel guide.

==Work==
* The influential Sea Ranch (1963) planned community in Sonoma County, California (with landscape architect Lawrence Halprin)
* Mutual Savings Bank Building, San Francisco, California (1964)
* The Seaside Professional Building (1959-60), in Seaside, California, was his first commercial building (1959-60), occupied by Monterey County Weekly since 1991.
* The Faculty Club at University of California, Santa Barbara, (1968) with William Turnbull
* Kresge College (1971) at University of California, Santa Cruz
* Leland Burns House, Pacific Palisades, (1973) (House noted for having a pipe organ in the living room)
* The postmodern archetype Piazza d&#x27;Italia (1978), an urban public plaza in New Orleans, Louisiana
* David Rodes House, Brentwood, California (1980) (featured in Life Magazine, December 1980)
* University Extension at the University of California, Irvine
* Oceanside Public Library and Oceanside Civic Center in Oceanside, California (1989) 
* Cedar Rapids Museum of Art (1989) in Cedar Rapids, Iowa
* Pleasant Hill City Hall (1991) in Pleasant Hill, California
* The Beverly Hills Civic Center (1992) in Beverly Hills, California
* National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, Taiwan (1992)
* Gethsemane Episcopal Cathedral, Fargo, North Dakota (1992)
* The California Center for the Arts, Escondido in Escondido, California (1993)
* The Haas School of Business (1995) at the University of California, Berkeley
*Lurie Tower at the University of Michigan (1995)
* The Preview Center (became a Bank of America branch) in Celebration, Florida (1996)
* The Williams College Museum of Art addition in Williamstown, Massachusetts
* The Krishnamurti Center, Ojai, California
* His last work, the Washington State History Museum in Tacoma, Washington

==References==
==Bibliography==

* &quot;Architekten, Charles Moore.&quot; Edition: 1. Auflage. Stuttgart
: IRB Verlag, 1986.
* Allen, Gerald. &quot;Charles Moore&quot;. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1980.
* Allen, Gerald and Charles W. Moore. &quot;Dimensions: shape, space and scale in architecture.&quot; New York: Architectural Record Books, 1976.
*Bloomer, Kent C. and Charles W. Moore ; with a contribution by Robert Yudell. &quot;Body, memory, and architecture.&quot; New Haven: Yale University Press, 1920
* Johnson, Eugene J. &quot;Charles Moore: Buildings and Projects, 1949-1986&quot;. New York: Rizzoli, 1986.
* Keim, Kevin P and Charles W. Moore. &quot;An Architectural Life: Memoirs and Memories of Charles W. Moore&quot;. Boston, Little, Brown and Co., 1996.
* Littlejohn, David. &quot;Architect: The Life and Work of Charles W. Moore&quot;. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1984.
* Lyndon, Donlyn. &quot;Chambers for a memory palace.&quot; Donlyn Lyndon and Charles W. Moore; with illustrations by the authors. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994.
* Moore, Charles W. &quot;Water and architecture.&quot; Princeton University, thesis, 1958.
* Moore, Charles W. &quot;The city observed, Los Angeles: a guide to its architecture and landscapes&quot; by Charles Moore, Peter Becker, Regula Campbell; photography by Regula Campbell. New York : Random House, 1984.
* Moore, Charles W. &quot;The poetics of gardens&quot; / Charles W. Moore, William J. Mitchell, William Turnbull Jr. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988.
* Moore, Charles W. &quot;The Yale Mathematics Building competition: architecture for a time of questioning.&quot; New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974.
* Moore, Charles W. and Sally Woodbridge. &quot;The cabin, the temple, the trailer&quot;; drawings by Diana Woodbridge [United States]: [publisher not identified], 1985.
* Moore, Charles W., Gerald Allen and Donlyn Lyndon. With axonometric drawings by William Turnbull. &quot;The place of houses.&quot; New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1974.
* Moore, Charles W. &quot;You have to pay for the public life : selected essays of Charles W. Moore&quot; edited by Kevin Keim. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.
* Nakamura, Toshio (ed.). &quot;The Work of Charles W. Moore&quot;. Tokyo: A + U Publishing, 1978.

==External links==

*The Charles W. Moore Foundation, Austin, Texas
*Charles W. Moore Archives, Alexander Architectural Archives, University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin
* Moore Ruble Yudell
*The Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley
* The Yale Building Project
*Description of Moore&#x27;s legendary Austin, Texas house and studio
*On the successful restoration of Moore&#x27;s Piazza d&#x27;Italia in New Orleans</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066442" start="0" end="21" title="Charles Moore (architect)" label="Charles Willard Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442488" start="106" end="112" title="FAIA" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="120" end="152" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317387" start="172" end="186" title="AIA Gold Medal" label="AIA Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="233" end="246" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="457" end="479" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111693592" start="650" end="662" title="Jean Labatut (architect)" label="Jean Labatut"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="666" end="686" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="785" end="798" title="post-doctoral" label="post-doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q210134" start="852" end="862" title="Louis Kahn" label="Louis Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212312" start="954" end="968" title="Robert Venturi" label="Robert Venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17318442" start="1042" end="1055" title="Donlyn Lyndon" label="Donlyn Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019569" start="1057" end="1077" title="William Turnbull Jr." label="William Turnbull Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1079" end="1093" title="Richard Peters (architect)" label="Richard Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931042" start="1099" end="1109" title="Hugh Hardy" label="Hugh Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376505" start="1345" end="1369" title="Pebble Beach, California" label="Pebble Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="1443" end="1451" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q270800" start="1855" end="1871" title="Gaston Bachelard" label="Gaston Bachelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1992" end="2001" title="Princeton" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="2037" end="2071" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17318451" start="2134" end="2151" title="Richard Whitaker (architect)" label="Richard Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459108" start="2573" end="2582" title="Sea Ranch, California" label="Sea Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q166567" start="2992" end="3009" title="Robert A.M. Stern" label="Robert A.M. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277977" start="3060" end="3072" title="Paul Rudolph (architect)" label="Paul Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514480" start="3097" end="3124" title="Yale School of Architecture" label="Yale School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16096865" start="3463" end="3475" title="Kent Bloomer" label="Kent Bloomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427818" start="3554" end="3575" title="social responsibility" label="social responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="3630" end="3637" title="student" label="student"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429447" start="3670" end="3686" title="Kingman Brewster" label="Kingman Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q212312" start="3867" end="3881" title="Robert Venturi" label="Robert Venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723412" start="4012" end="4035" title="Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk" label="Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q524033" start="4037" end="4049" title="Andrés Duany" label="Andrés Duany"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4484" end="4494" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="4507" end="4520" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5172" end="5209" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="5332" end="5361" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="5882" end="5889" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="5904" end="5912" title="PET film (biaxially oriented)" label="PET film"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="5914" end="5922" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006" start="5934" end="5943" title="neon sign" label="neon sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="6017" end="6023" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="6079" end="6086" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206464" start="6225" end="6243" title="Orinda, California" label="Orinda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q507286" start="6309" end="6318" title="Aedicula" label="aediculae"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="6455" end="6474" title="vernacular building" label="vernacular building"/>
<link wikidata="Q753891" start="6491" end="6509" title="San Miguel Allende" label="San Miguel Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301193" start="6515" end="6527" title="Sunset Strip" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="6548" end="6558" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758593" start="6907" end="6922" title="Bernard Maybeck" label="Bernard Maybeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020605" start="6924" end="6939" title="William Wurster" label="William Wurster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282931" start="6945" end="6960" title="Joseph Esherick (architect)" label="Joseph Esherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190411" start="7579" end="7599" title="Piazza d&amp;#x27;Italia, New Orleans" label="Piazza d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="7617" end="7629" title="Public space" label="public plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="7633" end="7644" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140304" start="7794" end="7812" title="Hood Museum of Art" label="Hood Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072937" start="7831" end="7861" title="Williams College Museum of Art" label="Williams College Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125258" start="7898" end="7921" title="Haas School of Business" label="Haas School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436789" start="8034" end="8048" title="Kresge College" label="Kresge College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194540" start="8208" end="8236" title="National Dong Hwa University" label="National Dong Hwa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="8425" end="8448" title="postmodern architecture" label="postmodern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212312" start="8461" end="8475" title="Robert Venturi" label="Robert Venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314636" start="8477" end="8491" title="Michael Graves" label="Michael Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331827" start="8493" end="8509" title="Stanley Tigerman" label="Stanley Tigerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q354634" start="8515" end="8529" title="Charles Jencks" label="Charles Jencks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459108" start="8795" end="8804" title="Sea Ranch" label="Sea Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="8833" end="8858" title="Sonoma County, California" label="Sonoma County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756604" start="8885" end="8901" title="Lawrence Halprin" label="Lawrence Halprin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110391971" start="8905" end="8933" title="Mutual Savings Bank Building" label="Mutual Savings Bank Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="8935" end="8960" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905305" start="9096" end="9118" title="Monterey County Weekly" label="Monterey County Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436789" start="9225" end="9239" title="Kresge College" label="Kresge College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="9250" end="9286" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="University of California, Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="9398" end="9408" title="Postmodern architecture" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190411" start="9419" end="9439" title="Piazza d&amp;#x27;Italia, New Orleans" label="Piazza d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="9457" end="9469" title="Public space" label="public plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="9473" end="9484" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="9486" end="9495" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="9619" end="9651" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California, Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q66364150" start="9654" end="9678" title="Oceanside Public Library" label="Oceanside Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q488924" start="9709" end="9730" title="Oceanside, California" label="Oceanside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940755" start="9741" end="9767" title="Cedar Rapids Museum of Art" label="Cedar Rapids Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="9778" end="9796" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q950926" start="9833" end="9858" title="Pleasant Hill, California" label="Pleasant Hill, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064577" start="9865" end="9891" title="Beverly Hills Civic Center" label="Beverly Hills Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="9902" end="9915" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194540" start="9930" end="9958" title="National Dong Hwa University" label="National Dong Hwa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q713310" start="9960" end="9967" title="Hualien City" label="Hualien"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="9969" end="9975" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839071" start="9985" end="10015" title="Gethsemane Episcopal Cathedral (Fargo, North Dakota)" label="Gethsemane Episcopal Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="10017" end="10036" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10050" end="10091" title="California Center for the Arts, Escondido" label="California Center for the Arts, Escondido"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="10095" end="10116" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125258" start="10130" end="10153" title="Haas School of Business" label="Haas School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="10168" end="10202" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="10223" end="10245" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001696" start="10311" end="10331" title="Celebration, Florida" label="Celebration, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072937" start="10345" end="10375" title="Williams College Museum of Art" label="Williams College Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q983837" start="10388" end="10415" title="Williamstown, Massachusetts" label="Williamstown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972250" start="10481" end="10512" title="Washington State History Museum" label="Washington State History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="10516" end="10534" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="13090" end="13124" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780253" wikidata="Q891569" url="?curid=780253" title="Lake Lappajärvi">
<text>Lappajärvi is a lake in Finland, in the municipalities of Lappajärvi, Alajärvi and Vimpeli. It is formed in a wide, partly eroded meteorite impact crater. The lake is part of Ähtävänjoki () basin together with Lake Evijärvi that is located downstream (north) of it.

The Lappajärvi impact structure is estimated to be 77.85 ± 0.78 million years old (Campanian age of the Late Cretaceous time period). Experts working on Finland&#x27;s Onkalo spent nuclear fuel repository project have studied Lake Lappajärvi to help them project how Finnish landscapes might look one million years in the future and beyond.

An island in the middle of the lake, Kärnänsaari (Kärnä Island), gives the name to the black impact melt rock (impactite) found there, locally called &quot;Kärnäiitti&quot;.

Nearby towns include Lappajärvi and Vimpeli and the nearest major city is Seinäjoki.

In September 2023, UNESCO accepted the Lappajärvi area&#x27;s &quot;Impact Crater Lake&quot; Geopark application as one of the possible recipients of Geopark status for 2024.

==Impact crater==
Lappajärvi is the largest or second-largest meteorite crater in Finland, and it is also the youngest and the first meteorite crater discovered in Finland. The diameter of the crater, which was formed in Lappajärvi, was approximately 22-23 kilometers, with a depth of 750 meters. It was caused by an asteroid estimated to be about 1.6 kilometers in size, around 77.85 ± 0.78 million years ago. According to current estimates, it is believed to have been formed during the intensified meteorite and asteroid bombardment in the Late Cretaceous epoch. The asteroid is thought to have been a common H-type chondrite.

The cooling of the bedrock is estimated to have taken place over a period ranging from one hundred thousand to one million years.

Below the Kärnänsaari island in the middle of the lake, there is impactite known as kärnäite. Kärnänsaari has been suspected to be the central uplift of the impact crater, although it could also be a mere erosional remnant shaped by glacial activity. The southeastern edge of the crater is surrounded by an elevated rim, now known as Lakeaharju and Pyhävuori. Typical rocks found in meteorite craters, such as breccia, as well as impact diamonds and minerals like suevite and coesite, have been discovered in Lappajärvi. The shattered bedrock resulting from the meteorite impact has created favorable groundwater areas in Lappajärvi.

Iso-Räyrinki Lake in Alajärvi has been suggested as a secondary crater of the Lappajärvi meteorite, thought to have been formed by a moon orbiting the Lappajärvi meteorite.

===Discovery===
The research history of Lappajärvi is considered to have started in 1858 when Henrik Holmberg mentioned in his book &quot;Materialier till Finlands geognosi&quot; a volcanic rock found in Lappajärvi. In 1916, geologist Eero Mäkinen analyzed the rock and identified it as dacite, a type of lava rock. After his studies on Lake Yanisyarvi in Karelia in 1920, geologist Pentti Eskola became convinced that Lappajärvi was also a volcanic lake. In the summer of 1926, Eskola visited Lappajärvi and confirmed that the kärnäite rock was volcanic in origin. Lappajärvi was long believed to be the remnant of an ancient volcano, and as late as 1964, Professor Ahti Simonen wrote about the lake&#x27;s ancient volcanic activity.

In the spring of 1967, after studying the Nördlinger Ries crater in Germany, Professor Thure Georg Sahama began to suspect that Lappajärvi was also a meteorite crater and suggested that Martti Lehtinen investigate it. In 1967, Swedish researcher Nils-Bertil Svensson observed that quartz in kärnäite was fragmented in the same way as in other craters on Earth. Svensson&#x27;s findings were published in &quot;Nature&quot; in February 1968. In 1967, Martti Lehtinen started his investigations of the crater and discovered suevite in the Hietakangas gravel pits in July 1967. In the summer of 1968, he found coesite in Lappajärvi. His licentiate thesis on the research was completed the following year. In 1976, Lehtinen published an English-language doctoral dissertation on the meteorite theory, which included evidence of quartz transformations in certain rock samples that could not have resulted from volcanic activity. The dissertation is considered the final confirmation of the meteorite theory. Gravity measurements conducted in the same year also supported the meteorite theory, as a gravitational anomaly was detected within a 17-kilometer diameter area.

In 1980, German researchers Elmar Jessberger and Uwe Reimold used the argon–argon dating method to determine the age of the crater to be approximately 77.3 million years.

From 1988 to 1990, the Geological Survey of Finland conducted drilling studies, with the first one reaching a depth of 217.75 meters in Härkäniemi, where kärnäite was found to extend from the surface to the depth of 145 m, followed by a suevite layer and a breccia layer. The second drilling reached a depth of 165.75 meters in Pokela, Vimpeli. The fourth drilling reached a depth of 275 meters in the intermediate island between Kärnänsaari and Matalasaari, but no kärnäite was found.

In 1992, paleomagnetic methods estimated the age of the crater to be around 195 million years. In 1997, small impact diamonds were discovered in suevite boulders from Lappajärvi. In 2001, uranium-lead dating by the Geological Survey of Finland estimated the age of the crater to be around 73.3 million years, with a margin of error of five million years, confirming that Lappajärvi was formed during the Late Cretaceous epoch. In a study published in 2013, argon–argon dating yielded an age of 76.2 million years for the crater. The study also revealed that some minerals were approximately one million years younger, suggesting that the cooling of the crater took place over a period ranging from one hundred thousand to one million years. In the summer of 2018, researchers proposed an age of 77.8 million years based on uranium-lead dating. After peer review, the age was revised to approximately 77.85 (± 0.78) million years.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Impact craters in Finland

==References==
==External links==
* Lappajärvi impact structure
* Lake Lappajärvi, a meteorite impact site in western Finland by Martti Lehtinen (1976)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q891569" start="0" end="10" title="Lake Lappajärvi" label="Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="40" end="54" title="municipalities of Finland" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020" start="58" end="68" title="Lappajärvi" label="Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980" start="70" end="78" title="Alajärvi" label="Alajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171" start="83" end="90" title="Vimpeli" label="Vimpeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="130" end="139" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="140" end="153" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="175" end="186" title="Ähtävänjoki" label="Ähtävänjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q593020" start="210" end="223" title="Lake Evijärvi" label="Lake Evijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020" start="271" end="281" title="Lappajärvi" label="Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="282" end="298" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="350" end="359" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="376" end="386" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413020" start="435" end="471" title="Onkalo spent nuclear fuel repository" label="Onkalo spent nuclear fuel repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q976105" start="720" end="729" title="impactite" label="impactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020" start="805" end="815" title="Lappajärvi" label="Lappajärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171" start="820" end="827" title="Vimpeli" label="Vimpeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157" start="858" end="867" title="Seinäjoki" label="Seinäjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324355" start="1020" end="1027" title="Geopark" label="Geopark"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="1589" end="1604" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156574" start="1943" end="1957" title="central uplift" label="central uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707848" start="2041" end="2057" title="Deglaciation" label="glacial activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="2218" end="2225" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q447600" start="2272" end="2279" title="suevite" label="suevite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424335" start="2284" end="2291" title="coesite" label="coesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466481" start="2904" end="2910" title="dacite" label="dacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="2922" end="2931" title="Volcanic rock" label="lava rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576687" start="2954" end="2969" title="Lake Yanisyarvi" label="Lake Yanisyarvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q935655" start="3000" end="3013" title="Pentti Eskola" label="Pentti Eskola"/>
<link wikidata="Q204324" start="3058" end="3071" title="Volcanic crater lake" label="volcanic lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="3763" end="3769" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413914" start="4356" end="4376" title="Gravity anomaly" label="Gravity measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="4589" end="4607" title="argon–argon dating" label="argon–argon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="5366" end="5385" title="uranium-lead dating" label="uranium-lead dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614344" start="6135" end="6160" title="Impact craters in Finland" label="Impact craters in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780255" wikidata="Q1809078" url="?curid=780255" title="Lawn Hill crater">
<text>Lawn Hill ‘crater’ refers to an Ordovician impact structure, the eroded remnant of a former impact crater, situated approximately 220 km north-north-west of Mount Isa in northwestern Queensland, Australia. The site is marked by an 18 km diameter ring of dolomite hills. The origin of this circular feature was uncertain until the discovery of shatter cones and shocked quartz from uplifted rocks at the centre was reported in 1987.

== Description ==

The site is eroded and it has been suggested that the original crater was slightly larger, at around 20 km diameter. In the past it has been debated whether the limestones, which are of Middle Cambrian age (ca. 510 Ma) based on comparisons with nearby outcrops of marine limestone in the Georgina Basin, were simply deposited in the crater after its formation, or were actually deformed by the impact event. Those differing points of view suggest that the crater may be of earlier Cambrian or Proterozoic age, or it could be of younger Paleozoic age. Although one recent study concluded that the impact most likely happened just before or even during the early stages of deposition of the limestone, suggesting an age of around 509–506 Ma (Middle Cambrian), the age of the impact structure is now thought to be Ordovician (ca. 472 Ma) based on 40Ar-39Ar dating of impact-related melt particles. The Georgina Basin was still an active depocenter at that time and the excellent preservation of the structure is attributed to burial by post-impact sedimentation.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1809078" start="0" end="18" title="Lawn Hill crater" label="Lawn Hill ‘crater’"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="32" end="42" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="43" end="59" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="92" end="105" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q606335" start="157" end="166" title="Mount Isa" label="Mount Isa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="183" end="193" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="195" end="204" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="254" end="262" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="343" end="355" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="361" end="375" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="645" end="653" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="667" end="669" title="Annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509375" start="740" end="754" title="Georgina Basin" label="Georgina Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="933" end="941" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="945" end="956" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="988" end="997" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1188" end="1190" title="Annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="1199" end="1207" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1283" end="1285" title="Annum" label="Ma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780256" wikidata="Q1866444" url="?curid=780256" title="Liverpool crater">
<text>Liverpool is a meteorite impact crater situated in Arnhem Land within the Northern Territory, Australia. It was named after the nearby Liverpool River. Liverpool is remote and difficult to access. The crater has a raised, near-circular rim averaging about 1.6 km in diameter. It was first noticed by geologists during reconnaissance geological mapping in the 1960s, and although an impact origin was considered possible, this was not confirmed until a more detailed study was undertaken in 1970.

== Description ==
The crater lies within flat-lying Paleoproterozoic sandstone of the McArthur Basin. This sandstone has been fractured and brecciated by the impact event to form the rim. Flat-lying and non-deformed sandstone that must have been deposited after the impact event is exposed within the crater&#x27;s center. Because the crater is quite well preserved, it can be argued that it was buried by younger sedimentary rock soon after the impact event; this younger rock has now been mostly eroded away except in the crater center. The crater-filling sandstone was originally thought to be of Cretaceous age, leading to the Cretaceous age listed for the crater in older literature sources. But more recent studies suggest that the infilling rock is more likely to be of Neoproterozoic age (1000-543 Ma), and therefore the crater is more likely to have formed at some time during the Neoproterozoic.

No meteorite fragments have been found at the site. This is not surprising considering its great age; such fragments would have weathered away. Evidence supporting an impact origin includes the geological structure of the crater, and the discovery of shocked quartz. The crater is not perfectly circular, but is about 6% broader in a northeast–southwest direction. And the internal parts of the crater are asymmetric in such a way as to imply that the impact was oblique from the southwest.

== Aboriginal significance ==
The Aboriginal people of Western Arnhem Land named Liverpool crater Yingundji and describe it as the nest of a giant catfish. This is supported by pictographs of giant catfish on the walls of a rock shelter within the crater.

== See also ==
* List of impact craters in Australia

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1866444" start="0" end="9" title="Liverpool crater" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="15" end="24" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="25" end="38" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q329884" start="51" end="62" title="Arnhem Land" label="Arnhem Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="74" end="92" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="94" end="103" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="549" end="565" title="Paleoproterozoic" label="Paleoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="566" end="575" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914959" start="583" end="597" title="McArthur Basin" label="McArthur Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="637" end="644" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="911" end="927" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="1097" end="1107" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="1274" end="1288" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1303" end="1305" title="Mega-annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="1655" end="1669" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q329884" start="1959" end="1970" title="Arnhem Land" label="Arnhem Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q782241" start="2170" end="2205" title="List of impact craters in Australia" label="List of impact craters in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780257" wikidata="Q7362576" url="?curid=780257" title="Romanian School of Neurology">
<text>The Romanian School of Neurology influenced a great share of Romanian and foreign neurologists, descending from a group of Gheorghe Marinescu&#x27;s co-workers at the Neurological Department of the Colentina Hospital at the University of Bucharest. One can therefore also speak of Marinescu&#x27;s School of Neurology.

Marinescu&#x27;s closest collaborators were Ion Minea (with contributions to neuroinfections), Anghel Radovici (with whom Marinescu described the &quot;kinn reflex&quot;, author of the monograph &quot;La Syphilis nerveuse&quot;, 1928), Nicolae Ionescu-Sisești (who was his successor as head of the department, author of the monographs &quot;Tumeurs Médullaires&quot;, 1929, &quot;Syringobulbie&quot;, 1932), State Drăgănescu (author of the book &quot;Lichidul cefalo-rahidian&quot; (The Cerebrospinal Fluid), 1932 and of the monograph &quot;Encefalite Virotice Umane&quot; (Human Viral Encephalitis, 1962, with Arcadie Petrescu), Oskar Sager (Head of the department after the death oh N. Ionescu-Siseşti in 1954, author of studies on the physiology of the thalamus with J. G. Dusser de Barenne), Arthur Kreindler (co-author of the Marinescu&#x27;s monograph &quot;Les Reflexes Conditionnelles&quot;, 1935, author of the monographs &quot;Epilepsia&quot; (Epilepsy), 1955, &quot;La Physiologie et Physiopathologie du cervelet&quot;, 1958, with Mircea Steriade, &quot;Anatomo-fiziologia clinică a sistemului nervos central&quot; (Clinical anatomo-physiology of the central nervous system), 1957, with Vlad Voiculescu), &quot;Afazia&quot; (Aphasia, 1962, with Alexandru Fradis), Emmerich Façon (contributions to clinical neurology and neuroinfections).

Starting from 1954, Arthur Kreindler, in his double position as director of the Institute of Neurology of the Romanian Academy and head of the post-graduate chair of Neurology at the University of Bucharest, surrounded himself with personalities like State Drăgănescu, Theodor Horneţ and Vlad Voiculescu. The chair organized post-graduate specialization in neurology, training many neurologists all over the country.

The central themes of clinical research were epilepsy, cerebro-vascular diseases, viral encephalitis, aphasia. Basic research dealt especially with states of consciousness, physiology of the thalamus, conditioned reflexes a.s.o. From the initial anatomo-clinical orientation, Romanian neurology evolved to a neurophysiological one, involving such modern topics as neurochemistry, neurogenetics and neuropsychology.

The following neurologists from the next generation should be quoted: Mihai Ioan Botez, Victor Ionăşescu, Ion N. Petrovici, Jean-Jaques Askenasy and Mircea Steriade.

Presently the main representative of Marinescu&#x27;s school of neurology in Romania is Constantin Popa, head of the neurological department at the Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy and director of the institute for cerebrovascular diseases in Bucharest.

== Bibliography ==
* A. Kreindler (ed.), &quot;Epilepsia. Cercetări clinice și experimentale&quot;, Editura Academiei Republicii Populare Romîne, 1955</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7362576" start="4" end="32" title="Romanian School of Neurology" label="Romanian School of Neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="61" end="68" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521586" start="123" end="141" title="Gheorghe Marinescu" label="Gheorghe Marinescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="198" end="216" title="Colentina Hospital" label="Colentina Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q608338" start="224" end="247" title="University of Bucharest" label="University of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362576" start="281" end="317" title="Romanian School of Neurology" label="Marinescu&amp;#x27;s School of Neurology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="364" end="373" title="Ion Minea" label="Ion Minea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="415" end="430" title="Anghel Radovici" label="Anghel Radovici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="556" end="579" title="Nicolae Ionescu-Sisești" label="Nicolae Ionescu-Sisești"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="728" end="744" title="State Drăgănescu" label="State Drăgănescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="950" end="961" title="Oskar Sager" label="Oskar Sager"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="1076" end="1084" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1090" end="1113" title="J. G. Dusser de Barenne" label="J. G. Dusser de Barenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799394" start="1116" end="1132" title="Arthur Kreindler" label="Arthur Kreindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="1556" end="1563" title="Aphasia" label="Aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1576" end="1592" title="Alexandru Fradis" label="Alexandru Fradis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1595" end="1609" title="Emmerich Façon" label="Emmerich Façon"/>
<link wikidata="Q901677" start="1780" end="1796" title="Romanian Academy" label="Romanian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1921" end="1937" title="State Drăgănescu" label="State Drăgănescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1939" end="1953" title="Theodor Horneţ" label="Theodor Horneţ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1958" end="1973" title="Vlad Voiculescu (physician)" label="Vlad Voiculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="2027" end="2036" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="2133" end="2141" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="2143" end="2168" title="cerebro-vascular diseases" label="cerebro-vascular diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053951" start="2170" end="2188" title="viral encephalitis" label="viral encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="2190" end="2197" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2289" end="2309" title="conditioned reflexes" label="conditioned reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q786278" start="2452" end="2466" title="neurochemistry" label="neurochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165278" start="2468" end="2481" title="neurogenetics" label="neurogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3872" start="2486" end="2501" title="neuropsychology" label="neuropsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310212" start="2574" end="2590" title="Mihai Ioan Botez" label="Mihai Ioan Botez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2592" end="2608" title="Victor Ionăşescu" label="Victor Ionăşescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q68052" start="2610" end="2626" title="Ion N. Petrovici" label="Ion N. Petrovici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2628" end="2648" title="Jean-Jaques Askenasy" label="Jean-Jaques Askenasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315935" start="2653" end="2668" title="Mircea Steriade" label="Mircea Steriade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2759" end="2774" title="Constantin Popa, neurologist" label="Constantin Popa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916637" start="2819" end="2867" title="Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy" label="Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2930" end="2939" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780263" wikidata="Q1551102" url="?curid=780263" title="Lockne crater">
<text>Lockne is a meteorite crater, located approximately south of the city of Östersund in northern Sweden. It has been suggested that it is a doublet with the nearby smaller Målingen Crater, apart. Computer simulations suggest that the asteroid that created the Lockne crater was some in diameter, and the one that carved out Målingen crater was about across.

It is in diameter and the age is estimated, based on accompanying chitinozoan microfossils, to be 458 million years (Late Ordovician). The crater is exposed at the surface. Its fossils, typical of shallow marine environments, show it to be a marine target impact event.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1551102" start="0" end="6" title="Lockne crater" label="Lockne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="12" end="21" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="22" end="28" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q26515" start="73" end="82" title="Östersund" label="Östersund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001337" start="170" end="185" title="Målingen Crater" label="Målingen Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="232" end="240" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468682" start="423" end="434" title="chitinozoan" label="chitinozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761786" start="435" end="446" title="microfossil" label="microfossil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="489" title="Ordovician#Subdivisions" label="Late Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="613" end="625" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780264" wikidata="Q2059684" url="?curid=780264" title="Logancha crater">
<text>Logancha is a meteorite crater in Siberia, Russia. It is in diameter and the age is estimated to be 40 ± 20 million years old (most likely Eocene). The crater is not exposed at the surface.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2059684" start="0" end="8" title="Logancha crater" label="Logancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="14" end="23" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="24" end="30" title="impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="34" end="41" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="139" end="145" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780265" wikidata="Q3504062" url="?curid=780265" title="Logoisk crater">
<text>Logoisk crater or Logoisk astrobleme is a meteorite impact crater in Belarus near the city of Lahoysk.

It is in diameter and is estimated to be 42.3 ± 1.1 million years old (Eocene). The crater is not exposed at the surface.

The crater was discovered by an accident during a routine exploration drilling near the village of in 1970s. A section was discovered with atypical materials in an unusual sequence: Quaternary deposits up to depth of 160m followed by a 230 meter thick layer of layered clays and lacustrine sediments followed by 240 meters of breccias, rocks previously unseen in the geology of Belarus. Three more drills made in 1976-1977 provided a clear evidence of the meteorite origin of the anomaly. Subsequent drillings mapped the crater. During the period of intensive research it was suggested that the crater may contain diamonds formed due high temperature and pressure of the impact, but there has been no confirmation.

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Sherlock, S. C., Kelley, S. P. , Glazovkaya, L., A New Age for the Logoisk Impact Structure, Berlarus and Implications for the Late Eocene Comet Shower, First International Conference on Impact Cratering in the Solar System. 2006
* Glazovskaya, L. I., Impact transformation of the crystalline basement in the Logoisk astrobleme, Meteorite Impacts in Precambrian Shields. Programme and Abstracts, the 4th Workshop of the European Science Foundation IMpact Programme, Lappajarvi-Karikkoselka-Saaksjarvi, Finland, May 24–28, 2000. ed. J. Plado and L.J. Pesonen. 2000
* Masaitis V. L. et al., The Logoysk Astrobleme, 1984
* &quot;Глазовская Л.И., Громов Е.И., Парфенова О.В., Илькевич Г.И.&quot; Логойская астроблема. — М.: Наука, 1991. — 141 с., с ил.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3504062" start="0" end="14" title="Logoisk crater" label="Logoisk crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504062" start="18" end="36" title="Logoisk crater" label="Logoisk astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="42" end="51" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="52" end="65" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="69" end="76" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200968" start="94" end="101" title="Lahoysk" label="Lahoysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="175" end="181" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="506" end="516" title="lacustrine" label="lacustrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="553" end="560" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780268" wikidata="Q54657" url="?curid=780268" title="Stan Smith">
<text>Stanley Roger Smith (born December 14, 1946) is an American former professional tennis player. A world No. 1 player and two-time major singles champion (at the 1971 US Open and 1972 Wimbledon Championships), Smith also paired with Bob Lutz to create one of the most successful doubles teams of all-time. In 1970, Smith won the inaugural year-end championships title. In 1972, he was the year-end world No. 1 singles player. In 1973, he won his second and last year end championship title at the Dallas WCT Finals. In addition, he won four Grand Prix Championship Series titles. In his early years he improved his tennis game through lessons from Pancho Segura, the Pasadena Tennis Patrons, and the sponsorship of the Southern California Tennis Association headed by Perry T. Jones. Smith is a past President of the International Tennis Hall of Fame and an ITHF Life Trustee. Outside tennis circles, Smith is best known as the namesake of a line of tennis shoes made by Adidas.

==Career==
Smith grew up in Pasadena, California and was coached mainly by Pancho Segura. He played collegiate tennis at the University of Southern California (USC), under Coach George Toley, where he was a three-time All-American and won the 1968 NCAA Singles Championship as well as the 1967 and 1968 doubles titles. At USC, Smith was a member of Beta Theta Pi fraternity&#x27;s Gamma Tau chapter.

As a boy, he tried to get a job as a ball boy for the Davis Cup, but was turned down because the organizers thought he was too clumsy.

In 1971 Smith and John Newcombe were joint recipients of The &quot;Martini and Rossi&quot; Award, voted for by 11 journalists and were co-ranked world No. 1 by Judith Elian. In 1972 Smith won the &#x27;Martini and Rossi&#x27; Award, voted for by a panel of journalists and was ranked world No. 1 by Elian, Tingay, &quot;World Tennis&quot;, Collins, Frank Rostron and Rex Bellamy.

In his 1979 testing autobiography, Jack Kramer, the long-time tennis promoter and great player himself, ranked Smith as one of the 21 best players of all time.

In 2005, &quot;TENNIS&quot; magazine ranked Smith as 35th in its &quot;40 Greatest Players of the &quot;TENNIS&quot; Era&quot;.

Smith was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1987.

Following his playing career, Smith became active as a coach for the United States Tennis Association. He has his own tennis academy with Billy Stearns, located on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.

In 1974, Smith married Princeton University tennis player Marjory Gengler. They later mentored South African tennis player Mark Mathabane, helping increase pressure on the South African government to end apartheid. Smith lives in Hilton Head with his wife and four children, all of whom competed in collegiate tennis.

==Tennis shoes==
To the general public, Stan Smith is probably best known for the line of tennis shoes which Adidas renamed after him in 1978. Although the Adidas Stan Smith shoe is not recommended for modern tennis playing, it continues to be a widely available iconic fashion brand.

==Grand Slam finals==
===Singles: 3 (2 titles, 1 runner-up)===
===Doubles: 13 (5 titles, 8 runners-up)===
==Career finals==
Note: Smith won 10 titles before the Open Era

===Singles: 95 (64 titles, 31 runners-up)===

* 48 Open Era titles listed by the ATP website

===Doubles (54 titles, 27 runners-up)===
==Grand Slam performance timeline==
===Singles===
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Little Pancho&quot; (2009) by Caroline Seebohm
* &quot;The Golden Age of College Tennis&quot; (2009) by George Toley

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54657" start="0" end="19" title="Stan Smith" label="Stanley Roger Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="80" end="86" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="97" end="108" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129" end="134" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q941998" start="160" end="172" title="1971 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1971 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051794" start="177" end="205" title="1972 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1972 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q888085" start="231" end="239" title="Bob Lutz (tennis)" label="Bob Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899425" start="327" end="359" title="1970 Pepsi-Cola Masters – Singles" label="inaugural year-end championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15069684" start="502" end="512" title="WCT Finals" label="WCT Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928252" start="539" end="569" title="Grand Prix Tennis Championship Series 1970–1989" label="Grand Prix Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="646" end="659" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660141" start="766" end="780" title="Perry T. Jones" label="Perry T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="815" end="848" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q357044" start="940" end="975" title="Adidas Stan Smith" label="line of tennis shoes made by Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="1053" end="1066" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1103" end="1136" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545255" start="1156" end="1168" title="George Toley" label="George Toley"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1196" end="1208" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645584" start="1221" end="1251" title="1968 NCAA University Division Tennis Championships" label="1968 NCAA Singles Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897282" start="1327" end="1340" title="Beta Theta Pi" label="Beta Theta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="1931" end="1942" title="Jack Kramer (tennis)" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2122" end="2183" title="Tennis (magazine)#Greatest" label="&amp;quot;40 Greatest Players of the &amp;quot;TENNIS&amp;quot; Era&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="2214" end="2247" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156323" start="2327" end="2359" title="United States Tennis Association" label="United States Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001134" start="2422" end="2456" title="Hilton Head Island, South Carolina" label="Hilton Head Island, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108320363" start="2517" end="2532" title="Marjory Gengler" label="Marjory Gengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900258" start="2582" end="2596" title="Mark Mathabane" label="Mark Mathabane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2663" end="2672" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="2887" end="2893" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q357044" start="2934" end="2951" title="Adidas Stan Smith" label="Adidas Stan Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780275" wikidata="Q3274742" url="?curid=780275" title="NUMMI">
<text>New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI) was an American automobile manufacturing company in Fremont, California, jointly owned by General Motors and Toyota that opened in 1984 and closed in April 2010. The plant is located in the East Industrial area of Fremont next to the Mud Slough between Interstate 880 and Interstate 680, the plant&#x27;s peak production year was 2006, when it manufactured 428,633 vehicles.

After the plant was closed by its owners, the facility was sold to Tesla and reopened in October 2010, becoming known as the Tesla Fremont Factory.

== History ==

===Background===

Before NUMMI, the site was the former Fremont Assembly that General Motors operated between 1962 and 1982. Employees at the Fremont plant were &quot;considered the worst workforce in the automobile industry in the United States,&quot; according to a later recounting by a leader of the workers&#x27; own union, the United Auto Workers (UAW).

GM as a company was departmentalized (design, manufacturing) as per Henry Ford&#x27;s division of labor, but without the necessary communication and collaboration between the departments. There was an adversarial relationship between workers and plant supervisors, with management not considering the employees&#x27; view on production, and quantity was preferred over quality. Like all American car plants, the production lines at Fremont seldom stopped, and when mistakes were made, cars continued down the line with the expectation that they would be fixed later. By the early 1980s, the adversarial relationship had deteriorated to the point where employees drank alcohol, smoked marijuana (at the time, an illegal activity), were frequently absent (enough so that the production line could not be started), and even committed petty acts of sabotage such as putting &quot;Coke bottles inside the door panels, so they&#x27;d rattle and annoy the customer.&quot;

Attempts to discipline workers were often met with grievances or even strikes, putting the plant into near-continuous chaos. By 1982, GM had had enough and closed Fremont Assembly and laid off its thousands of workers.

===Transforming Fremont Assembly into NUMMI===
At about the same time, GM was struggling to profitably build high-quality and fuel-efficient small cars that consumers demanded after the energy crisis of the 1970s. Consumers started turning to foreign automakers for these vehicles, prompting the U.S. Congress to consider import restrictions to protect the domestic auto industry. That led GM and Toyota to team up and create New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI), a joint venture to manufacture vehicles to be sold under both brands.

GM saw the joint venture as a way to get access to quality small cars and an opportunity to learn about the Toyota Production System and The Toyota Way, a series of lean manufacturing and management philosophies that had made the company a leader in the automotive manufacturing and production industry. For Toyota, the factory gave the company its first manufacturing base in North America allowing it to avoid tariffs on imported vehicles and saw GM as a partner that could show them how to navigate the American labor environment, particularly relations with the United Auto Workers union.

The companies made the unusual choice to remake the troubled Fremont Assembly into the new NUMMI plant. The leadership of the UAW union insisted on re-hiring the same union leadership that had overseen GM&#x27;s worst workforce. GM was against it, but Toyota agreed, believing that their system could turn things around. However, Toyota insisted that the plant would need to operate differently and old seniority rules would not apply. The workers hated the proposed changes, but desperately needed jobs. Ultimately, over 85% of NUMMI&#x27;s initial workforce were the workers laid off at Fremont Assembly in 1982. GM would also assign 16 managers to the plant and Toyota sent 30 managers and production coordinators from Japan, including the CEO, Tatsuro Toyoda, part of the company&#x27;s founding family.

Ahead of the reopening of the plant, Toyota sent many of the workers to Toyota&#x27;s Takaoka plant in Japan to learn the Toyota Production System and actually work for a few days on the assembly line. Workers who made the transition identified the emphasis on quality and teamwork by Toyota management as what motivated a change in work ethic. Among the cultural changes were the same uniform, parking and cafeterias for all levels of employment in order to promote a team concept, and a no-layoff policy. Built-in process quality and employee suggestion programs for continual improvement were other changes. Consensus decision-making reached management level, in contrast with the old departmentalization.

By December 1984 (two years after the closure of Fremont Assembly), NUMMI&#x27;s first car, a yellow Chevrolet Nova, rolled off the assembly line. The plant started producing the Toyota Corolla in September 1986. Almost right away, the NUMMI factory was producing cars at the same speed as the Japanese factories and Corollas produced at NUMMI were judged to be equal in quality to those produced in Japan with a similar number of defects per 100 vehicles.

In 1990, for the 1991 model year, Toyota started building the Toyota Hilux (also known as the Toyota Pickup) at NUMMI, allowing the company to completely avoid the chicken tax, a 25 percent tariff on light trucks imposed in 1964. Previously, the company had avoided a large portion of the tariff by importing the truck as an incomplete chassis cab (which included the entire truck, less the truck bed) which only faced a 4% tariff. Once in the United States, Toyota Auto Body California (TABC) would produce the truck beds and attach them to the trucks. TABC was the first manufacturing investment in the U.S. for Toyota. This tariff loophole was closed in 1980.

NUMMI did face some financial challenges, with cars costing more to build than at other GM plants and only operating at 58.6% capacity by 1988. The plant had not reached break-even by 1991.

In January 1995, NUMMI began producing the Toyota Tacoma, a pickup truck designed exclusively for the North American market.

Up to May 2010, NUMMI built an average of 6,000 vehicles a week, or nearly eight million cars and trucks since opening in 1984. In 1997, NUMMI produced 357,809 cars and trucks. Production reached its annual peak of 428,633 units in 2006.

=== The end of the joint venture ===
Toyota took the lessons it learned from NUMMI and went on to establish the wholly-owned Toyota Motor Manufacturing USA (later renamed Toyota Motor Manufacturing Kentucky) and Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada plants in 1986, and by 2009 the company was operating a dozen manufacturing facilities in North America. However, NUMMI remained Toyota&#x27;s only unionized plant in the United States.

GM executives, particularly CEO John F. Smith Jr., attempted to spread the Toyota Production System to other assembly plants, but it proved largely unsuccessful. Despite having a front row seat to learn about the production system, by 1998 (15 years later) GM had still not been able to implement lean manufacturing in the rest of the United States, though GM managers trained at NUMMI were successful in introducing the approach to its unionized factories in Brazil.

By 2009, GM was in serious financial trouble and filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization. In April the company confirmed its commitment to NUMMI and in June announced that it was scrapping the Pontiac brand which would end production of the Corolla-derived Pontiac Vibe at NUMMI by August 2009. That triggered several months of discussions between the automakers, trying to find products that could be produced at the factory for both companies, with Toyota even offering to build a version of its Prius hybrid for GM at the factory.

Fremont Mayor Bob Wasserman, city officials and California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger lobbied the automakers to find a product and keep NUMMI open. State officials crafted sales tax exemption on new factory equipment to preserve NUMMI. A regional committee was formed in February 2010 to investigate the closure of the plant, and the facility was appraised while operating.

The talks ultimately failed and in June 2009 the GM announced that it would pull out of NUMMI. On August 27, 2009, Toyota announced that it would also discontinue production at NUMMI by March 2010, marking the first time the company had ever closed a factory.

In November 2009 call with autoworkers Toyota&#x27;s head of U.S. sales said that though it was a difficult decision to shut down the plant, &quot;the economics of having a plant in California so far away from the supplier lines&quot; in the Midwest &quot;just doesn&#x27;t make business sense&quot; for Toyota. Autoworkers prepared for the shut down by refreshing skills and planning for career transitions. In March 2010, 90% of the workers at the plant approved a $281 million severance package from Toyota that had been negotiated by the UAW, averaging $54,000 to the plant&#x27;s 4,700 employees.

Production of the Corolla in North America was shifted to Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada until the new Toyota Motor Manufacturing Mississippi assembly plant could open in October 2011. Production of the Tacoma had already partially shifted to Toyota Motor Manufacturing de Baja California in 2004, and the remaining work shifted to Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas.

At 9:40am on April 1, 2010, the plant produced its last car, a red Toyota Corolla. NUMMI sold off equipment at an auction, with robots and tooling going to Toyota&#x27;s plants in Kentucky, Texas and Mississippi. NUMMI sold some equipment to Tesla for $15 million.

===Reuse of the factory===

Ahead of the closure of NUMMI, several possible uses for the facility were proposed.

In January 2010, the land was considered for a new stadium for the Oakland Athletics of Major League Baseball. It is close to the proposed site of Cisco Field, which was never formally approved. On March 10, 2010, Aurica Motors announced that it intended to raise investment capital and garner federal economic stimulus funds to help retrain the workers and retool the facility for production of electric vehicles. Both proposals went nowhere.

On May 20, 2010, Tesla Motors announced that it would purchase most (210 of 370 acres) of the former NUMMI site from Toyota for $42 million, significantly under market value. As part of the agreement, Toyota would also purchase $50 million of common stock when Tesla held its IPO the next month. In exchange, Tesla agreed to partner with Toyota on the &quot;development of electric vehicles, parts, and production system and engineering support.&quot; The two companies would later end their partnership in 2017.

The plant, renamed the Tesla Fremont Factory, produces the Model S, Model X, Model 3, and Model Y vehicles. , the plant employs 22,000 people, far greater than the 5,500 employees of NUMMI, and produced nearly 560,000 vehicles, 30 percent more than the maximum output of NUMMI.

==Models produced==
During its time in operation, the NUMMI joint venture factory produced the following models (model years):

*Chevrolet Nova (1985–1988)
*Geo/Chevrolet Prizm (1989–2002)
*Pontiac Vibe/Toyota Voltz (2003–2010)
*Toyota Corolla (1987–2010)
**Toyota Corolla (E80) FX16 (1987)
**Toyota Corolla (E90) (1988–1992)
**Toyota Corolla (E100) (1993–1997)
**Toyota Corolla (E110) (1998–2002)
**Toyota Corolla (E130) (2002–2008)
**Toyota Corolla (E140) (2008–2010)
*Toyota Hilux/Pickup (1992–1994)
*Toyota Tacoma (1995–2010)

==See also==
*CAMI Automotive (CAMI) — A similar joint venture in Canada between Suzuki and General Motors from 1986 to 2009; now operating as a wholly owned GM plant.
*United Australian Automobile Industries (UAAI) — A similar joint venture in Australia between Toyota and GM-Holden from 1989 to 1996.
*&quot;Gung Ho&quot; — A 1986 comedy film portraying a similar joint venture and is used by Toyota executives in Japan as an example of how not to manage Americans.

==References==
==External links==
*Autointell NUMMI page
*Photo Tour of NUMMI from Edmunds.com
*JD Power Gold Plant Award for GM
*NPR&#x27;s This American Life&#x27;s full hour story of the creation and demise of NUMMI - episode #403 from This American Life
*NPR&#x27;s This American Life&#x27;s 2015 update on NUMMI&#x27;s story - episode #561 from This American Life
*NUMMI production over the years </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3274742" start="0" end="36" title="NUMMI" label="New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3274742" start="38" end="43" title="NUMMI" label="NUMMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="61" end="71" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="72" end="85" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49220" start="97" end="116" title="Fremont, California" label="Fremont, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="135" end="149" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="154" end="160" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q94186401" start="279" end="289" title="Mud Slough" label="Mud Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q400030" start="298" end="312" title="Interstate 880 (California)" label="Interstate 880"/>
<link wikidata="Q399996" start="317" end="331" title="Interstate 680 (California)" label="Interstate 680"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="488" end="493" title="Tesla, Inc." label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705509" start="546" end="567" title="Tesla Fremont Factory" label="Tesla Fremont Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501553" start="641" end="657" title="Fremont Assembly" label="Fremont Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="663" end="677" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="918" end="937" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233817" start="966" end="982" title="Departmentalization" label="departmentalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="1014" end="1024" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="1032" end="1049" title="Division of labour" label="division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="2318" end="2344" title="1970s energy crisis" label="energy crisis of the 1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="2606" end="2619" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553383" start="2783" end="2807" title="Toyota Production System" label="Toyota Production System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391625" start="2812" end="2826" title="The Toyota Way" label="The Toyota Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="2840" end="2858" title="lean manufacturing" label="lean manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="3241" end="3260" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634158" start="4017" end="4031" title="Tatsuro Toyoda" label="Tatsuro Toyoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983149" start="4150" end="4186" title="Takaoka plant" label="Toyota&amp;#x27;s Takaoka plant in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553383" start="4200" end="4224" title="Toyota Production System" label="Toyota Production System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462531" start="4570" end="4576" title="layoff" label="layoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q924685" start="4585" end="4609" title="Autonomation" label="Built-in process quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318104" start="4647" end="4668" title="continual improvement process" label="continual improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q188577" start="4689" end="4714" title="Consensus decision-making" label="Consensus decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233817" start="4766" end="4785" title="departmentalization" label="departmentalization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4889" end="4903" title="Chevrolet Nova#Fifth generation (1985–1988)" label="Chevrolet Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q848607" start="5308" end="5320" title="Toyota Hilux" label="Toyota Hilux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963394" start="5410" end="5421" title="chicken tax" label="chicken tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="5436" end="5442" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969132" start="5446" end="5457" title="light truck" label="light truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024680" start="5582" end="5593" title="chassis cab" label="chassis cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669160" start="5705" end="5732" title="Toyota Auto Body California" label="Toyota Auto Body California"/>
<link wikidata="Q626990" start="6080" end="6090" title="Break-even (economics)" label="break-even"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581540" start="6144" end="6157" title="Toyota Tacoma" label="Toyota Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684281" start="6637" end="6672" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Kentucky" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464318" start="6678" end="6711" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232558" start="6931" end="6948" title="John F. Smith Jr." label="John F. Smith Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="7196" end="7214" title="lean manufacturing" label="lean manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532041" start="7417" end="7463" title="General Motors Chapter 11 reorganization" label="filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060726" start="7632" end="7644" title="Pontiac Vibe" label="Pontiac Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213115" start="7873" end="7878" title="Toyota Prius" label="Prius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934320" start="7924" end="7937" title="Bob Wasserman" label="Bob Wasserman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="7978" end="7999" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="8092" end="8105" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322967" start="8261" end="8270" title="Business valuation" label="appraised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="8764" end="8778" title="supply chain" label="supplier lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q320033" start="9030" end="9047" title="severance package" label="severance package"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464318" start="9211" end="9244" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830833" start="9259" end="9297" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Mississippi" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830835" start="9399" end="9444" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing de Baja California" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing de Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830832" start="9488" end="9520" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas" label="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="9970" end="9987" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="9991" end="10012" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q39728961" start="10050" end="10061" title="Cisco Field" label="Cisco Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822328" start="10117" end="10130" title="Aurica Motors" label="Aurica Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="10365" end="10377" title="Tesla Motors" label="Tesla Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705509" start="10885" end="10906" title="Tesla Fremont Factory" label="Tesla Fremont Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463050" start="10921" end="10928" title="Tesla Model S" label="Model S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634161" start="10930" end="10937" title="Tesla Model X" label="Model X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705507" start="10939" end="10946" title="Tesla Model 3" label="Model 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298250" start="10952" end="10959" title="Tesla Model Y" label="Model Y"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11270" end="11284" title="Chevrolet Chevy II / Nova#Fifth generation (1985–1988)" label="Chevrolet Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241863" start="11298" end="11317" title="Geo Prizm" label="Geo/Chevrolet Prizm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060726" start="11331" end="11343" title="Pontiac Vibe" label="Pontiac Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060726" start="11344" end="11356" title="Toyota Voltz" label="Toyota Voltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="11370" end="11384" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536061" start="11399" end="11419" title="Toyota Corolla (E80)" label="Toyota Corolla (E80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977620" start="11434" end="11454" title="Toyota Corolla (E90)" label="Toyota Corolla (E90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873250" start="11469" end="11490" title="Toyota Corolla (E100)" label="Toyota Corolla (E100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q921838" start="11505" end="11526" title="Toyota Corolla (E110)" label="Toyota Corolla (E110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726227" start="11541" end="11562" title="Toyota Corolla (E130)" label="Toyota Corolla (E130)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536054" start="11577" end="11598" title="Toyota Corolla (E140)" label="Toyota Corolla (E140)"/>
<link wikidata="Q848607" start="11612" end="11631" title="Toyota Hilux (N100)" label="Toyota Hilux/Pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581540" start="11645" end="11658" title="Toyota Tacoma" label="Toyota Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386010" start="11686" end="11701" title="CAMI Automotive" label="CAMI Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11738" end="11744" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="11753" end="11759" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="11764" end="11778" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11830" end="11832" title="General Motors Canada#Canadian factories" label="GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887491" start="11841" end="11880" title="United Australian Automobile Industries" label="United Australian Automobile Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11917" end="11926" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="11946" end="11955" title="Holden" label="GM-Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q669675" start="11982" end="11989" title="Gung Ho (film)" label="Gung Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339985" start="12224" end="12235" title="Edmunds.com" label="Edmunds.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421465" start="12380" end="12398" title="This American Life" label="This American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421465" start="12491" end="12509" title="This American Life" label="This American Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780278" wikidata="Q4307008" url="?curid=780278" title="Acragas">
<text>Acragas may refer to:

* Acragas, an ancient Greek city on the site of modern Agrigento, Sicily
* Acragas (mythology), son of Zeus and the Oceanid Asterope in Greek mythology
* Acragas, a river god
* Acragas (silversmith), an engraver or chaser in silver, mentioned by Pliny the Elder
* &quot;Acragas&quot; (spider), a genus of jumping spiders</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13678" start="78" end="87" title="Agrigento" label="Agrigento"/>
<link wikidata="Q10404083" start="98" end="117" title="Acragas (mythology)" label="Acragas (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027575" start="188" end="197" title="River gods (Greek mythology)" label="river god"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604755" start="200" end="221" title="Acragas (silversmith)" label="Acragas (silversmith)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238903" start="287" end="315" title="Acragas (spider)" label="&amp;quot;Acragas&amp;quot; (spider)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780280" wikidata="Q1877311" url="?curid=780280" title="Lumparn">
<text>Lumparn (fi. &quot;Lumpari&quot;) is a large bay devoid of islands in the main island of Åland, Finland, bordered by Sund to the north, Lumparland to the east, Lemland to the south and Jomala to the west.

== Description ==
Most of the bay fills a nine kilometer wide impact structure. The structure is estimated to be about 1000 million years old (Proterozoic). The depression was originally believed to be a rift. Extraterrestrial origin was first proposed in 1979, but not until 1993 was the impact structure finally confirmed. Long shatter cones have been discovered in the southwestern part of the bay. The remains of the crater are filled with sediments. Between Pleistocene sediments and crushed rapakivi granite bedrock there is a layer of Paleozoic (Ordovician) limestones. This makes Lumparn one of the few places in Finland where fossils have been found.

The bay has also previously been referred to as &quot;Lumpari&quot; in some Finnish documents, though the Research Institute for the Languages of Finland does not list &quot;Lumpari&quot; as in current usage.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==
* Impact craters in Finland

== References ==
== External links ==
* Lumparn impact structure (archived link)
* The Landforms of Finland
* Map of Lumparn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1877311" start="0" end="7" title="Lumparn" label="Lumparn"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="45" end="48" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23038" start="74" end="85" title="Fasta Åland" label="main island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="89" end="94" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="96" end="103" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176201" start="117" end="121" title="Sund, Åland" label="Sund"/>
<link wikidata="Q176191" start="136" end="146" title="Lumparland" label="Lumparland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176186" start="160" end="167" title="Lemland" label="Lemland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176178" start="185" end="191" title="Jomala" label="Jomala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="268" end="284" title="impact structure" label="impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="349" end="360" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="410" end="414" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="536" end="549" title="shatter cones" label="shatter cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="669" end="680" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542109" start="703" end="719" title="rapakivi granite" label="rapakivi granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="720" end="727" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="748" end="757" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="759" end="769" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="771" end="780" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="841" end="847" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="943" end="950" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361959" start="973" end="1020" title="Research Institute for the Languages of Finland" label="Research Institute for the Languages of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614344" start="1109" end="1134" title="Impact craters in Finland" label="Impact craters in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780287" wikidata="Q327386" url="?curid=780287" title="Juan Marichal">
<text>Juan Antonio Marichal Sánchez (born October 20, 1937), nicknamed &quot;the Dominican Dandy&quot;, is a Dominican former right-handed pitcher who played 16 seasons in Major League Baseball from 1960 to 1975, mostly with the San Francisco Giants. Known for his high leg kick, variety of pitches, arm angles and deliveries, pinpoint control, and durability, Marichal won 18 games to help the Giants reach the 1962 World Series, and went on to earn 191 victories in the 1960s, the most of any major league pitcher. He won over 20 games six times, on each occasion posting an earned run average (ERA) below 2.50 and striking out more than 200 batters, and became the first right-hander since Bob Feller to win 25 games three times; his 26 wins in 1968 remain a franchise record.

Marichal led the National League (NL) in wins, innings pitched, complete games and shutouts twice each. He was often overshadowed by his contemporaries Sandy Koufax and Bob Gibson; in each of Marichal&#x27;s four best seasons, either Koufax or Gibson won the Cy Young Award, always by unanimous vote. He pitched a no-hitter in June 1963, and two weeks later outdueled Warren Spahn for a 1–0 victory in 16 innings; Marichal also had three one-hitters–including one in his major league debut–and six two-hitters. One of the most outstanding performers in All-Star history, he was named to the team in nine seasons, recording an ERA of 0.50 in eight appearances and being named Most Valuable Player of the 1965 contest.

On August 22, 1965, Marichal was one of the principal figures in perhaps the most violent incident in major league history. While batting in a heated game against the archrival Los Angeles Dodgers, he struck catcher John Roseboro in the head with his bat after Roseboro had thrown the ball back to the mound, brushing past Marichal&#x27;s face; the blow opened a gash in Roseboro&#x27;s head that required stitches, and set off a huge brawl between the teams. Marichal was suspended and received a then-record fine, also paying a financial settlement, but the two players later reconciled, and eventually became close friends. Roseboro would later lobby to get Marichal elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame after he failed to get elected on his first two ballots due to this incident. Marichal would later become a pallbearer at Roseboro&#x27;s funeral.

Marichal&#x27;s 243 wins, 2.84 ERA, 244 complete games and 3,444 innings pitched with the Giants are San Francisco team records; his 2,281 strikeouts, 446 games started and 52 shutouts with the club place him behind only Christy Mathewson in franchise history. At the time of his retirement, he ranked sixth in National League history in strikeouts (2,282) and shutouts (52); his 244 complete games ranked ninth among NL pitchers active after 1920. Marichal was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983; he was the first Dominican player and the first foreign-born player ever elected.

==Early life==
Juan Marichal was born on October 20, 1937, in the small farming village of Laguna Verde, Dominican Republic, the youngest of Francisco and Natividad Marichal&#x27;s four children. He has two brothers, Gonzalo and Rafael, and a sister, Maria. His father died of an unknown illness when Marichal was three years old. His house did not have electricity, but food was plentiful since his family owned a farm. As a child, Marichal worked on the farm daily and was responsible for taking care of his family&#x27;s horses, donkeys, and goats. He lived near the Yaque del Norte River and often spent time swimming and fishing. One day, while Marichal was playing by the river, he fell unconscious owing to poor digestion and was in a coma for nine days. Doctors did not expect him to survive, but he slowly regained consciousness after his family gave him steam baths under doctor&#x27;s orders.

His older brother Gonzalo instilled a love of baseball in young Marichal and taught him the fundamentals of pitching, fielding, and batting. Every weekend, Marichal played the sport with his brother and friends. For their games, they found golf balls and paid the local shoemaker one peso to sew thick cloth around the ball to make it the proper size.They employed branches from a wassama tree for bats and canvas tarps for gloves. Among his childhood playmates were the Alou brothers, Felipe, Jesús, and Matty, who all later played with Marichal on the San Francisco Giants. From the age of six, Marichal aspired to become a professional baseball player, but his mother discouraged this, instead urging him to get an education. At the time, there were no players from the Dominican Republic in the major leagues, and his goal was viewed to be unrealistic. At age 11, he briefly held a job cutting sugarcane for the J.W. Tatem Shipping conglomerate.

In 1954, sixteen-year-old Marichal joined a summer league in Monte Cristi, playing for a team called Las Flores. Although he began as a shortstop, Marichal switched to pitching after taking inspiration from Bombo Ramos of the Dominican national team. He left high school after being recruited to play for the United Fruit Company team in 1956.

==Playing career==
Marichal was discovered by Ramfis Trujillo, the son of late Dominican dictator Rafael Leónidas Trujillo. Ramfis was the primary sponsor of the Dominican Air Force Baseball Team (Aviación Dominicana), against which Marichal pitched a 2–1 victory in his native Monte Cristi. From the very moment the game ended, Marichal was a member of Aviación Dominicana team, enlisted to the Air Force right on the spot by Ramfis&#x27;s orders.

Marichal started and won the first game at Cheney Stadium in 1960, home of the new Tacoma Giants, the Giants AAA affiliate.

Marichal was promoted to the major leagues for the first time in July 1960. He entered the major leagues on July 19 as the second native pitcher to come from the Dominican Republic. He made an immediate impression: in his debut against the Philadelphia Phillies, he struck out Rubén Amaro to begin the game and retired the first 19 batters, then took a no-hitter into the eighth inning only to surrender a two-out single to Clay Dalrymple. He ended up with a one-hit shutout, walking one and striking out 12; his game score of 96 was the highest for any pitcher in his major league debut. He started 10 more games that season, finishing at 6–2 with a 2.66 ERA.

Injuries affected him in 1961, but he still made 27 starts and won 13 games for the Giants. On August 2, he threw another one-hitter, a 6-0 win at Dodger Stadium in which he struck out 11, allowing only a Tommy Davis single to lead off the fifth. In 1962, the Giants and Dodgers battled each other in a tight pennant race. A sprained ankle kept Marichal out of action between September 5 and 22, and the Giants lost his last two regularly-scheduled starts of the year. The teams finished the season tied and faced off in a best-of-three tiebreaker series to determine the league champion. Starting the decisive Game 3, Marichal held the Dodgers to one run until the sixth, when Tommy Davis hit a two-run home run to give Los Angeles a 3–2 lead. When Marichal exited to start the bottom of the eighth, the Dodgers led 4–2, but San Francisco rallied in the ninth to win the game 6–4. In the World Series, Marichal started Game 4 with the Giants down 2 games to 1, and had a 2-0 lead through four innings. But while attempting to bunt in the top of the fifth, he smashed the thumb on his pitching hand, and was placed on the disabled list for the remainder of the Series. The Giants went on to win the game 7–3, but lost the Series in seven games.

After his 18-win campaign in 1962, Marichal finally cracked the 20-victory plateau in 1963, when he went 25–8 with 248 strikeouts and a 2.41 ERA. He appeared in every All-Star game of the 1960s beginning in 1962. On August 4, 1965, Marichal had a career-high 14 strikeouts in a 4-3, 10-inning road win over the Cincinnati Reds. In May 1966, he was named NL Player of the Month with a 6–0 record, a 0.97 ERA, and 42 strikeouts; he had pitched 31 consecutive scoreless innings between May 17 and May 31, including a 14-inning 1-0 shutout of the Phillies on May 26. On September 21 of that year, Marichal had perhaps the most remarkable moment of his batting career, hitting a walk-off home run off ace Pittsburgh Pirates reliever Roy Face for a 6-5 win; it was just the second of his four career home runs. On July 14, 1967, he surrendered the 500th home run of Eddie Mathews&#x27; career. On September 12, 1969, Marichal pitched his third one-hitter, a 1-0 win over the Reds in which the only hit was Tommy Helms&#x27; single to lead off the third; Helms was then caught stealing, with the only other baserunner being a sixth-inning walk.
From 1963 through 1969, Marichal had more than 20 victories in every season except 1967 and never posted an ERA higher than 2.76, which author James S. Hirsch calls one &quot;of the finest pitching performances in history.&quot; He led the league in victories in 1963 and 1968, when he won 26 games. His 30 complete games paced the league, the most thrown by any pitcher in a season in the decade. In 1968, he also earned the highest position of his career in MVP voting, finishing fifth behind Bob Gibson, Pete Rose, Willie McCovey, and Curt Flood. He and Sandy Koufax were the only two major league pitchers in the post-war era (1946–present) to have more than one season of 25 or more wins, each having three.

Marichal won more games during the 1960s (191) than any other major league pitcher, but did not receive any votes for the Cy Young Award until 1970, when baseball writers started voting for the top three pitchers in each league rather than one per league (or, until 1967, only the top pitcher in the major leagues). Marichal finished in the top 10 in ERA seven consecutive years, from 1963 to 1969, in which year he led the league. During his career, he also finished in the top 10 in strikeouts six times, top 10 in innings pitched eight times (leading the league twice), and top 10 in complete games 10 times, with a career total of 244. He led the league twice in shutouts, throwing 10 of them in 1965.

Marichal exhibited exceptional control. He had 2,303 strikeouts with only 709 walks, a strikeout-to-walk ratio of 3.25. This ranks among the top 20 pitchers of all time, ahead of such notables as Bob Gibson, Steve Carlton, Sandy Koufax, Don Drysdale, Walter Johnson and Roger Clemens, who each have strikeout-to-walk ratios of less than 3:1. Over his career, Marichal led the league in the fewest walks per nine innings four times, and finished second three times – totaling eleven years in which he finished in the top 10, while also finishing in the top 10 for strikeouts six years.

=== Pitching Duel with Spahn ===
Marichal dueled Warren Spahn, the 42-year-old Milwaukee Braves future Hall of Fame pitcher, in a night contest on July 2, 1963, at Candlestick Park in San Francisco, and the two great pitchers matched scoreless innings until Willie Mays homered off Spahn to win the game 1–0 in the 16th inning.

Both Spahn and Marichal tossed 15-plus inning complete games, something that had not happened before or since in the major leagues. Marichal allowed eight hits (all singles except for a double hit by Spahn) in the 16 innings, striking out 10, and saddling eventual career home run king Hank Aaron with an 0-for-6 collar. Spahn gave up nine hits in 15.1 innings, walking just one (Mays intentionally in the 14th, after Harvey Kuenn&#x27;s leadoff double) and striking out two.

According to Marichal, manager Alvin Dark offered to take him out twice once the game reached the 12th inning. The second time, Marichal told Dark, &quot;Do you see that man on the mound? That man is forty-two, and I&#x27;m twenty-five. I&#x27;m not ready for you to take me out.&quot; The game, almost the innings-duration of two contests, lasted only 4 hours, 10 minutes. By coincidence, future baseball commissioner Bud Selig attended the game as a fan.

=== Roseboro-Marichal incident ===
Marichal is also remembered for a notorious incident that occurred with John Roseboro during a game between the Giants and Los Angeles Dodgers at Candlestick Park on August 22, 1965. The Giants-Dodgers rivalry was, at the time, the fiercest in baseball — a rivalry that began when both teams still played in New York City.

As the 1965 season neared its climax, the Giants were involved in a tight pennant race, entering the game trailing the Dodgers by a game and a half while the Braves were one game behind the Dodgers. During the second game of the series two days earlier, Maury Wills was awarded first base after umpire Al Forman ruled that Giants catcher Tom Haller interfered with his swing; Haller claimed the Dodgers were holding their bats farther back than usual, and Matty Alou responded by doing the same, receiving a warning from Roseboro after his bat actually made contact with the Dodger catcher. 

Wills led off the game with a bunt single off Marichal and scored on Ron Fairly&#x27;s double. Marichal, a fierce competitor, viewed the bunt as a cheap way to get on base and took umbrage with Wills. When Wills came up to bat in the second inning, Marichal threw a pitch directly at him, sending him sprawling to the ground. Willie Mays then led off the bottom of the second inning for the Giants, and Dodgers pitcher Sandy Koufax threw a pitch over Mays&#x27; head as a token form of retaliation. In the top of the third inning with two out, Marichal threw a fastball that came close to hitting Fairly, prompting him to dive to the ground. Marichal&#x27;s act angered the Dodgers, and home plate umpire Shag Crawford warned both teams that any further retaliations would not be tolerated.

Marichal came to bat in the third inning expecting Koufax to throw at him. Instead, he was startled when, after the second pitch, Roseboro&#x27;s return throw to Koufax either brushed his ear or came close enough for Marichal to feel the breeze off the ball. Marichal screamed &quot;Why did you do that?&quot; to Roseboro, who came out of his crouch with his fists clenched. Marichal later said he thought Roseboro was about to attack him. Giants captain Mays said Roseboro &quot;brushed [Marichal]. Maybe it was a swing.&quot; Marichal raised his bat, striking Roseboro at least twice on the head, opening a two-inch gash that sent blood flowing down the catcher&#x27;s face. Koufax raced in from the mound to attempt to separate them and was joined by the umpires, players and coaches from both teams.

A 14-minute brawl ensued on the field before Koufax, Mays and other peacemakers restored order. Marichal was ejected from the game, and afterwards, National League president Warren Giles suspended him for eight games (two starts), fined him a then-NL record US$1,750 (), and also forbade him from traveling to Dodger Stadium for the final, crucial two-game series of the season. Roseboro, who required 14 stitches for his wound, filed a $110,000 damage suit against Marichal one week after the incident, but eventually settled out of court for $7,500.

Many people thought Marichal&#x27;s punishment was too lenient, since it would cost him only two starts. Fans booed him for the rest of the season whenever he pitched a road game. The Giants were in a tight pennant race with the Dodgers (as well as the Pirates, Reds and Braves) and the race was decided with only two games to play. The Giants, who ended up winning the August 22 game and were trailing by only a half-game afterward, eventually lost the pennant to the Dodgers by two games. Ironically, the Giants went on a 14-game win streak that started during Marichal&#x27;s absence, and by then it was a two-team race as the Pirates, Reds and Braves fell further behind. But then the Dodgers won 15 of their final 16 games (after Marichal had returned) to win the pennant. Marichal won in his first game back, 2–1 vs. the Houston Astros on September 9 (the same day Koufax pitched his perfect game vs. the Chicago Cubs), but lost his last three decisions as the Giants slumped in the season&#x27;s final week. &quot;Marichal&#x27;s actions might have cost us the pennant,&quot; Mays speculated, noting that the relief pitchers had to work more in the absence of Marichal, who usually completed his starts.

Marichal didn&#x27;t face the Dodgers again until spring training on April 3, . In his first at bat against Marichal since the incident, Roseboro hit a three-run home run. Later on, Giants general manager Chub Feeney approached Dodgers general manager Buzzie Bavasi to attempt to arrange a handshake between Marichal and Roseboro. However, Roseboro declined the offer.

Years later, in his memoirs, Roseboro stated that he was retaliating for Marichal&#x27;s having thrown at Wills. He took matters into his own hands as he did not want to risk Koufax being ejected and possibly being suspended for retaliating while the Dodgers were in the middle of a close pennant race. He stated that his throwing close to Marichal&#x27;s ear was &quot;standard operating procedure&quot;, as a form of retribution. After years of bitterness, Roseboro and Marichal became close friends in the 1980s, getting together occasionally at old-timers&#x27; games, golf tournaments and charity events.

===1970–1975===
In 1970, Marichal experienced a severe reaction to penicillin which led to back pain and chronic arthritis. His career stumbled that year, as he only posted 12 wins and his ERA shot up to 4.12; he did, however, pick up his 200th career victory on August 28 with a 5-1 win over the Pirates, evening his record at 9-9 with his sixth straight win. He recovered with a stellar 1971 season in which he won 18 games and his ERA again dropped below 3.00; he recorded his 2,000th strikeout on May 10 in a 3-2 win over the Reds, retiring Lee May in the ninth inning. It was the only season in which Marichal earned any consideration for the Cy Young Award, finishing in 8th place. The Giants returned to the playoffs for the first time since 1962, winning the NL West division and facing the Pirates in the NL Championship Series. Marichal started the third game in Pittsburgh with the series tied at one game each; he pitched well, limiting Pittsburgh&#x27;s offense to solo home runs by Bob Robertson and Richie Hebner. However, the Giants managed only one unearned run, losing the game 2–1 before losing the series three games to one.

1971 would turn out to be Marichal&#x27;s final strong season and the last time he would be selected to the All-Star Game. In 1972, he got off to a 1–6 start, finishing the year with a 6–16 record, his first losing season. After posting an 11–15 record in 1973, his contract was sold to the Boston Red Sox on December 8.

Marichal had some success in 1974; he started the season with a 2-1 record but an ERA of 7.16 in mid-May before arm and back problems sidelined him. He returned in August, winning three more games and lowering his ERA to 4.12, but could not make it past the third inning in his two September starts; he was released after the season with a 5–1 record and 4.87 ERA in 11 starts, his last win being a 2-1 road victory over the Oakland Athletics on August 11. He then signed with the Dodgers as a free agent.

Dodger fans had never forgiven Marichal for his attack on Roseboro 10 years earlier, and it took a personal appeal from Roseboro to calm them down. However, Marichal&#x27;s 1975 didn&#x27;t last long; he was lit up for nine runs, 11 hits and a 13.50 ERA in only two starts, again not making it past the fourth inning, before retiring less than two weeks into the season. He finished his career with 243 victories, 142 losses, 244 complete games, 2,303 strikeouts and a 2.89 ERA over 3,507 innings pitched. His 243 wins were the most by a foreign-born pitcher in over half a century, and he held virtually every career record for Latin American pitchers before most of them were broken by Luis Tiant and Dennis Martínez. He played in the 1962 World Series against the New York Yankees (one start, with no decision) and the 1971 National League Championship Series against the Pirates (losing his only start). Between 1962 and 1971, the Giants averaged 90 wins a season, and Marichal averaged 20 wins a year.

===No-hitter and All-Star performances===
Marichal pitched a no-hitter on June 15, 1963, a 1-0 shutout of the Houston Colt .45s; he retired the first 14 hitters, allowing only a pair of walks, and struck out Brock Davis to close out the win. Chuck Hiller&#x27;s eighth-inning RBI double provided the game&#x27;s only scoring.

He was named to nine All-Star teams, and was voted the Most Valuable Player of the 1965 game in Minneapolis, in which he pitched three shutout innings to begin the game and faced the minimum nine batters, giving up one hit before a double play. His overall All-Star Game record was 2–0 with a 0.50 ERA in eight appearances, facing 62 batters in 18 total innings, second-most in innings pitched only to Don Drysdale (19.1 innings; 2–1, 1.40 ERA and 69 batters faced).

====Career statistics====
==Pitching style==
Unlike Koufax and Gibson, both of whom were power pitchers, Marichal was a finesse pitcher who developed pinpoint control early in his career. He threw five pitches – fastball, slider, changeup, curveball, and screwball – for strikes in three different angles: over the top, three-quarters, or sidearm, giving him a wide-ranging repertoire.

Marichal was known for his high leg kick delivery which allowed him to conceal the type of pitch until it was delivered. The high left leg kick went nearly vertical (even more so than Warren Spahn&#x27;s delivery). He maintained this delivery his entire career, the kick only slightly diminished as he neared retirement.

==Honors==
Marichal fell short of election to the Baseball Hall of Fame during his first two years of eligibility, coming within seven votes in 1982, by all accounts because the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America voters still held his attack on Roseboro against him. However, after a personal appeal by Roseboro, Marichal was elected in 1983, and thanked Roseboro in his induction speech. When Roseboro died in 2002, Marichal served as an honorary pallbearer at his funeral and told the gathered, &quot;Johnny&#x27;s forgiving me was one of the best things that happened in my life. I wish I could have had John Roseboro as my catcher.&quot;

In 1975, the Giants retired Marichal&#x27;s uniform number 27. In 1999, he ranked #71 on &quot;The Sporting News&quot;&#x27; list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.

In 2005, Marichal was honored before a game with a statue outside SBC Park&#x27;s (as it was known then) &quot;Lefty O&#x27;Doul&quot; entrance. The Giants also honored him by wearing jerseys that said &quot;Gigantes&quot;, the Spanish word for &quot;Giants&quot; during the series.

On July 20, 2003, Marichal was inducted into the Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum Hall of Fame in a pregame on-field ceremony at Pac Bell Park. In 2005, he was named one of the three starting pitchers on Major League Baseball&#x27;s Latino Legends Team.

In 2015, the Estadio Quisqueya in his home country was renamed &quot;Estadio Quisqueya Juan Marichal&quot; after him. The following year, a statue of Marichal was unveiled outside the stadium.

==Personal life==

In the early 1960s, Marichal became engaged to Alma Rosa Carvajal. Following the assassination of Rafael Trujillo in 1961, the Dominican Republic was thrown into chaos and conditions became dangerous. Marichal, in spring training at the time, sought to return to his home country in order to bring Alma back with him to the United States. His manager, Alvin Dark, not only consented to Marichal leaving camp, but even gave the pitcher two plane tickets.

Upon returning to the States with his fiancé, Marichal married Carvajal in March 1962. Together, they had six children: Rosie, Elsie, Yvette, Ursula Raquel, Charlene, and Juan Antonio.

Since retirement, Marichal lives in the Dominican Republic where he owns a farm. He travels frequently to the United States and has worked in baseball in various capacities. From 1996 to 2000, he served in the cabinet of Dominican Republic President Leonel Fernández as Minister of Sports and Physical Education.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual shutout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career WHIP leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a pitcher leaders
* List of Major League Baseball no-hitters
* List of Major League Baseball retired numbers
* List of Major League Baseball players from the Dominican Republic

==References==
==Book sources==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327386" start="0" end="29" title="Juan Marichal" label="Juan Antonio Marichal Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q327386" start="71" end="90" title="Juan Marichal" label="the Dominican Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="103" end="112" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="133" end="140" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="166" end="187" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="223" end="243" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063937" start="285" end="292" title="pitch (baseball)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165879" start="330" end="337" title="control pitcher" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="364" end="367" title="Win–loss record (pitching)" label="won"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="406" end="423" title="1962 World Series" label="1962 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="571" end="589" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="611" end="623" title="strikeout" label="striking out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206676" start="687" end="697" title="Bob Feller" label="Bob Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="792" end="807" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="822" end="837" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="839" end="852" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505648" start="858" end="866" title="shutout (baseball)" label="shutouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="927" end="939" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="944" end="954" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="1034" end="1048" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="1089" end="1098" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131345" start="1143" end="1155" title="Warren Spahn" label="Warren Spahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="1328" end="1336" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051079" start="1450" end="1470" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328742" start="1570" end="1615" title="Battle of Candlestick" label="most violent incident in major league history"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="1670" end="1689" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255634" start="1709" end="1722" title="John Roseboro" label="John Roseboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2178" end="2199" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520127" start="2503" end="2516" title="games started" label="games started"/>
<link wikidata="Q73086" start="2569" end="2586" title="Christy Mathewson" label="Christy Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="2659" end="2674" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2828" end="2849" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866499" start="2853" end="2857" title="1983 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="3047" end="3065" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q776071" start="3512" end="3533" title="Yaque del Norte River" label="Yaque del Norte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="3684" end="3688" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q919777" start="4087" end="4096" title="golf ball" label="golf ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q242922" start="4131" end="4135" title="Dominican peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q809910" start="4245" end="4249" title="baseball bat" label="bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q809894" start="4271" end="4277" title="baseball glove" label="gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068115" start="4333" end="4339" title="Felipe Alou" label="Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188383" start="4341" end="4346" title="Jesús Alou" label="Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133102" start="4352" end="4357" title="Matty Alou" label="Matty"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="4401" end="4421" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="4745" end="4754" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130701" start="4859" end="4871" title="Monte Cristi (Dominican Republic)" label="Monte Cristi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="4934" end="4943" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091011" start="5024" end="5047" title="Dominican Republic national baseball team" label="Dominican national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771942" start="5107" end="5127" title="United Fruit Company" label="United Fruit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680974" start="5189" end="5204" title="Ramfis Trujillo" label="Ramfis Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="5241" end="5265" title="Rafael Leónidas Trujillo" label="Rafael Leónidas Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669881" start="5305" end="5324" title="Dominican Air Force" label="Dominican Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962638" start="5636" end="5650" title="Cheney Stadium" label="Cheney Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740096" start="5676" end="5689" title="Tacoma Giants" label="Tacoma Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570053" start="5788" end="5792" title="1960 San Francisco Giants season" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="5958" end="5979" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19631083" start="5995" end="6006" title="Rubén Amaro Sr." label="Rubén Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="6071" end="6080" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196988" start="6132" end="6138" title="single (baseball)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129883" start="6142" end="6156" title="Clay Dalrymple" label="Clay Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="6194" end="6201" title="base on balls" label="walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519969" start="6231" end="6241" title="game score" label="game score"/>
<link wikidata="Q247420" start="6527" end="6541" title="Dodger Stadium" label="Dodger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819340" start="6585" end="6596" title="Tommy Davis (outfielder)" label="Tommy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570801" start="6903" end="6934" title="1962 National League tie-breaker series" label="best-of-three tiebreaker series"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="7084" end="7092" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="7269" end="7281" title="1962 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143726" start="7407" end="7411" title="bunt (baseball)" label="bunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571211" start="7712" end="7716" title="1963 San Francisco Giants season" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="7937" end="7952" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273468" start="7961" end="7965" title="1966 in baseball" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133972" start="7980" end="8002" title="Major League Baseball Player of the Month Award" label="NL Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q859678" start="8300" end="8317" title="walk-off home run" label="walk-off home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="8326" end="8344" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372792" start="8354" end="8362" title="Roy Face" label="Roy Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q590424" start="8486" end="8499" title="Eddie Mathews" label="Eddie Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819512" start="8626" end="8637" title="Tommy Helms" label="Tommy Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="8696" end="8704" title="stolen base" label="stealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439369" start="8907" end="8922" title="James S. Hirsch" label="James S. Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571211" start="9027" end="9031" title="1963 San Francisco Giants season" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573212" start="9036" end="9040" title="1968 San Francisco Giants season" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="9224" end="9227" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="9259" end="9269" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="9271" end="9280" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569094" start="9282" end="9296" title="Willie McCovey" label="Willie McCovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195372" start="9302" end="9312" title="Curt Flood" label="Curt Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="9321" end="9333" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="9600" end="9614" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623859" start="10272" end="10295" title="strikeout-to-walk ratio" label="strikeout-to-walk ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="10381" end="10391" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287709" start="10393" end="10406" title="Steve Carlton" label="Steve Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="10408" end="10420" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q972358" start="10422" end="10434" title="Don Drysdale" label="Don Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="10436" end="10450" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="10455" end="10468" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131345" start="10820" end="10832" title="Warren Spahn" label="Warren Spahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571147" start="10850" end="10866" title="1963 Milwaukee Braves season" label="Milwaukee Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="10935" end="10951" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="11029" end="11040" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="11286" end="11292" title="double (baseball)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="11386" end="11396" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072539" start="11485" end="11498" title="intentional walk" label="intentionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128037" start="11518" end="11530" title="Harvey Kuenn" label="Harvey Kuenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840597" start="11608" end="11618" title="Alvin Dark" label="Alvin Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927496" start="11996" end="12005" title="Bud Selig" label="Bud Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255634" start="12142" end="12155" title="John Roseboro" label="John Roseboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571935" start="12193" end="12212" title="1965 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571946" start="12552" end="12558" title="1965 Milwaukee Braves season" label="Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301795" start="12648" end="12659" title="Maury Wills" label="Maury Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703837" start="12696" end="12705" title="Al Forman" label="Al Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816058" start="12732" end="12742" title="Tom Haller" label="Tom Haller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12743" end="12753" title="Interference (baseball)#Catcher&amp;#x27;s interference" label="interfered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133102" start="12850" end="12860" title="Matty Alou" label="Matty Alou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441384" start="13056" end="13066" title="Ron Fairly" label="Ron Fairly"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="13406" end="13418" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461139" start="13692" end="13705" title="Shag Crawford" label="Shag Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566389" start="14758" end="14770" title="Warren Giles" label="Warren Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="15964" end="15978" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="16027" end="16039" title="perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="16048" end="16060" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="16253" end="16267" title="relief pitcher" label="relief pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="16399" end="16414" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="16442" end="16448" title="at bat" label="at bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115236" start="16554" end="16565" title="Chub Feeney" label="Chub Feeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003586" start="16601" end="16614" title="Buzzie Bavasi" label="Buzzie Bavasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083341" start="17268" end="17289" title="Old-Timers&amp;#x27; Day" label="old-timers&amp;#x27; game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574158" start="17349" end="17353" title="1970 San Francisco Giants season" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="17397" end="17407" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="17443" end="17452" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577627" start="17569" end="17589" title="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders" label="200th career victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574645" start="17719" end="17723" title="1971 San Francisco Giants season" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643426" start="17810" end="17827" title="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders" label="2,000th strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514493" start="17875" end="17882" title="Lee May" label="Lee May"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="17978" end="17992" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="18097" end="18104" title="NL West" label="NL West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511219" start="18144" end="18166" title="1971 National League Championship Series" label="NL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933801" start="18326" end="18339" title="Bob Robertson" label="Bob Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330514" start="18344" end="18357" title="Richie Hebner" label="Richie Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q906099" start="18396" end="18408" title="earned run" label="unearned run"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="18767" end="18781" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576012" start="18827" end="18831" title="1974 Boston Red Sox season" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="19223" end="19240" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="19292" end="19302" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576661" start="19478" end="19482" title="1975 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="19934" end="19948" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266840" start="19993" end="20003" title="Luis Tiant" label="Luis Tiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023184" start="20008" end="20023" title="Dennis Martínez" label="Dennis Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="20042" end="20059" title="1962 World Series" label="1962 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="20072" end="20088" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="20106" end="20117" title="Win–loss record (pitching)" label="no decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511219" start="20127" end="20167" title="1971 National League Championship Series" label="1971 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="20374" end="20383" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972711" start="20521" end="20532" title="Brock Davis" label="Brock Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967594" start="20555" end="20567" title="Chuck Hiller" label="Chuck Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="20661" end="20669" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571939" start="20723" end="20732" title="1965 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1965 game"/>
<link wikidata="Q972358" start="21042" end="21054" title="Don Drysdale" label="Don Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q608445" start="21330" end="21336" title="slider (pitch)" label="slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061998" start="21338" end="21346" title="changeup" label="changeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710733" start="21348" end="21357" title="curveball" label="curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q846196" start="21363" end="21372" title="screwball" label="screwball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858334" start="21447" end="21454" title="sidearm (baseball)" label="sidearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131345" start="21679" end="21691" title="Warren Spahn" label="Warren Spahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="21867" end="21888" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="21995" end="22040" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866499" start="22165" end="22169" title="1983 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="22566" end="22583" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857867" start="22666" end="22704" title="Major League Baseball All-Century Team" label="Major League Baseball All-Century Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q125358557" start="22758" end="22764" title="Statue of Juan Marichal" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q298585" start="22773" end="22781" title="Oracle Park" label="SBC Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772725" start="23040" end="23086" title="Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum Hall of Fame" label="Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496604" start="23225" end="23244" title="Latino Legends Team" label="Latino Legends Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400466" start="23260" end="23277" title="Estadio Quisqueya" label="Estadio Quisqueya"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="23558" end="23573" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="23587" end="23605" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840597" start="23812" end="23822" title="Alvin Dark" label="Alvin Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24211" end="24224" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q151944" start="24351" end="24367" title="Leonel Fernández" label="Leonel Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577599" start="24430" end="24478" title="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q987859" start="24481" end="24530" title="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589040" start="24533" end="24585" title="List of Major League Baseball annual shutout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual shutout leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577627" start="24588" end="24637" title="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643426" start="24640" end="24694" title="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577612" start="24697" end="24746" title="List of Major League Baseball career WHIP leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career WHIP leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925218" start="24749" end="24801" title="List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037317" start="24804" end="24869" title="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a pitcher leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a pitcher leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136238" start="24872" end="24912" title="List of Major League Baseball no-hitters" label="List of Major League Baseball no-hitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11645907" start="24915" end="24960" title="List of Major League Baseball retired numbers" label="List of Major League Baseball retired numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135388" start="24963" end="25028" title="List of Major League Baseball players from the Dominican Republic" label="List of Major League Baseball players from the Dominican Republic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780288" wikidata="Q705803" url="?curid=780288" title="Imre Frivaldszky">
<text>Emerich Frivaldszky von Frivald (6 February 1799 – 19 October 1870), known as Imre Frivaldszky, was a Hungarian botanist and entomologist.

==Biography==
Born into a family of landed gentry, Frivaldszky studied at the gymnasiums in Sátoraljaújhely and Eger, then philosophy at the Royal Academy of Kassa. He graduated in medicine from the University of Budapest in 1823.

While still a student in Eger he accompanied Pál Kitaibel and Jószef Sadler on botanical excursions. By the time he graduated in medicine he was already assistant curator at the Hungarian National Museum in Budapest in 1822, where he later served as curator until his retirement in 1851. In 1824 he abandoned the practice of medicine and spent the rest of his life as a botanist and zoologist. He made many collecting trips throughout Hungary, Ottoman Empire and Italy. Frivaldszky issued and distributed the exsiccata-like series &quot;Species plantarum exsiccatarum europaea-turcicarum&quot;.

Frivaldszky wrote extensively on plants, snakes, snails and especially insects (Lepidoptera and Coleoptera). A large part of his huge entomological collection was destroyed in a flood in 1838, the rest in 1956 during the anticommunist revolution. Many of his specimens are in the Natural History Museum of the University of Pisa. His nephew János Frivaldszky also became an entomologist and curator at the Hungarian National Museum.

==Notes==
* &quot;This article includes material from the Slovak and Hungarian Wikipedia.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Frivaldszky family website
* Obituary in the Österreichische botanische Zeitschrift, 1870
* Bálint Zs. and S Abadjev: &quot;An annotated list of Imre Frivaldszky’s publications&quot;. Annales Historico-Naturales Musei Naturalis Hungarici 98:185, 2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q705803" start="0" end="31" title="Imre Frivaldszky" label="Emerich Frivaldszky von Frivald"/>
<link wikidata="Q705803" start="78" end="94" title="Imre Frivaldszky" label="Imre Frivaldszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="102" end="111" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="112" end="120" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="125" end="137" title="entomologist" label="entomologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q116417" start="232" end="247" title="Sátoraljaújhely" label="Sátoraljaújhely"/>
<link wikidata="Q167109" start="252" end="256" title="Eger" label="Eger"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="298" end="303" title="Košice" label="Kassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q583036" start="417" end="429" title="Pál Kitaibel" label="Pál Kitaibel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="434" end="447" title="Jószef Sadler" label="Jószef Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q914141" start="550" end="575" title="Hungarian National Museum" label="Hungarian National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="807" end="814" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="816" end="830" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114554807" start="881" end="890" title="exsiccata" label="exsiccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="1048" end="1059" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="1064" end="1074" title="Coleoptera" label="Coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099134" start="1248" end="1296" title="Natural History Museum of the University of Pisa" label="Natural History Museum of the University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004050" start="1309" end="1326" title="János Frivaldszky" label="János Frivaldszky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780289" wikidata="Q1404518" url="?curid=780289" title="Oranjemund">
<text>Oranjemund (German for &quot;Mouth of Orange&quot;) is a diamond mining town in the ǁKaras Region of the extreme southwest of Namibia, on the northern bank of the Orange River mouth at the border with South Africa. It had a population of 7,736 people in 2023.

==History==
The entire area along the shore of the Atlantic Ocean was proclaimed restricted (the &quot;Sperrgebiet&quot;) in 1908 due to the occurrence of alluvial diamonds. Since then, the public was forbidden entry. In 1927 diamonds were found south of the Orange River in South Africa. Hans Merensky and other prospectors assumed that the northern shore on South West African territory would also have diamonds. A year later they conducted an expedition from Lüderitz to the mouth of the Orange River, where they found rich deposits on the north bank of the river and the adjacent northern coastline and established a tented camp from which Oranjemund had developed.

Due to the Great Depression, diamond mining was not undertaken until 1935, a year later workers&#x27; houses were erected. Oranjemund as a formal settlement was thus established in 1936. Production of mainly gem-quality diamonds has remained approximately 2 million carats (400 kg) per year since inception of the mine, mainly through improvements in technology.

Oranjemund was proclaimed a town in 2011. Until 2017 the town was run by Namdeb (formerly Consolidated Diamond Mines), now a subsidiary of De Beers. Access to, and settlement in Oranjemund was restricted to employees and their relatives. Its infrastructure is superior to that of other towns in Namibia&#x27;s South, due to it not being dependent on cost recovery from its inhabitants. In the second half of the 20th century, Oranjemund featured a large recreational complex with swimming pool, cinema, restaurants and bars. Water is still provided free of charge, and until 2016, so was electricity.

==Economy and infrastructure==
Oranjemund is dominated by its diamond mining industry.

===Transportation===
Oranjemund features a border post to Alexander Bay, South Africa via the Ernest Oppenheimer Bridge over the Orange River. Until the town was declared accessible to the public in 2017, only persons with pre-application of 1 month were allowed to cross the border. Before the town was proclaimed in 2011, this was the only road access to Oranjemund, as the &quot;Sperrgebiet&quot; covered all territory north and east of the town. Today Oranjemund is connected to Rosh Pinah via a tarred road along the Namibian shore of the Orange River.

Oranjemund Airport had scheduled flights to Cape Town, Lüderitz, Walvis Bay and Windhoek. , only a scheduled flight to Windhoek Eros is offered.

==Geography==


===Climate===
Oranjemund has a desert climate (&quot;BWk&quot;, according to the Köppen climate classification), with pleasant temperatures throughout the year. The average annual precipitation is .

==Politics==
Oranjemund was privately owned by De Beers until 2017, and thus governed by the diamond mining company&#x27;s administration. In 2011 the political administration was handed over to government which proclaimed it a town. It is now governed by a town council that has seven seats.

The first election run in Oranjemund was a by-election of the 2010 local authority election, 2,221 registered voters elected local authority councillors for the first time on 16 March 2012. SWAPO won the elections, and since 23 March 2012 Henry Edward Coetzee is the town&#x27;s mayor.

SWAPO also won the 2020 local authority election but lost majority control over the town council. SWAPO obtained 935 votes and gained three seats. Independent Patriots for Change (IPC), an opposition party formed in August 2020, gained 737 votes and also three seats. The remaining seat went to the Landless People&#x27;s Movement (LPM, a new party registered in 2018) with 158 votes.

==References==
==External links==
* Oranjemund Town Council, official website
* Oranjemund Online, unofficial website with historic pictures
* Oranjemund weather conditions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1404518" start="0" end="10" title="Oranjemund" label="Oranjemund"/>
<link wikidata="Q573467" start="84" end="97" title="ǁKaras Region" label="ǁKaras Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="126" end="133" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="163" end="175" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="201" end="213" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="312" end="326" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933532" start="364" end="375" title="Sperrgebiet" label="Sperrgebiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="416" end="424" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="536" end="548" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q77805" start="550" end="563" title="Hans Merensky" label="Hans Merensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="621" end="638" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="723" end="731" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="943" end="959" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1140" end="1151" title="gem-quality" label="gem-quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="1152" end="1160" title="diamonds" label="diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q261247" start="1198" end="1204" title="Carat (mass)" label="carats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1369" end="1375" title="Namdeb" label="Namdeb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1386" end="1412" title="Consolidated Diamond Mines" label="Consolidated Diamond Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="1435" end="1443" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856529" start="2044" end="2071" title="Alexander Bay, South Africa" label="Alexander Bay, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223189" start="2080" end="2105" title="Ernest Oppenheimer Bridge" label="Ernest Oppenheimer Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q851674" start="2469" end="2479" title="Rosh Pinah" label="Rosh Pinah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432245" start="2545" end="2563" title="Oranjemund Airport" label="Oranjemund Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="2589" end="2598" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="2600" end="2608" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="2610" end="2620" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="2625" end="2633" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321635" start="2664" end="2677" title="Eros Airport" label="Windhoek Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="2738" end="2752" title="desert climate" label="desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2788" end="2817" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589263" start="3102" end="3112" title="Government of Namibia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077057" start="3263" end="3292" title="Namibian local and regional elections, 2010" label="2010 local authority election"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="3391" end="3396" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q102394326" start="3507" end="3536" title="2020 Namibian local and regional elections" label="2020 local authority election"/>
<link wikidata="Q98081326" start="3635" end="3666" title="Independent Patriots for Change" label="Independent Patriots for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518792" start="3787" end="3818" title="Landless People&amp;#x27;s Movement (Namibia)" label="Landless People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780290" wikidata="Q254241" url="?curid=780290" title="Dave the Barbarian">
<text>Dave the Barbarian is an American animated television series created by Doug Langdale for Disney Channel. It follows a barbarian, and his friends and family, on surreal comedy Medieval-themed adventures. The series premiered on January 23, 2004, and ended on January 22, 2005, with a total of one season with 21 episodes.

== Premise ==
The series is set in the kingdom of Udrogoth during the Middle Ages. It centers on Dave (voiced by Danny Cooksey), a powerful yet cowardly barbarian who lives with his fashionable yet self-centered older sister Candy (voiced by Erica Luttrell) and feisty younger sister Fang (voiced by Tress MacNeille). His parents, Throktar and Glimia, are the King and Queen, but are away &quot;fighting evil&quot; across the world (though they sometimes communicate via a magic crystal ball or cauldron), and have left Candy in charge of the kingdom as Princess Regent while Dave is supposed to defend the kingdom (since he is the biggest). Together the three siblings, along with their gluttonous and mildly incompetent &quot;wizard&quot; uncle Oswidge, are left to run and protect the kingdom from the villainous yet dimwitted Dark Lord Chuckles the Silly Piggy (voiced by Paul Rugg).

There is a Narrator, referred to either as &quot;the Narrator&quot; or &quot;the Storyteller&quot;, voiced by Jeff Bennett. He is able to talk to the characters of the show, and vice versa, which breaks the fourth wall to the extent where he was once captured by Dark Lord Chuckles the Silly Piggy and was forced to tell the story according to his kidnapper&#x27;s commands.

== Characters ==
===Main===
* Dave (voiced by Danny Cooksey) is a muscular and very strong barbarian war-prince who is very sensitive to pain and would rather knit and cook than fight evil. He is also afraid of many things and at least once an episode, he will be frightened somehow and shriek his high pitched, effeminate scream. He is also allergic to many things. According to Fang, Dave wanted to be a barbarian when he was young, but thought a barbarian was a librarian who also cuts hair. Dave&#x27;s catchphrases are &quot;Bejabbers!&quot; and &quot;Please don&#x27;t hurt me!&quot;
* Candy (voiced by Erica Luttrell) has a contemporary &quot;valley girl&quot; attitude and would rather shop and hang out than rule a kingdom. Candy&#x27;s main ability is her martial arts skills. She is the kingdom&#x27;s most beautiful girl and she is rather selfish, but gets over that in a small way while helping Hamwise and his wife defeat the nefarious Invisigoths. Candy has used the quote &quot;Don&#x27;t mess with the princess&quot; on a number of occasions and has referred to herself also as a Barbarian. She has displayed the most strength out of the family, often when it comes to monsters destroying a shop or so. Whether or not she is stronger than Dave remains unseen but out of the two, she is the one willing to use her strength.
* Fang (voiced by Tress MacNeille) is a very rambunctious and uncivilized young warrior who loves to smash things. She has long red hair in a ponytail. She is the butt of a running joke in which she is often mistaken for a monkey, hence her catchphrase, &quot;Not a monkey!&quot; However, she frequently acts and appears to look like a monkey and during one episode she finds a tribe of monkeys that exactly resemble her. She is too small to fight most of the time and resents Dave (who is very strong) because of his cowardice. She aspires to be a barbarian warrior and often reprimands Dave for his gentleness and niche interests. She secretly likes to play with dolls. Fang wields a spear in combat, as well as kicking, biting, and punching. Her wardrobe (specifically, the animal skin tunic and bone in her hair) incorporates elements of both Pebbles and Bamm-Bamm from &quot;The Flintstones&quot;. 
* Uncle Oswidge (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) is Dave, Fang and Candy&#x27;s uncle. He is a clumsy sorcerer who often wreaks havoc with his spells rather than being useful. In &quot;Sorcerer Material&quot;, it is revealed that Oswidge did not attend sorcery school; he merely worked in the cafeteria. He is an avid foodie, being a skilled chef and hash slinger; his favorite foods are ham and &quot;Nut Logs&quot;, which he attacks a server to receive. Like his niece Fang, he secretly likes to play with dolls. He presents a rather unkempt appearance. Despite his inadequacy as a sorcerer, his knowledge of magic surpasses that of the rest of the family.
* Faffy (voiced by Frank Welker) is the family&#x27;s dumb pig-shaped pet dragon. Unlike most dragons, he breathes lightning and is domesticated, plus he does not have a tail. He does possess a wild streak that can be revealed when around other dragons, particularly evil ones with rebellious attitudes. The Narrator has mentioned that Faffy has a one-digit IQ.
* Lula (voiced by Estelle Harris) is Dave&#x27;s shrill, impatient, sarcastic, and enchanted sword. Her main ability is shooting lightning from the tip of her blade. She was once the sword of Argon the Ageless, with whom she was infatuated, but was used by Argon as the nose of a snowman, and left in the melted puddle for centuries. It&#x27;s revealed that Lula is related to other mystical weapons of different kinds, her older sister being Mjolnir, the hammer of Thor, and her cousin being the trident of Poseidon.

===Supporting===
* King Throktar (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) and Queen Glimia (voiced by Erica Luttrell) are the proper rulers of Udrogoth, and the parents of Dave, Candy and Fang. They are away fighting evil around the world, though they can communicate to their children via Oswidge&#x27;s crystal ball, a magical cauldron, or other forms of fantasy telecommunication. Occasionally the King and Queen are on the phone call while in a perilous situation, such as a battle with zombie spiders.
* The Narrator/Storyteller (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is the narrator of the series. He has never been seen in an episode.
* Dinky (voiced by Erica Luttrell) and Cheezette (voiced by Tress MacNeille) are Princess Candy&#x27;s best friends, who are sometimes unsupportive – and wisely so – towards her actions. They are as obsessive about fashion, clothes, and social lives as Candy is.
* Mrs. Gert Bogmelon (voiced by Lisa Kaplan) is a witch-like shopkeeper who loves money and loves to rip off her customers. She can be cowed by Fang and other aggressive people but takes advantage of meek people like Dave. She sells evil weasels, mystical swords, and other plot-related paraphernalia, such as used T-shirts for sporting events.
* Twinkle the Marvel Horse (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is a magical pony with a rainbow-colored tail. He has extreme depression and possible psychosis, apparently due to being left on his own in the stable all the time. He often talks about his dreams, which are very disturbing. He is capable of flight, though he has no wings. His manner of speech is a parody of Christopher Walken.

===Villains===
* The Dark Lord Chuckles the Silly Piggy (voiced by Paul Rugg) is a pig with a high-collared cape (and equally high voice) bent on ruling Udrogoth and the main antagonist of the show. Chuckles lives in a castle on the outskirts of the kingdom. He possesses the Mystic Amulet of Hogswineboar (named so because hogs, swine, and boars are all synonyms for the word &#x27;pig&#x27;). This grants him amazing mystical powers such as telekinesis, shape-shifting, blasting magic to rival Lula&#x27;s, and conjuration. He is also a whiz with technology, as evidenced by the Mecha-Dave. His schemes usually rely on a particular gimmick (like giant clams, giant ducks, evil pastries, or evil furniture). His catchphrase is (whenever he gets hurt) &quot;Ooh, my little piggy [insert body part]&quot;. It was also revealed in one episode (&quot;The Princess and the Peabrains&quot;) that he has a nephew named Knuckles the Silly Piggy, who wants to be the Harvest Hog instead of a dark lord of evil.
* Malsquando (voiced by Rob Paulsen) is an evil sorcerer and Oswidge&#x27;s rival. He has an obsession with taking over the world and making money. He was revealed to be a member of the Evil Sorcerers&#x27; union. He also runs a shop that cures hiccats (magical hiccups that produce cats from one&#x27;s mouth). Malsquando reveals that while he attended sorcery school, Oswidge merely worked in the cafeteria, thus invalidating Oswidge as a wizard. Lula expresses that she finds his accent attractive. His speaking pattern is based on that of Jonathan Harris.
* Quosmir (voiced by Michael McShane) is the god of freshly laundered trousers, overused punctuation and possibly other random and ridiculous things. He has mommy issues and carries a security blanket known as his &quot;ni-ni lankie&quot;. He often experiences short-term memory loss and attention deficit disorder. He is a green skinned naga-like giant with the lower half of a snake instead of legs; he is always wearing a blue cape and a combover. He has a severe inferiority complex that is only exacerbated in the presence of his mother. He has immense magical powers including flight, super-speed, and flaming loogies.
* Princess Irmaplotz and Queen Zonthara (voiced by Melissa and Joan Rivers) is the evil sorceress princess of Hyrogoth that is trying to destroy Dave (or more likely she just wants to make Dave&#x27;s life miserable). Her mother Zonthara is the ruler of Hyrogoth, and keeps on trying to teach Irmaplotz to be more evil. Her father is good, making her half-evil. Earlier in the show, Dave and Irmaplotz fell in love over their similar reading habits, love of bad poetry, and similar allergies. However, after careful consideration, Dave ended the relationship due to Irmaplotz&#x27;s desire for evil, which contradicts Dave&#x27;s desire to do good. After this, Irmaplotz becomes an antagonist, seeking revenge for being dumped. Irmaplotz is nearsighted, occasionally wearing glasses, but avoids wearing them in fear of looking &quot;bookish&quot;. In the episode &quot;The Cow Says Moon&quot;, Irmaplotz reveals she still has feelings for Dave when she compliments him while still saying that vengeance will be hers.
* Ned Frischman (voiced by Richard Steven Horvitz) is a nerd who works at a pants factory in the year 1994. He gains a radioactive zipper which he uses to travel back into time to attempt conquering the world by using the advanced technology of the future, such as the Game Guy (a parody of a Game Boy), and a joke book from the 1940s. The humans become addicted to playing the same game on their Game Guys and they clamor for new batteries, which Frischman repeatedly provides by traveling to the future and purchasing them. He then uses the pursuit of batteries to enslave Urdugoth inhabitants into building pyramids and other monuments in his name. He is defeated by Faffy, Lula and Twinkle the Marvel Horse, who all do not have thumbs and therefore did not become addicted to Game Guys.

== Production ==
The series was created and written by Doug Langdale. After premiering on Disney in 2004, it aired on Toon Disney a year later. In Latin America, the show was broadcast on Jetix.

The series juxtaposes both the ancient and modern. Candy, for example, shops in the local mall and uses the crystal ball for online shopping sprees.

Occasionally, the series breaks the fourth wall with a character complaining about a plot, directly addressing the audience, or communicating to the narrator. Characters can sometimes be offended by how the narrator describes them, including Oswidge in &quot;Sorcerer Material&quot;. In &quot;The Maddening Sprite of the Stump&quot;, the show&#x27;s narrator skips over a fight scene, asking viewers to imagine an epic battle and explaining that &quot;a low budget show&quot; like &quot;Dave the Barbarian&quot; did not have the expenses to animate such a scene. In &quot;A Pig&#x27;s Story&quot;, the series antagonist realizes the show&#x27;s narration leads to his losses, so he types favorable situations and hypnotizes the Storyteller into reading the voice-over, culminating in a theme song for the antagonist; ultimately, the narrator&#x27;s laryngitis makes him lose his voice and foil the evil plan.

== Episodes ==

== Broadcast ==
The series was broadcast internationally, including on the Family Channel in Canada, on STS in Russia, on Disney Cinemagic in the United Kingdom, on Jetix in Latin America, on MBC 3 in Arabia, on SIC in Portugal, and on Super RTL in Germany.

== Awards and nominations ==
* Annie Awards
:2005 – &quot;Storyboarding in an Animated Television Production&quot; – Wendy Grieb for episode &quot;The Maddening Sprite of the Stump&quot; (Won)
:2005 – &quot;Writing in an Animated Television Production&quot; – Evan Gore &amp; Heather Lombard for episode &quot;Ned Frischman: Man of Tomorrow&quot; (Nominated)

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="34" end="42" title="animated series" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q779672" start="72" end="85" title="Doug Langdale" label="Doug Langdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="90" end="104" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="119" end="128" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="161" end="175" title="surreal comedy" label="surreal comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="176" end="184" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="373" end="381" title="Ostrogoths" label="Udrogoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="393" end="404" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015230" start="436" end="449" title="Danny Cooksey" label="Danny Cooksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="476" end="485" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056461" start="565" end="579" title="Erica Luttrell" label="Erica Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q237530" start="623" end="638" title="Tress MacNeille" label="Tress MacNeille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032349" start="802" end="814" title="crystal ball" label="crystal ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="818" end="826" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q729924" start="877" end="892" title="Prince regent" label="Princess Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="1051" end="1057" title="Magician (fantasy)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755065" start="1153" end="1162" title="Dark Lord" label="Dark Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298027" start="1199" end="1208" title="Paul Rugg" label="Paul Rugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="1223" end="1231" title="Narrator" label="Narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q311103" start="1322" end="1334" title="Jeff Bennett" label="Jeff Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="1408" end="1430" title="fourth wall" label="breaks the fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015230" start="1634" end="1647" title="Danny Cooksey" label="Danny Cooksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q473652" start="1900" end="1910" title="effeminate" label="effeminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="1930" end="1938" title="allergic" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182436" start="2053" end="2062" title="librarian" label="librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056461" start="2197" end="2211" title="Erica Luttrell" label="Erica Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129796" start="2238" end="2249" title="valley girl" label="valley girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="2354" end="2366" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36381317" start="2439" end="2446" title="selfish" label="selfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q237530" start="2946" end="2961" title="Tress MacNeille" label="Tress MacNeille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="3151" end="3157" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270587" start="3775" end="3782" title="Pebbles Flintstone" label="Pebbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785956" start="3787" end="3796" title="Bamm-Bamm Rubble" label="Bamm-Bamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="3808" end="3823" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q488335" start="3859" end="3883" title="Kevin Michael Richardson" label="Kevin Michael Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="3938" end="3946" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="sorcerer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4089" end="4103" title="List_of_fictional_schools#Magic_schools" label="sorcery school"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463304" start="4129" end="4138" title="cafeteria" label="cafeteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435960" start="4154" end="4160" title="foodie" label="foodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="4514" end="4526" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="4853" end="4855" title="Intelligence quotient" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q272935" start="4875" end="4889" title="Estelle Harris" label="Estelle Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965846" start="4940" end="4955" title="Magic sword" label="enchanted sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="4986" end="4995" title="lightning discharge" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="5300" end="5307" title="Mjölnir" label="Mjolnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644862" start="5354" end="5373" title="trident of Poseidon" label="trident of Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q488335" start="5420" end="5444" title="Kevin Michael Richardson" label="Kevin Michael Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056461" start="5474" end="5488" title="Erica Luttrell" label="Erica Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032349" start="5677" end="5689" title="crystal ball" label="crystal ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="5737" end="5754" title="Telecommunications" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q311103" start="5917" end="5929" title="Jeff Bennett (voice actor)" label="Jeff Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056461" start="6019" end="6033" title="Erica Luttrell" label="Erica Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q237530" start="6060" end="6075" title="Tress MacNeille" label="Tress MacNeille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759540" start="6550" end="6563" title="paraphernalia" label="paraphernalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311103" start="6646" end="6658" title="Jeff Bennett (voice actor)" label="Jeff Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q185051" start="6970" end="6988" title="Christopher Walken" label="Christopher Walken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755065" start="7012" end="7021" title="Dark Lord" label="Dark Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298027" start="7058" end="7067" title="Paul Rugg" label="Paul Rugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="7166" end="7176" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="7434" end="7445" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="7447" end="7461" title="shape-shifting" label="shape-shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="7540" end="7550" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q311987" start="8018" end="8029" title="Rob Paulsen" label="Rob Paulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287014" start="8537" end="8552" title="Jonathan Harris" label="Jonathan Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384407" start="8575" end="8590" title="Mike McShane" label="Michael McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="8842" end="8868" title="attention deficit disorder" label="attention deficit disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="8892" end="8896" title="Nāga" label="naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812865" start="9230" end="9237" title="Melissa Rivers" label="Melissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q240933" start="9242" end="9253" title="Joan Rivers" label="Joan Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="9267" end="9276" title="magician (fantasy)" label="sorceress"/>
<link wikidata="Q863048" start="9277" end="9285" title="princess" label="princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036" start="10223" end="10245" title="Richard Steven Horvitz" label="Richard Steven Horvitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q650031" start="10252" end="10256" title="nerd" label="nerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="10489" end="10497" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q779672" start="11043" end="11056" title="Doug Langdale" label="Doug Langdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="11135" end="11148" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q156073" start="11176" end="11181" title="Jetix" label="Jetix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="11195" end="11233" title="Anachronism" label="juxtaposes both the ancient and modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="11370" end="11381" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194557" start="12183" end="12193" title="laryngitis" label="laryngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481717" start="12335" end="12349" title="Family Channel (Canadian TV network)" label="Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754271" start="12364" end="12367" title="STS (TV channel)" label="STS"/>
<link wikidata="Q635278" start="12382" end="12398" title="Disney Cinemagic" label="Disney Cinemagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156073" start="12425" end="12430" title="Jetix" label="Jetix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997140" start="12452" end="12457" title="MBC 3" label="MBC 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031951" start="12472" end="12475" title="Sociedade Independente de Comunicação" label="SIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q684994" start="12496" end="12505" title="Super RTL" label="Super RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="12550" end="12562" title="Annie Awards" label="Annie Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780294" wikidata="Q2413003" url="?curid=780294" title="Michael Abels">
<text>Michael Abels (born October 8, 1962) is an American composer best known for the opera &quot;Omar&quot;, co-written with Rhiannon Giddens, and his scores for the Jordan Peele films &quot;Get Out&quot;, &quot;Us&quot; and &quot;Nope&quot;. The hip-hop influenced score for &quot;Us&quot; was short-listed for the Oscars and was even named &quot;Score of the Decade&quot; by &quot;TheWrap&quot;. Other recent media projects include the films &quot;Bad Education&quot;, &quot;Nightbooks&quot;, &quot;Fake Famous&quot;, and the docu-series &quot;Allen v. Farrow&quot;. His most recent releases include &quot;Beauty&quot; which premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival and is now streaming on Netflix, &quot;Breaking&quot; (formerly &quot;892&quot;) which premiered at Sundance, and his third collaboration with Jordan Peele, &quot;Nope&quot;.

Abels&#x27; works also includes many concert works, such as &quot;At War With Ourselves&quot; for the Kronos Quartet, &quot;Isolation Variation&quot; for Hilary Hahn, and the opera &quot;Omar&quot; co-composed with Grammy-winning singer/songwriter Rhiannon Giddens. Some of these pieces are available on the Cedille Records, including &quot;Delights &amp; Dances&quot; and &quot;Winged Creatures&quot;. Recent commissions include a work for the National Symphony Orchestra and a guitar concerto for Mak Grgić.

Abels is co-founder of the Composers Diversity Collective, an advocacy group to increase visibility of composers of color in film, gaming and streaming media.

In 2023, the opera &quot;Omar&quot;, co-written by Abels and Rhiannon Giddens, won the Pulitzer Prize for Music.

== Early life ==
Abels was born in Phoenix, Arizona. He spent his early years on a small farm in South Dakota, where he lived with his grandparents. Introduced to music via the family piano, he began showing an innate curiosity towards music at age 4. His music-loving grandparents convinced the local piano teacher to take him on as a student despite his age. At age 8, Abels began composing music, and by age 13, his first completed orchestral work was performed.

Upon graduating from high school, Abels attended the University of Southern California Thornton School of Music in Los Angeles. Abels, who is mixed race, eventually studied West African drumming techniques at California Institute for the Arts, and sang in a predominantly black church choir to further explore his African-American roots.

==Filmography==
Composer
* &quot;Get Out&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Us&quot; (2019)
* &quot;See You Yesterday&quot; (2019)
* &quot;All Day and a Night&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Bad Education&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Fake Famous&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Nightbooks&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Nope&quot; (2022)
* &quot;Breaking&quot; (2022)
* &quot;Landscape with Invisible Hand&quot; (2023)
* &quot;The Burial&quot; (2023)
* &quot;The American Society of Magical Negroes&quot; (2024)
* &quot;The Acolyte&quot; (2024)

Additional music
* &quot;Detroit&quot; (2017)

=== Other works ===
* &quot;Global Warming&quot; (1990) (commissioned by the Phoenix Youth Symphony)
* &quot;I&#x27;m Determined&quot; (1991) for orchestra
* &quot;How Majestic&quot; (1992) for orchestra
* &quot;American Variations on Swing Low Sweet Chariot&quot; (1993) (premiered by Doc Severinsen and the Phoenix Symphony)
* &quot;Frederick&#x27;s Fables&quot; (1994, 1996) four pieces for orchestra, based on selected stories of Leo Lionni
* &quot;Dance for Martin&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1998) for orchestra (commissioned by the Houston Symphony and the Nashville Symphony)
* &quot;You&#x27;re a Grand Old Flag&quot; (1995) for orchestra
* &quot;More Seasons&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Limitless&quot; (2000) for choir, or soloist with choral accompaniment, and piano
* &quot;Homies &amp; Popz&quot; (2001) opera
* &quot;Tribute&quot; (2001) for orchestra
* &quot;Affectionate Objects&quot; (2004) for orchestra
* &quot;Outburst&quot; (2005) for orchestra
* &quot;Delights &amp; Dances&quot; (2007) for string quartet and orchestra
* &quot;Urban Legends&quot; (2008) for string quartet and orchestra (commissioned by the Sphinx Organization)
* &quot;Aquadia&quot; (2009) for orchestra (co-commissioned by the Chicago Sinfonietta and the Shedd Aquarium)
* &quot;Be the Change&quot; (2015) for choir, or soloist with choral accompaniment, and piano
* &quot;The Open Hand&quot;
* &quot;Victory Road&quot; (2017) for orchestra
* &quot;Iconoclasm&quot; (2017) for piano
* &quot;Liquify&quot; (2017) for orchestra
* &quot;Twilight Drive&quot; for piano
* &quot;Winged Creatures&quot; (2018) for flute, clarinet and orchestra (commissioned by Cedille Records) written for Anthony and Demarre McGill
* &quot;Pensivity&quot; for piano
* &quot;Life in a Day&quot;
* &quot;Struck by Enlightenment&quot;
* &quot;Falling Sky&quot; (for concert band) (2019)
* &quot;Falling Sky&quot;, ballet (2020)
* &quot;Anguish&quot; (from &quot;Falling Sky&quot;) (2020) for piano
* &quot;Gift of the Machine&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Isolation Variation&quot; (2020) for unaccompanied violin (for Hillary Hahn)
* &quot;At War with Ourselves&quot;, oratorio - libretto by Nikky Finney, commissioned for the Kronos Quartet
* &quot;Omar&quot;, an original opera on the life of Omar ibn Said co-composed by Rhiannon Giddens
* &quot;Get Out&quot;, in concert (2020)
* &quot;Emerge&quot; (2021) for orchestra (co-commission from Detroit Symphony Orchestra)
* &quot;Guitar Concerto &quot;Borders&quot;&quot; (2022) Commissioned by ROCO &amp; Quad City Symphony, written for Mak Grgić

== Awards and nominations ==
==References==
==External links==
* Profile at SubitoMusic.com
* Michael Abels Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2413003" start="0" end="13" title="Michael Abels" label="Michael Abels"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190968" start="92" end="96" title="Omar (opera)" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="120" end="136" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371986" start="161" end="173" title="Jordan Peele" label="Jordan Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136235" start="186" end="193" title="Get Out" label="Get Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000996" start="207" end="209" title="Us (2019 film)" label="Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176162" start="226" end="230" title="Nope (film)" label="Nope"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="311" end="317" title="Oscars" label="Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042582" start="378" end="385" title="TheWrap" label="TheWrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q58814555" start="445" end="458" title="Bad Education (2019 film)" label="Bad Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q106570651" start="472" end="482" title="Nightbooks" label="Nightbooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106074440" start="496" end="507" title="Fake Famous" label="Fake Famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q105596611" start="541" end="556" title="Allen v. Farrow" label="Allen v. Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q110040212" start="700" end="708" title="Breaking (film)" label="Breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176162" start="824" end="828" title="Nope (film)" label="Nope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="939" end="953" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235406" start="991" end="1002" title="Hilary Hahn" label="Hilary Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="1085" end="1101" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057050" start="1145" end="1160" title="Cedille Records" label="Cedille Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744749" start="1282" end="1309" title="National Symphony Orchestra" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q24758367" start="1336" end="1345" title="Mak Grgić" label="Mak Grgić"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190968" start="1533" end="1537" title="Omar (opera)" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="1569" end="1585" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="1595" end="1619" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Pulitzer Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="1657" end="1673" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="1719" end="1731" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="2142" end="2175" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386547" start="2176" end="2200" title="Thornton School of Music" label="Thornton School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2204" end="2215" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026827" start="2298" end="2331" title="California Institute for the Arts" label="California Institute for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2403" end="2419" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136235" start="2461" end="2468" title="Get Out" label="Get Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000996" start="2490" end="2492" title="Us (2019 film)" label="Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q63235490" start="2514" end="2531" title="See You Yesterday" label="See You Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818683" start="2553" end="2572" title="All Day and a Night" label="All Day and a Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q58814555" start="2594" end="2607" title="Bad Education (2019 film)" label="Bad Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q106074440" start="2629" end="2640" title="Fake Famous" label="Fake Famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q106570651" start="2662" end="2672" title="Nightbooks" label="Nightbooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176162" start="2694" end="2698" title="Nope (film)" label="Nope"/>
<link wikidata="Q110040212" start="2720" end="2728" title="Breaking (film)" label="Breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q111671358" start="2750" end="2779" title="Landscape with Invisible Hand" label="Landscape with Invisible Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962910" start="2801" end="2811" title="The Burial (film)" label="The Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690415" start="2833" end="2872" title="The American Society of Magical Negroes" label="The American Society of Magical Negroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="2894" end="2905" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q27965056" start="2945" end="2952" title="Detroit (film)" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q711921" start="3253" end="3267" title="Doc Severinsen" label="Doc Severinsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931743" start="3276" end="3292" title="Phoenix Symphony" label="Phoenix Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q964731" start="3401" end="3411" title="Leo Lionni" label="Leo Lionni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631506" start="3498" end="3514" title="Houston Symphony" label="Houston Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967018" start="3523" end="3541" title="Nashville Symphony" label="Nashville Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576814" start="4084" end="4103" title="Sphinx Organization" label="Sphinx Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963327" start="4172" end="4191" title="Chicago Sinfonietta" label="Chicago Sinfonietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166515" start="4200" end="4214" title="Shedd Aquarium" label="Shedd Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057050" start="4599" end="4614" title="Cedille Records" label="Cedille Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773067" start="4628" end="4635" title="Anthony McGill (musician)" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q55584195" start="4640" end="4654" title="Demarre McGill" label="Demarre McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q235406" start="5030" end="5042" title="Hillary Hahn" label="Hillary Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035311" start="5104" end="5116" title="Nikky Finney" label="Nikky Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="5139" end="5153" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190968" start="5162" end="5166" title="Omar (opera)" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687711" start="5207" end="5220" title="Omar ibn Said" label="Omar ibn Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="5236" end="5252" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068185" start="5356" end="5382" title="Detroit Symphony Orchestra" label="Detroit Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337666" start="5457" end="5461" title="ROCO" label="ROCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419939" start="5468" end="5486" title="Quad City Symphony" label="Quad City Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q24758367" start="5500" end="5509" title="Mak Grgić" label="Mak Grgić"/>
</links>
</doc>
