<doc id="37412" wikidata="Q173509" url="?curid=37412" title="Gold standard">
<text>A gold standard is a monetary system in which the standard economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold. The gold standard was the basis for the international monetary system from the 1870s to the early 1920s, and from the late 1920s to 1932 as well as from 1944 until 1971 when the United States unilaterally terminated convertibility of the US dollar to gold, effectively ending the Bretton Woods system. Many states nonetheless hold substantial gold reserves.

Historically, the silver standard and bimetallism have been more common than the gold standard. The shift to an international monetary system based on a gold standard reflected accident, network externalities, and path dependence. Great Britain accidentally adopted a &quot;de facto&quot; gold standard in 1717 when Isaac Newton, then-master of the Royal Mint, set the exchange rate of silver to gold too low, thus causing silver coins to go out of circulation. As Great Britain became the world&#x27;s leading financial and commercial power in the 19th century, other states increasingly adopted Britain&#x27;s monetary system.

The gold standard was largely abandoned during the Great Depression before being reinstated in a limited form as part of the post-World War II Bretton Woods system. The gold standard was abandoned due to its propensity for volatility, as well as the constraints it imposed on governments: by retaining a fixed exchange rate, governments were hamstrung in engaging in expansionary policies to, for example, reduce unemployment during economic recessions.

According to a 2012 survey of 39 economists, the vast majority (92 percent) agreed that a return to the gold standard would not improve price-stability and employment outcomes, and two-thirds of economic historians surveyed in the mid-1990s rejected the idea that the gold standard &quot;was effective in stabilizing prices and moderating business-cycle fluctuations during the nineteenth century.&quot; The consensus view among economists is that the gold standard helped prolong and deepen the Great Depression. Historically, banking crises were more common during periods under the gold standard while currency crises were less common. According to economist Michael D. Bordo, the gold standard has three benefits that made its use popular during certain historical periods: &quot;its record as a stable nominal anchor; its automaticity; and its role as a credible commitment mechanism.&quot; The gold standard is supported by many followers of the Austrian School, free-market libertarians, and some supply-siders.
==Implementation==
The United Kingdom slipped into a gold specie standard in 1717 by over-valuing gold at times its weight in silver. It was unique among nations to use gold in conjunction with clipped, underweight silver shillings, addressed only before the end of the 18th century by the acceptance of gold proxies like token silver coins and banknotes.

From the more widespread acceptance of paper money in the 19th century emerged the gold bullion standard, a system where gold coins do not circulate, but authorities like central banks agree to exchange circulating currency for gold bullion at a fixed price. First emerging in the late 18th century to regulate exchange between London and Edinburgh, Keynes (1913) noted how such a standard became the predominant means of implementing the gold standard internationally in the 1870s.

Restricting the free circulation of gold under the Classical Gold Standard period from the 1870s to 1914 was also needed in countries which decided to implement the gold standard while guaranteeing the exchangeability of huge amounts of legacy silver coins into gold at the fixed rate (rather than valuing publicly held silver at its depreciated value). The term limping standard is often used in countries maintaining significant amounts of silver coin at par with gold, thus an additional element of uncertainty with the currency&#x27;s value versus gold. The most common silver coins kept at limping standard parity included French 5-franc coins, German 3-mark thalers, Dutch guilders, Indian rupees, and U.S. Morgan dollars.

Lastly, countries may implement a gold exchange standard, where the government guarantees a fixed exchange rate, not to a specified amount of gold, but rather to the currency of another country that is under a gold standard. This became the predominant international standard under the Bretton Woods Agreement from 1945 to 1971 by the fixing of world currencies to the U.S. dollar, the only currency after World War II to be on the gold bullion standard.

==History before 1873==
===Silver and bimetallic standards until the 19th century===

The use of gold as money began around 600 BCE in Asia Minor and has been widely accepted ever since, together with various other commodities used as money, with those that lose the least value over time becoming the accepted form. In the early and high Middle Ages, the Byzantine gold solidus or &quot;bezant&quot; was used widely throughout Europe and the Mediterranean, but its use waned with the decline of the Byzantine Empire&#x27;s economic influence.

However, economic systems using gold as the sole currency and unit of account never emerged before the 18th century. For millennia it was silver, not gold, which was the real basis of the domestic economies: the foundation for most money-of-account systems, for payment of wages and salaries, and for most local retail trade. Gold functioning as currency and unit of account for daily transactions was not possible due to various hindrances which were only solved by tools that emerged in the 19th century, among them:
* Divisibility: Gold as currency was hindered by its small size and rarity, with the dime-sized ducat of 3.4 grams representing 7 days&#x27; salary for the highest-paid workers. In contrast, coins of silver and billon (low-grade silver) easily corresponded to daily labor costs and food purchases, making silver more effective as currency and unit of account. In mid-15th century England, most highly paid skilled artisans earned 6d a day (six pence, or 5.4 g silver), and a whole sheep cost 12d. This made the ducat of 40d and the half-ducat of 20d of little use for domestic trade.
* Non-existence of token coinage for gold: Sargent and Velde (1997) explained how token coins of copper or billon exchangeable for silver or gold were almost non-existent before the 19th century. Small change was issued at almost full intrinsic value and without conversion provisions into specie. Tokens of little intrinsic value were widely mistrusted, were viewed as a precursor to currency devaluation, and were easily counterfeited in the pre-industrial era. This made the gold standard impossible anywhere with token silver coins; Britain itself only accepted the latter in the 19th century.
* Non-existence of banknotes: Banknotes were mistrusted as currency in the first half of the 18th century following France&#x27;s failed banknote issuance in 1716 under economist John Law. Banknotes only became accepted across Europe with the further maturing of banking institutions, and also as a result of the Napoleonic Wars of the early 19th century. Counterfeiting concerns also applied to banknotes.

The earliest European currency standards were therefore based on the silver standard, from the denarius of the Roman Empire to the penny (denier) introduced by Charlemagne throughout Western Europe, to the Spanish dollar and the German Reichsthaler and Conventionsthaler which survived well into the 19th century. Gold functioned as a medium for international trade and high-value transactions, but it generally fluctuated in price versus everyday silver money.

A bimetallic standard emerged under a silver standard in the process of giving popular gold coins like ducats a fixed value in terms of silver. In light of fluctuating gold–silver ratios in other countries, bimetallic standards were rather unstable and &quot;de facto&quot; transformed into a &quot;parallel bimetallic standard&quot; (where gold circulates at a floating exchange rate to silver) or reverted to a mono-metallic standard. France was the most important country which maintained a bimetallic standard during most of the 19th century.

===Gold standard origin in Britain===
The English pound sterling introduced was initially a silver standard unit worth 20 shillings or 240 silver pennies. The latter initially contained 1.35 g fine silver, reduced by 1601 to 0.464 g (hence giving way to the shilling [12 pence] of 5.57 g fine silver). Hence the pound sterling was originally 324 g fine silver reduced to 111.36 g by 1601.

The problem of clipped, underweight silver pennies and shillings was a persistent, unresolved issue from the late 17th century to the early 19th century. In 1717 the value of the gold guinea (of 7.6885 g fine gold) was fixed at 21 shillings, resulting in a gold–silver ratio of 15.2, higher than prevailing ratios in Continental Europe. Great Britain was therefore &quot;de jure&quot; under a bimetallic standard with gold serving as the cheaper and more reliable currency compared to clipped silver (full-weight silver coins did not circulate and went to Europe where 21 shillings fetched over a guinea in gold). Several factors helped extend the British gold standard into the 19th century, namely:
* The Brazilian Gold Rush of the 18th century supplying significant quantities of gold to Portugal and Britain, with Portuguese gold coins also legal tender in Britain.
* Ongoing trade deficits with China (which sold to Europe but had little use for European goods) drained silver from the economies of most of Europe. Combined with greater confidence in banknotes issued by the Bank of England, it opened the way for gold as well as banknotes becoming acceptable currency in lieu of silver.
* The acceptability of token / subsidiary silver coins as substitutes for gold before the end of the 18th century. Initially issued by the Bank of England and other private companies, permanent issuance of subsidiary coinage from the Royal Mint commenced after the Great Recoinage of 1816.

A proclamation from Queen Anne in 1704 introduced the British West Indies to the gold standard; however, it did not result in the wide use of gold currency and the gold standard, given Britain&#x27;s mercantilist policy of hoarding gold and silver from its colonies for use at home. Prices were quoted &quot;de jure&quot; in gold pounds sterling but were rarely paid in gold; the colonists&#x27; &quot;de facto&quot; daily medium of exchange and unit of account was predominantly the Spanish silver dollar. 
Following the Napoleonic Wars, Britain legally moved from the bimetallic to the gold standard in the 19th century in several steps, namely:
* The 21-shilling guinea was discontinued in favor of the 20-shilling gold sovereign, or £1 coin, which contained 7.32238 g fine gold
* The permanent issuance of subsidiary, limited legal tender silver coinage, commencing with the Great Recoinage of 1816
* The 1819 Act for the Resumption of Cash Payments, which set 1823 as the date for resumption of convertibility of Bank of England banknotes into gold sovereigns, and
* The Bank Charter Act 1844, which institutionalized the gold standard in Britain by establishing a ratio between gold reserves held by the Bank of England versus the banknotes which it could issue, and by significantly curbing the privilege of other British banks to issue banknotes.

From the second half of the 19th century Britain then introduced its gold standard to Australia, New Zealand, and the British West Indies in the form of circulating gold sovereigns as well as banknotes that were convertible at par into sovereigns or Bank of England banknotes. Canada introduced its own gold dollar in 1867 at par with the U.S. gold dollar and with a fixed exchange rate to the gold sovereign.

===Effects of the 19th century gold rush===

Up until 1850 only Britain and a few of its colonies were on the gold standard, with the majority of other countries being on the silver standard. France and the United States were two of the more notable countries on the bimetallic standard. France&#x27;s actions in maintaining the French franc at either 4.5 g fine silver or 0.29032 g fine gold stabilized world gold–silver price ratios close to the French ratio of 15.5 in the first three quarters of the 19th century by offering to mint the cheaper metal in unlimited quantities – gold 20-franc coins whenever the ratio is below 15.5, and silver 5-franc coins whenever the ratio is above 15.5. The United States dollar was also bimetallic &quot;de jure&quot; until 1900, worth either 24.0566 g fine silver, or 1.60377 g fine gold (ratio 15.0); the latter revised to 1.50463 g fine gold (ratio 15.99) from 1837 to 1934. The silver dollar was generally the cheaper currency before 1837, while the gold dollar was cheaper between 1837 and 1873.

The nearly coincidental California gold rush of 1849 and the Australian gold rushes of 1851 significantly increased world gold supplies and the minting of gold francs and dollars as the gold–silver ratio went below 15.5, pushing France and the United States into the gold standard with Great Britain during the 1850s. The benefits of the gold standard were first felt by this larger bloc of countries, with Britain and France being the world&#x27;s leading financial and industrial powers of the 19th century while the United States was an emerging power.

By the time the gold–silver ratio reverted to 15.5 in the 1860s, this bloc of gold-utilizing countries grew further and provided momentum to an international gold standard before the end of the 19th century:
* Portugal and several British colonies commenced with the gold standard in the 1850s and 1860s
* France was joined by Belgium, Switzerland and Italy in a larger Latin Monetary Union based on both the gold and silver French francs.
* Several international monetary conferences in the last third of the 19th century began to consider the merits of an international gold standard, albeit with concerns on its impact on the price of silver should several countries make the switch.

==The international classical gold standard, 1873–1914==
===Rollout in Europe and the United States===
The international classical gold standard commenced in 1873 after the German Empire decided to transition from the silver North German thaler and South German gulden to the German gold mark, reflecting the sentiment of the first international monetary conference in 1867, and utilizing the 5 billion gold francs (worth 4.05 billion marks or 1,451 metric tons) in indemnity demanded from France at the end of the Franco-Prussian War. This transition done by a large, centrally located European economy also triggered a switch to gold by several European countries in the 1870s and led as well to the suspension of the unlimited minting of silver 5-franc coins in the Latin Monetary Union in 1873.

The following countries switched from silver or bimetallic currencies to gold in the following years (Britain is included for completeness):
* 1816, British Empire: one pound: from 111.37 g silver to 7.32238 g gold; ratio 15.21
* 1873, German Empire: one North German thaler or 1 South German gulden of 16.67 g silver, converted to 3 German gold marks of 3/2.79 = 1.0753 g gold; ratio 15.5
* 1873, Latin Monetary Union franc: from 4.5 g silver to 9/31 = 0.29032 g gold; ratio 15.5
* 1873, United States dollar, by the Coinage Act of 1873: from 24.0566 g silver to 1.50463 g gold; ratio 15.99
* 1875, Scandinavian Monetary Union: Rigsdaler specie of 25.28 g silver, converted to 4 krone (or krona) of 4/2.48 = 1.6129 g gold; ratio 15.67
* 1875, Netherlands: the Dutch Guilder from 9.45 g silver to 0.6048 g gold; ratio 15.625.
* 1881, Ottoman Empire: the Ottoman lira 
* 1892, Austria-Hungary: the Austro-Hungarian florin of 11.11 g silver, converted to two Austro-Hungarian krone of 2/3.28 = 0.60976 g gold; ratio 18.22
* 1897, Russian Empire: the ruble from 18 g silver to 0.7742 g gold; ratio 23.25.

The gold standard became the basis for the international monetary system after 1873. According to economic historian Barry Eichengreen, &quot;only then did countries settle on gold as the basis for their money supplies. Only then were pegged exchange rates based on the gold standard firmly established.&quot; Adopting and maintaining a singular monetary arrangement encouraged international trade and investment by stabilizing international price relationships and facilitating foreign borrowing. The gold standard was not firmly established in non-industrial countries.

===Central banks and the gold exchange standard===

As feared by the various international monetary conferences, the switch to gold, combined with record U.S. silver output from the Comstock Lode, plunged the price of silver after 1873 with the gold–silver ratio climbing to historic highs of 18 by 1880. Most of continental Europe made the conscious decision to move to the gold standard while leaving the mass of legacy (and erstwhile depreciated) silver coins remaining unlimited legal tender and convertible at face value for new gold currency. The term limping standard was used to describe currencies whose nations&#x27; commitment to the gold standard was put into doubt by the huge mass of silver coins still tendered for payment, the most numerous of which were French 5-franc coins, German 3-mark Vereinsthalers, Dutch guilders and American Morgan dollars.

Britain&#x27;s original gold specie standard with gold in circulation was not feasible anymore with the rest of Continental Europe also switching to gold. The problem of scarce gold and legacy silver coins was only resolved by national central banks taking over the replacement of silver with national bank notes and token coins, centralizing the nation&#x27;s supply of scarce gold, providing for reserve assets to guarantee convertibility of legacy silver coins, and allowing the conversion of banknotes into gold bullion or other gold-standard currencies solely for external purchases. This system is known as either a gold bullion standard whenever gold bars are offered, or a gold exchange standard whenever other gold-convertible currencies are offered.

John Maynard Keynes referred to both standards above as simply the gold exchange standard in his 1913 book &quot;Indian Currency and Finance&quot;. He described this as the predominant form of the international gold standard before the First World War, that a gold standard was generally impossible to implement before the 19th century due to the absence of recently developed tools (like central banking institutions, banknotes, and token currencies), and that a gold exchange standard was even superior to Britain&#x27;s gold specie standard with gold in circulation. As discussed by Keynes:

The classical gold standard of the late 19th century was therefore not merely a superficial switch from circulating silver to circulating gold. The bulk of silver currency was actually replaced by banknotes and token currency whose gold value was guaranteed by gold bullion and other reserve assets held inside central banks. In turn, the gold exchange standard was just one step away from modern fiat currency with banknotes issued by central banks, and whose value is secured by the bank&#x27;s reserve assets, but whose exchange value is determined by the central bank&#x27;s monetary policy objectives on its purchasing power in lieu of a fixed equivalence to gold.

===Rollout outside Europe===
The final chapter of the classical gold standard ending in 1914 saw the gold exchange standard extended to many Asian countries by fixing the value of local currencies to gold or to the gold standard currency of a Western colonial power. The Netherlands East Indies guilder was the first Asian currency pegged to gold in 1875 via a gold exchange standard which maintained its parity with the gold Dutch guilder.

Various international monetary conferences were called up until 1892, with various countries actually pledging to maintain the limping standard of freely circulating legacy silver coins in order to prevent the further deterioration of the gold–silver ratio which reached 20 in the 1880s. After 1890 however, silver&#x27;s price decline could not be prevented further and the gold–silver ratio rose sharply above 30.

In 1893 the Indian rupee of 10.69 g fine silver was fixed at 16 British pence (or £1 = 15 rupees; gold–silver ratio 21.9), with legacy silver rupees remaining legal tender. In 1906 the Straits dollar of 24.26 g silver was fixed at 28 pence (or £1 = 8 dollars; ratio 28.4).

Nearly similar gold standards were implemented in Japan in 1897, in the Philippines in 1903, and in Mexico in 1905 when the previous yen or peso of 24.26 g silver was redefined to approximately 0.75 g gold or half a U.S. dollar (ratio 32.3). Japan gained the needed gold reserves after the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895. For Japan, moving to gold was considered vital for gaining access to Western capital markets.

===&quot;Rules of the Game&quot;===
In the 1920s John Maynard Keynes retrospectively developed the phrase &quot;rules of the game&quot; to describe how central banks would ideally implement a gold standard during the prewar classical era, assuming international trade flows followed the ideal price–specie flow mechanism. Violations of the &quot;rules&quot; actually observed during the classical gold standard era from 1873 to 1914, however, reveal how much more powerful national central banks actually are in influencing price levels and specie flows, compared to the &quot;self-correcting&quot; flows predicted by the price-specie flow mechanism.

Keynes premised the &quot;rules of the game&quot; on best practices of central banks to implement the pre-1914 international gold standard, namely:
* To substitute gold with fiat currency in circulation, so that gold reserves may be centralized
* To actually allow a prudently determined ratio of gold reserves to fiat currency of less than 100%, with the difference made up by other loans and invested assets, such reserve ratio amounts consistent with fractional reserve banking practices
* To exchange circulating currency for gold or other foreign currencies at a fixed gold price, and to freely permit gold imports and exports
* Central banks were actually allowed modest margins in exchange rates to reflect gold delivery costs while still adhering to the gold standard. To illustrate this point, France may ideally allow the pound sterling (worth 25.22 francs based on ratios of their gold content) to trade between so-called &quot;gold points&quot; of 25.02F to 25.42F (plus or minus an assumed 0.20F/£ in gold delivery costs). France prevents sterling from climbing above 25.42F by delivering gold worth 25.22F or £1 (spending 0.20F for delivery), and from falling below 25.02F by the reverse process of ordering £1 in gold worth 25.22F in France (and again, minus 0.20F in costs).
* Finally, central banks were authorized to suspend the gold standard in times of war until it could be restored again as the contingency subsides.

Central banks were also expected to maintain the gold standard on the ideal assumption of international trade operating under the price–specie flow mechanism proposed by economist David Hume wherein:
* Countries which exported more goods would receive specie (gold or silver) inflows, at the expense of countries which imported those goods.
* More specie in exporting countries will result in higher price levels there, and conversely in lower price levels amongst countries spending their specie.
* Price disparities will self-correct as lower prices in specie-deficient will attract spending from specie-rich countries, until price levels in both places equalize again.

In practice, however, specie flows during the classical gold standard era failed to exhibit the self-corrective behavior described above. Gold finding its way back from surplus to deficit countries to exploit price differences was a painfully slow process, and central banks found it far more effective to raise or lower domestic price levels by lowering or raising domestic interest rates. High price level countries may raise interest rates to lower domestic demand and prices, but it may also trigger gold inflows from investors – contradicting the premise that gold will flow out of countries with high price levels. Developed economies deciding to buy or sell domestic assets to international investors also turned out to be more effective in influencing gold flows than the self-correcting mechanism predicted by Hume.

Another set of violations to the &quot;rules of the game&quot; involved central banks not intervening in a timely manner even as exchange rates went outside the &quot;gold points&quot; (in the example above, cases existed of the pound climbing above 25.42 francs or falling below 25.02 francs). Central banks were found to pursue other objectives other than fixed exchange rates to gold (like e.g., lower domestic prices, or stopping huge gold outflows), though such behavior is limited by public credibility on their adherence to the gold standard. Keynes described such violations occurring before 1913 by French banks limiting gold payouts to 200 francs per head and charging a 1% premium, and by the German Reichsbank partially suspending free payment in gold, though &quot;covertly and with shame&quot;.

Some countries had limited success in implementing the gold standard even while disregarding such &quot;rules of the game&quot; in its pursuit of other monetary policy objectives. Inside the Latin Monetary Union, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta traded outside typical gold-standard levels of 25.02–25.42F/£ for extended periods of time:
* Italy tolerated in 1866 the issuance of (forced legal tender paper currency) worth less than the Latin Monetary Union franc. It also flooded the Union with low-valued subsidiary silver coins worth less than the franc. For the rest of the 19th century the Italian lira traded at a fluctuating discount versus the standard gold franc.
* In 1883 the Spanish peseta went off the gold standard and traded below parity with the gold French franc. However, as the free minting of silver was suspended to the general public, the peseta had a floating exchange rate between the value of the gold franc and the silver franc. The Spanish government captured all profits from minting (5-peseta coins) out of silver bought for less than 5 ptas. While total issuance was limited to prevent the peseta from falling below the silver franc, the abundance of in circulation prevented the peseta from returning at par with the gold franc. Spain&#x27;s system where the silver traded at a premium above its metallic value due to relative scarcity is called the &quot;fiduciary standard&quot; and was similarly implemented in the Philippines and other Spanish colonies in the end of the 19th century.

==In the United States==


===Inception===
In the 1780s, Thomas Jefferson, Robert Morris and Alexander Hamilton recommended to Congress that a decimal currency system be adopted by the United States. The initial recommendation in 1785 was a silver standard based on the Spanish milled dollar (finalized at 371.25 grains or 24.0566 g fine silver), but in the final version of the Coinage Act of 1792 Hamilton&#x27;s recommendation to include a $10 gold eagle was also approved, containing 247.5 grains (16.0377 g) fine gold. Hamilton therefore put the U.S. dollar on a bimetallic standard with a gold–silver ratio of 15.0.

American-issued dollars and cents remained less common in circulation than Spanish dollars and reales (1/8th dollar) for the next six decades until foreign currency was demonetized in 1857. $10 gold eagles were exported to Europe where it could fetch over ten Spanish dollars due to their higher gold ratio of 15.5. American silver dollars also compared favorably with Spanish dollars and were easily used for overseas purchases. In 1806 President Jefferson suspended the minting of exportable gold coins and silver dollars in order to divert the United States Mint&#x27;s limited resources into fractional coins which stayed in circulation.

===Pre-Civil War===
The United States also embarked on establishing a national bank with the First Bank of the United States in 1791 and the Second Bank of the United States in 1816. In 1836, President Andrew Jackson failed to extend the Second Bank&#x27;s charter, reflecting his sentiments against banking institutions as well as his preference for the use of gold coins for large payments rather than privately issued banknotes. The return of gold could only be possible by reducing the dollar&#x27;s gold equivalence, and in the Coinage Act of 1834 the gold–silver ratio was increased to 16.0 (ratio finalized in 1837 to 15.99 when the fine gold content of the $10 eagle was set at 232.2 grains or 15.0463 g).

Gold discoveries in California in 1848 and later in Australia lowered the gold price relative to silver; this drove silver money from circulation because it was worth more in the market than as money. Passage of the Independent Treasury Act of 1848 placed the U.S. on a strict hard-money standard. Doing business with the American government required gold or silver coins.

Government accounts were legally separated from the banking system. However, the mint ratio (the fixed exchange rate between gold and silver at the mint) continued to overvalue gold. In 1853, silver coins 50 cents and below were reduced in silver content and cannot be requested for minting by the general public (only the U.S. government can request for it). In 1857 the legal tender status of Spanish dollars and other foreign coinage was repealed. In 1857 the final crisis of the free banking era began as American banks suspended payment in silver, with ripples through the developing international financial system.

===Post-Civil War===

Due to the inflationary finance measures undertaken to help pay for the U.S. Civil War, the government found it difficult to pay its obligations in gold or silver and suspended payments of obligations not legally specified in specie (gold bonds); this led banks to suspend the conversion of bank liabilities (bank notes and deposits) into specie. In 1862 paper money was made legal tender. It was a fiat money (not convertible on demand at a fixed rate into specie). These notes came to be called &quot;greenbacks&quot;.

After the Civil War, Congress wanted to reestablish the metallic standard at pre-war rates. The market price of gold in greenbacks was above the pre-war fixed price ($20.67 per ounce of gold) requiring deflation to achieve the pre-war price. This was accomplished by growing the stock of money less rapidly than real output. By 1879 the market price of the greenback matched the mint price of gold, and according to Barry Eichengreen, the United States was effectively on the gold standard that year.

The Coinage Act of 1873 (also known as the Crime of ‘73) suspended the minting of the standard silver dollar (of 412.5 grains, 90% fine), the only fully legal tender coin that individuals could convert silver bullion into in unlimited (or Free silver) quantities, and right at the onset of the silver rush from the Comstock Lode in the 1870s. Political agitation over the inability of silver miners to monetize their produce resulted in the Bland–Allison Act of 1878 and Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 which made compulsory the minting of significant quantities of the silver Morgan dollar.

With the resumption of convertibility on June 30, 1879, the government again paid its debts in gold, accepted greenbacks for customs and redeemed greenbacks on demand in gold. While greenbacks made suitable substitutes for gold coins, American implementation of the gold standard was hobbled by the continued over-issuance of silver dollars and silver certificates emanating from political pressures. Lack of public confidence in the ubiquitous silver currency resulted in a run on U.S. gold reserves during the Panic of 1893.

During the latter part of the nineteenth century the use of silver and a return to the bimetallic standard were recurrent political issues, raised especially by William Jennings Bryan, the People&#x27;s Party and the Free Silver movement. In 1900 the gold dollar was declared the standard unit of account and a gold reserve for government issued paper notes was established. Greenbacks, silver certificates, and silver dollars continued to be legal tender, all redeemable in gold.

===Fluctuations in the U.S. gold stock, 1862–1877===

The U.S. had a gold stock of in 1862. Stocks rose to in 1866, declined in 1875 to and rose to in 1878. Net exports did not mirror that pattern. In the decade before the Civil War net exports were roughly constant; postwar they varied erratically around pre-war levels but fell significantly in 1877 and became negative in 1878 and 1879. The net import of gold meant that the foreign demand for American currency to purchase goods, services, and investments exceeded the corresponding American demands for foreign currencies. In the final years of the greenback period (1862–1879), gold production increased while gold exports decreased. The decrease in gold exports was considered by some to be a result of changing monetary conditions. The demands for gold during this period were as a speculative vehicle, and for its primary use in the foreign exchange markets financing international trade. The major effect of the increase in gold demand by the public and Treasury was to reduce exports of gold and increase the Greenback price of gold relative to purchasing power.

==Abandonment of the gold standard==

=== Impact of World War I ===
Governments with insufficient tax revenue suspended convertibility repeatedly in the 19th century. The real test, however, came in the form of World War I, a test which &quot;it failed utterly&quot; according to economist Richard Lipsey. The gold specie standard came to an end in the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire with the outbreak of World War I.

By the end of 1913, the classical gold standard was at its peak, but World War I caused many countries to suspend or abandon it. According to Lawrence Officer the main cause of the gold standard&#x27;s failure to resume its previous position after World War I was &quot;the Bank of England&#x27;s precarious liquidity position and the gold-exchange standard&quot;. A run on sterling caused Britain to impose exchange controls that fatally weakened the standard; convertibility was not legally suspended, but gold prices no longer played the role that they did before. In financing the war and abandoning gold, many of the belligerents suffered drastic inflations. Price levels doubled in the U.S. and Britain, tripled in France and quadrupled in Italy. Exchange rates changed less, even though European inflation rates were more severe than America&#x27;s. This meant that the costs of American goods decreased relative to those in Europe. Between August 1914 and spring of 1915, the dollar value of U.S. exports tripled, and its trade surplus exceeded $1 billion for the first time.

Ultimately, the system could not deal quickly enough with the large deficits and surpluses; this was previously attributed to downward wage rigidity brought about by the advent of unionized labor but is now considered as an inherent fault of the system that arose under the pressures of war and rapid technological change. In any case, prices had not reached equilibrium by the time of the Great Depression, which served to kill off the system completely.

For example, Germany had gone off the gold standard in 1914 and could not effectively return to it because war reparations had cost it much of its gold reserves. During the occupation of the Ruhr the German central bank (Reichsbank) issued enormous sums of non-convertible marks to support workers who were on strike against the French occupation and to buy foreign currency for reparations; this led to the German hyperinflation of the early 1920s and the decimation of the German middle class.

The U.S. did not suspend the gold standard during the war. The newly created Federal Reserve intervened in currency markets and sold bonds to &quot;sterilize&quot; some of the gold imports that would have otherwise increased the stock of money. By 1927 many countries had returned to the gold standard. As a result of World War I the United States, which had been a net debtor country, had become a net creditor by 1919.

=== Interwar period ===
The gold specie standard ended in the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire at the outbreak of World War I, when Treasury notes replaced the circulation of gold sovereigns and gold half sovereigns. Legally, the gold specie standard was not abolished. The end of the gold standard was successfully effected by the Bank of England through appeals to patriotism urging citizens not to redeem paper money for gold specie. It was only in 1925, when Britain returned to the gold standard in conjunction with Australia and South Africa, that the gold specie standard was officially ended.
The British both introduced the gold bullion standard and simultaneously repealed the gold specie standard. The new standard ended the circulation of gold specie coins. Instead, the law compelled the authorities to sell gold bullion on demand at a fixed price, but &quot;only in the form of bars containing approximately four hundred ounces troy [12 kg] of fine gold&quot;. John Maynard Keynes, citing deflationary dangers, argued against resumption of the gold standard. By fixing the price at a level which restored the pre-war exchange rate of US$4.86 per pound sterling, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, Churchill is argued to have made an error that led to depression, unemployment and the 1926 general strike. The decision was described by Andrew Turnbull as a &quot;historic mistake&quot;.

The pound left the gold standard in 1931 and a number of currencies of countries that historically had performed a large amount of their trade in sterling were pegged to sterling instead of to gold. The Bank of England took the decision to leave the gold standard abruptly and unilaterally.

=== Great Depression===

Many other countries followed Britain in returning to the gold standard, leading to a period of relative stability but also deflation. This state of affairs lasted until the Great Depression (1929–1939) forced countries off the gold standard. Primary-producing countries were first to abandon the gold standard. In the summer of 1931, a Central European banking crisis led Germany and Austria to suspend gold convertibility and impose exchange controls. A May 1931 run on Austria&#x27;s largest commercial bank had caused it to fail. The run spread to Germany, where the central bank also collapsed. International financial assistance was too late and in July 1931 Germany adopted exchange controls, followed by Austria in October. The Austrian and German experiences, as well as British budgetary and political difficulties, were among the factors that destroyed confidence in sterling, which occurred in mid-July 1931. Runs ensued and the Bank of England lost much of its reserves.

On September 19, 1931, speculative attacks on the pound led the Bank of England to abandon the gold standard, ostensibly &quot;temporarily&quot;. However, the ostensibly temporary departure from the gold standard had unexpectedly positive effects on the economy, leading to greater acceptance of departing from the gold standard. Loans from American and French central banks of £50 million were insufficient and exhausted in a matter of weeks, due to large gold outflows across the Atlantic. The British benefited from this departure. They could now use monetary policy to stimulate the economy. Australia and New Zealand had already left the standard and Canada quickly followed suit.

The interwar partially backed gold standard was inherently unstable because of the conflict between the expansion of liabilities to foreign central banks and the resulting deterioration in the Bank of England&#x27;s reserve ratio. France was then attempting to make Paris a world class financial center, and it received large gold flows as well.

Upon taking office in March 1933, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt departed from the gold standard.

By the end of 1932, the gold standard had been abandoned as a global monetary system. Czechoslovakia, Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Switzerland abandoned the gold standard in the mid-1930s. According to Barry Eichengreen, there were three primary reasons for the collapse of the gold standard:

# Tradeoffs between currency stability and other domestic economic objectives: Governments in the 1920s and 1930s faced conflictual pressures between maintaining currency stability and reducing unemployment. Suffrage, trade unions, and labor parties pressured governments to focus on reducing unemployment rather than maintaining currency stability.
# Increased risk of destabilizing capital flight: International finance doubted the credibility of national governments to maintain currency stability, which led to capital flight during crises, which aggravated the crises.
# The U.S., not Britain, was the main financial center: Whereas Britain had during past periods been capable of managing a harmonious international monetary system, the U.S. was not.
According to Douglas Irwin, the gold standard contributed to policymakers&#x27; turning to extreme protectionism in the 1930s. Policymakers were reluctant to abandon the gold standard, which would have allowed their currencies to depreciate. This instead led policymakers to impose higher tariffs and other protectionist measures.

=== The Gold Standard and the Great Depression ===
Economists, such as Barry Eichengreen, Peter Temin and Ben Bernanke, allocate at least part of the blame for prolonging the economic depression on the gold standard of the 1920s. The Great Depression started in 1929 and lasted for about a decade. The gold standard theory of the Depression has been described as the &quot;consensus view&quot; among economists. This view is based on two arguments: &quot;(1) Under the gold standard, deflationary shocks were transmitted between countries and, (2) for most countries, continued adherence to gold prevented monetary authorities from offsetting banking panics and blocked their recoveries.&quot; However, a 2002 paper argues that the second argument would only apply &quot;to small open economies with limited gold reserves. This was not the case for the United States, the largest country in the world, holding massive gold reserves. The United States was not constrained from using expansionary policy to offset banking panics, deflation, and declining economic activity.&quot; According to Edward C. Simmons, in the United States, adherence to the gold standard prevented the Federal Reserve from expanding the money supply to stimulate the economy, fund insolvent banks and fund government deficits that could &quot;prime the pump&quot; for an expansion. Once off the gold standard, it became free to engage in such money creation. The gold standard limited the flexibility of the central banks&#x27; monetary policy by limiting their ability to expand the money supply. In the US, the central bank was required by the Federal Reserve Act (1913) to have gold backing 40% of its demand notes. A 2024 study in the &quot;American Economic Review&quot; found that for a sample of 27 countries, leaving the gold standard helped states to recover from the Great Depression.

Higher interest rates intensified the deflationary pressure on the dollar and reduced investment in U.S. banks. Commercial banks converted Federal Reserve Notes to gold in 1931, reducing its gold reserves and forcing a corresponding reduction in the amount of currency in circulation. This speculative attack created a panic in the U.S. banking system. Fearing imminent devaluation many depositors withdrew funds from U.S. banks. As bank runs grew, a reverse multiplier effect caused a contraction in the money supply. Additionally the New York Fed had loaned over in gold (over 240 tons) to European Central Banks. This transfer contracted the U.S. money supply. The foreign loans became questionable once Britain, Germany, Austria and other European countries went off the gold standard in 1931 and weakened confidence in the dollar.

The forced contraction of the money supply resulted in deflation. Even as nominal interest rates dropped, deflation-adjusted real interest rates remained high, rewarding those who held onto money instead of spending it, further slowing the economy. Recovery in the United States was slower than in Britain, in part due to Congressional reluctance to abandon the gold standard and float the U.S. currency as Britain had done.

In the early 1930s, the Federal Reserve defended the dollar by raising interest rates, trying to increase the demand for dollars. This helped attract international investors who bought foreign assets with gold.

Congress passed the Gold Reserve Act on 30 January 1934; the measure nationalized all gold by ordering Federal Reserve banks to turn over their supply to the U.S. Treasury. In return, the banks received gold certificates to be used as reserves against deposits and Federal Reserve notes. The act also authorized the president to devalue the gold dollar. Under this authority, the president, on 31 January 1934, changed the value of the dollar from to the troy ounce to to the troy ounce, a devaluation of over 40%.

Other causal factors, or factors in the prolongation of the Great Depression include trade wars and the reduction in international trade caused by barriers such as Smoot–Hawley Tariff in the U.S. and the Imperial Preference policies of Great Britain, the failure of central banks to act responsibly, government policies designed to prevent wages from falling, such as the Davis–Bacon Act of 1931, during the deflationary period resulting in production costs dropping slower than sales prices, thereby injuring business profits and increases in taxes to reduce budget deficits and to support new programs such as Social Security. The U.S. top marginal income tax rate went from 25% to 63% in 1932 and to 79% in 1936, while the bottom rate increased over tenfold, from .375% in 1929 to 4% in 1932. The concurrent massive drought resulted in the U.S. Dust Bowl.

The Austrian School argued that the Great Depression was the result of a credit bust. Alan Greenspan wrote that the bank failures of the 1930s were sparked by Great Britain dropping the gold standard in 1931. This act &quot;tore asunder&quot; any remaining confidence in the banking system. Financial historian Niall Ferguson wrote that what made the Great Depression truly &#x27;great&#x27; was the European banking crisis of 1931. According to Federal Reserve Chairman Marriner Eccles, the root cause was the concentration of wealth resulting in a stagnating or decreasing standard of living for the poor and middle class. These classes went into debt, producing the credit explosion of the 1920s. Eventually, the debt load grew too heavy, resulting in the massive defaults and financial panics of the 1930s.

====Trying to return to the Gold Standard====
:See also: Financial crisis of 1914, World War I reparations, Herbert Hoover gold mining engineer
During World War I many countries suspended their Gold standard in varying ways. There was high inflation from WWI, and in the 1920s in the Weimar Republic, Austria, and throughout Europe. In the late 1920s there was a scramble to deflate prices to get the gold standard&#x27;s conversion rates back on track to pre-WWI levels, by causing deflation and high unemployment through tight monetary policy. In 1933 FDR signed Executive Order 6102 and in 1934 signed the Gold Reserve Act.
===Bretton Woods===

Under the Bretton Woods international monetary agreement of 1944, the gold standard was kept without domestic convertibility. The role of gold was severely constrained, as other countries&#x27; currencies were fixed in terms of the dollar. Many countries kept reserves in gold and settled accounts in gold. Still, they preferred to settle balances with other currencies, with the US dollar becoming the favorite. The International Monetary Fund was established to help with the exchange process and assist nations in maintaining fixed rates. Within Bretton Woods adjustment was cushioned through credits that helped countries avoid deflation. Under the old standard, a country with an overvalued currency would lose gold and experience deflation until the currency was again valued correctly. Most countries defined their currencies in terms of dollars, but some countries imposed trading restrictions to protect reserves and exchange rates. Therefore, most countries&#x27; currencies were still basically inconvertible. In the late 1950s, the exchange restrictions were dropped and gold became an important element in international financial settlements.

After the Second World War, a system similar to a gold standard and sometimes described as a &quot;gold exchange standard&quot; was established by the Bretton Woods Agreements. Under this system, many countries fixed their exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar and central banks could exchange dollar holdings into gold at the official exchange rate of per ounce; this option was not available to firms or individuals. All currencies pegged to the dollar thereby had a fixed value in terms of gold. Since private parties could not exchange gold at the official rate, market prices fluctuated. Large jumps in the market price 1960 lead to the creation of the London Gold Pool.

Starting in the 1959–1969 administration of President Charles de Gaulle and continuing until 1970, France reduced its dollar reserves, exchanging them for gold at the official exchange rate, reducing U.S. economic influence. This, along with the fiscal strain of federal expenditures for the Vietnam War and persistent balance of payments deficits, led U.S. President Richard Nixon to end international convertibility of the U.S. dollar to gold on August 15, 1971 (the &quot;Nixon Shock&quot;).

This was meant to be a temporary measure, with the gold price of the dollar and the official rate of exchanges remaining constant. Revaluing currencies was the main purpose of this plan. No official revaluation or redemption occurred. The dollar subsequently floated. In December 1971, the &quot;Smithsonian Agreement&quot; was reached. In this agreement, the dollar was devalued from per troy ounce of gold to . Other countries&#x27; currencies appreciated. However, gold convertibility did not resume. In October 1973, the price was raised to . Once again, the devaluation was insufficient. Within two weeks of the second devaluation the dollar was left to float. The par value was made official in September 1973, long after it had been abandoned in practice. In October 1976, the government officially changed the definition of the dollar; references to gold were removed from statutes. From this point, the international monetary system was made of pure fiat money. However, gold has persisted as a significant reserve asset since the collapse of the classical gold standard.

=== Modern gold production ===
An estimated total of 174,100 tonnes of gold have been mined in human history, according to GFMS as of 2012. This is roughly equivalent to 5.6 billion troy ounces or, in terms of volume, about , or a cube on a side. There are varying estimates of the total volume of gold mined. One reason for the variance is that gold has been mined for thousands of years. Another reason is that some nations are not particularly open about how much gold is being mined. In addition, it is difficult to account for the gold output in illegal mining activities.

World production for 2011 was circa 2,700 tonnes. Since the 1950s, annual gold output growth has approximately kept pace with world population growth (i.e. a doubling in this period) although it has lagged behind world economic growth (an approximately eightfold increase since the 1950s, and fourfold since 1980.

==Reintroduction==
In 2024, Zimbabwe became the first country in the 21st century to use a gold standard for its currency, in order to tackle inflation and create confidence within the economy. The Zimbabwe Gold (ZiG) is backed by US$400 million and 2,522 kg of gold, thus giving a total of US$575 million worth of hard assets. This development came after the Zimdollar crashed based on official rate from US$1:ZWL2.50 at introduction to US$1:ZWL30,672.42 on 5 April 2024, whilst parallel market was trading at US$1:ZWL42,500 at the time of removal.

==Theory==
Commodity money is inconvenient to store and transport in large amounts. Furthermore, it does not allow a government to manipulate the flow of commerce with the same ease that a fiat currency does. As such, commodity money gave way to representative money and gold and other specie were retained as its backing.

Gold was a preferred form of money due to its rarity, durability, divisibility, fungibility and ease of identification, often in conjunction with silver. Silver was typically the main circulating medium, with gold as the monetary reserve. Commodity money was anonymous, as identifying marks can be removed. Commodity money retains its value despite what may happen to the monetary authority. After the fall of South Vietnam, many refugees carried their wealth to the West in gold after the national currency became worthless.

Under commodity standards currency itself has no intrinsic value but is accepted by traders because it can be redeemed any time for the equivalent specie. A U.S. silver certificate, for example, could be redeemed for an actual piece of silver.

Representative money and the gold standard protect citizens from hyperinflation and other abuses of monetary policy, as were seen in some countries during the Great Depression. Commodity money conversely led to deflation.

Countries that left the gold standard earlier than other countries recovered from the Great Depression sooner. For example, Great Britain and the Scandinavian countries, which left the gold standard in 1931, recovered much earlier than France and Belgium, which remained on gold much longer. Countries such as China, which had a silver standard, almost entirely avoided the depression (due to the fact it was then barely integrated into the global economy). The connection between leaving the gold standard and the severity and duration of the depression was consistent for dozens of countries, including developing countries. This may explain why the experience and length of the depression differed between national economies.

===Variations===
A &quot;full or 100%-reserve&quot; gold standard exists when the monetary authority holds sufficient gold to convert all the circulating representative money into gold at the promised exchange rate. It is sometimes referred to as the gold specie standard to more easily distinguish it. Opponents of a full standard consider it difficult to implement, saying that the quantity of gold in the world is too small to sustain worldwide economic activity at or near current gold prices; implementation would entail a many-fold increase in the price of gold. Gold standard proponents have said, &quot;Once a money is established, any stock of money becomes compatible with any amount of employment and real income.&quot; While prices would necessarily adjust to the supply of gold, the process may involve considerable economic disruption, as was experienced during earlier attempts to maintain gold standards.

In an &quot;international gold-standard system&quot; (which is necessarily based on an internal gold standard in the countries concerned), gold or a currency that is convertible into gold at a fixed price is used to make international payments. Under such a system, when exchange rates rise above or fall below the fixed mint rate by more than the cost of shipping gold, inflows or outflows occur until rates return to the official level. International gold standards often limit which entities have the right to redeem currency for gold.

== Impact ==
A poll of 39 prominent U.S. economists conducted by the IGM Economic Experts Panel in 2012 found that none of them believed that returning to the gold standard would improve price-stability and employment outcomes. The specific statement with which the economists were asked to agree or disagree was: &quot;If the U.S. replaced its discretionary monetary policy regime with a gold standard, defining a &#x27;dollar&#x27; as a specific number of ounces of gold, the price-stability and employment outcomes would be better for the average American.&quot; 40% of the economists disagreed, and 53% strongly disagreed with the statement; the rest did not respond to the question. The panel of polled economists included past Nobel Prize winners, former economic advisers to both Republican and Democratic presidents, and senior faculty from Harvard, Chicago, Stanford, MIT, and other well-known research universities. A 1995 study reported on survey results among economic historians showing that two-thirds of economic historians disagreed that the gold standard &quot;was effective in stabilizing prices and moderating business-cycle fluctuations during the nineteenth century.&quot;

===Advantages===
According to economist Michael D. Bordo, the gold standard has three benefits: &quot;its record as a stable nominal anchor; its automaticity; and its role as a credible commitment mechanism&quot;:

* A gold standard does not allow some types of financial repression. Financial repression acts as a mechanism to transfer wealth from creditors to debtors, particularly the governments that practice it. Financial repression is most successful in reducing debt when accompanied by inflation and can be considered a form of taxation. In 1966 Alan Greenspan wrote &quot;Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth. Gold stands in the way of this insidious process. It stands as a protector of property rights. If one grasps this, one has no difficulty in understanding the statists&#x27; antagonism toward the gold standard.&quot;
* Long-term price stability has been described as one of the virtues of the gold standard, but historical data shows that the magnitude of short run swings in prices were far higher under the gold standard.
*Currency crises were less frequent under the gold standard than in periods without the gold standard. However, banking crises were more frequent.
* The gold standard provides fixed international exchange rates between participating countries and thus reduces uncertainty in international trade. Historically, imbalances between price levels were offset by a balance-of-payment adjustment mechanism called the &quot;price–specie flow mechanism&quot;. Gold used to pay for imports reduces the money supply of importing nations, causing deflation, which makes them more competitive, while the importation of gold by net exporters serves to increase their money supply, causing inflation, making them less competitive.
* Hyper-inflation, a common correlator with government overthrows and economic failures, is more difficult when a gold standard exists. This is because hyper-inflation, by definition, is a loss in trust of failing fiat and those governments that create the fiat.

===Disadvantages===

* The unequal distribution of gold deposits makes the gold standard more advantageous for those countries that produce gold. In 2010 the largest producers of gold, in order, were China, Australia, the U.S., South Africa, and Russia. The country with the largest unmined gold deposits is Australia.
* Some economists believe that the gold standard acts as a limit on economic growth. According to David Mayer, &quot;As an economy&#x27;s productive capacity grows, then so should its money supply. Because a gold standard requires that money be backed in the metal, then the scarcity of the metal constrains the ability of the economy to produce more capital and grow.&quot;
* Mainstream economists believe that economic recessions can be largely mitigated by increasing the money supply during economic downturns. A gold standard means that the money supply would be determined by the gold supply and hence monetary policy could no longer be used to stabilize the economy.
* Although the gold standard brings long-run price stability, it is historically associated with high short-run price volatility. It has been argued by Schwartz, among others, that instability in short-term price levels can lead to financial instability as lenders and borrowers become uncertain about the value of debt. Historically, discoveries of gold and rapid increases in gold production have caused volatility.
* Deflation punishes debtors. Real debt burdens therefore rise, causing borrowers to cut spending to service their debts or to default. Lenders become wealthier, but may choose to save some of the additional wealth, reducing GDP.
* The money supply would essentially be determined by the rate of gold production. When gold stocks increase more rapidly than the economy, there is inflation and the reverse is also true. The consensus view is that the gold standard contributed to the severity and length of the Great Depression, as under the gold standard central banks could not expand credit at a fast enough rate to offset deflationary forces.
* Hamilton contended that the gold standard is susceptible to speculative attacks when a government&#x27;s financial position appears weak. Conversely, this threat discourages governments from engaging in risky policy . For example, the U.S. was forced to contract the money supply and raise interest rates in September 1931 to defend the dollar after speculators forced the UK off the gold standard.
* Devaluing a currency under a gold standard would generally produce sharper changes than the smooth declines seen in fiat currencies, depending on the method of devaluation.
* Most economists favor a low, positive rate of inflation of around 2%. This reflects fear of deflationary shocks and the belief that active monetary policy can dampen fluctuations in output and unemployment. Inflation gives them room to tighten policy without inducing deflation.
* A gold standard provides practical constraints against the measures that central banks might otherwise use to respond to economic crises. Creation of new money reduces interest rates and thereby increases demand for new lower cost debt, raising the demand for money.
*The late emergence of the gold standard may in part have been a consequence of its higher value than other metals, which made it unpractical for most laborers to use in everyday transactions (relative to less valuable silver coins).

==Advocates==
A return to the gold standard was considered by the U.S. Gold Commission in 1982 but found only minority support. In 2001 Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad proposed a new currency that would be used initially for international trade among Muslim nations, using a modern Islamic gold dinar, defined as 4.25 grams of pure (24-carat) gold. Mahathir claimed it would be a stable unit of account and a political symbol of unity between Islamic nations. This would purportedly reduce dependence on the U.S. dollar and establish a non-debt-backed currency in accord with Sharia law that prohibited the charging of interest. However, this proposal has not been taken up, and the global monetary system continues to rely on the U.S. dollar as the main trading and reserve currency.

Former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan acknowledged he was one of &quot;a small minority&quot; within the central bank that had some positive view on the gold standard. In a 1966 essay he contributed to a book by Ayn Rand, titled &quot;Gold and Economic Freedom&quot;, Greenspan argued the case for returning to a &#x27;pure&#x27; gold standard; in that essay he described supporters of fiat currencies as &quot;welfare statists&quot; intending to use monetary policy to finance deficit spending. More recently he claimed that by focusing on targeting inflation &quot;central bankers have behaved as though we were on the gold standard&quot;, rendering a return to the standard unnecessary. Similarly, economists like Robert Barro argued that whilst some form of &quot;monetary constitution&quot; is essential for stable, depoliticized monetary policy, the form this constitution takes – for example, a gold standard, some other commodity-based standard, or a fiat currency with fixed rules for determining the quantity of money – is considerably less important.

The gold standard is supported by many followers of the Austrian School of economics, free-market libertarians, and some supply-siders.

===U.S. politics===
Former congressman Ron Paul is a long-term, high-profile advocate of a gold standard, but has also expressed support for using a standard based on a basket of commodities that better reflects the state of the economy.

In 2011 the Utah legislature passed a bill to accept federally issued gold and silver coins as legal tender to pay taxes. As federally issued currency, the coins were already legal tender for taxes, although the market price of their metal content currently exceeds their monetary value. As of 2011 similar legislation was under consideration in other U.S. states. The bill was initiated by newly elected Republican Party legislators associated with the Tea Party movement and was driven by anxiety over the policies of President Barack Obama.

In 2013, the Arizona Legislature passed SB 1439, which would have made gold and silver coin a legal tender in payment of debt, but the bill was vetoed by the Governor.

In 2015, some Republican candidates for the 2016 presidential election advocated for a gold standard, based on concern that the Federal Reserve&#x27;s attempts to increase economic growth may create inflation. Economic historians did not agree with the candidates&#x27; assertions that the gold standard would benefit the U.S. economy.

==See also==

* &quot;A Program for Monetary Reform&quot; (1939) – The Gold Standard
* Black Friday (1869)—Also referred to as the &quot;Gold Panic of 1869&quot;
* Executive Order 6102
* Full-reserve banking
* Gold as an investment
* Gold dinar
* Gold points
* Hard money (policy)
* Metal as money
* Metallism
===International institutions===
* Bank for International Settlements
* International Monetary Fund
* United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference
* World Bank

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* Cassel, Gustav. The Downfall of the Gold Standard. Oxford University Press, 1936.
* Drummond, Ian M. The Gold Standard and the International Monetary System 1900–1939. Macmillan Education, LTD, 1987.
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* Also published as: 
* 
* Coletta, Paolo E. &quot;Greenbackers, Goldbugs, and Silverites: Currency Reform and Politics, 1860-1897,” in H. Wayne Morgan (ed.), The Gilded Age: A Reappraisal. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1963; pp. 111–139.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*1925: Churchill &amp; The Gold Standard - UK Parliament Living Heritage
* What is The Gold Standard? University of Iowa Center for International Finance and Development
* History of the Bank of England Bank of England
* Timeline: Gold&#x27;s history as a currency standard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="2" end="15" title="Gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773266" start="21" end="36" title="backed currency" label="monetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="59" end="67" title="economics" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747699" start="68" end="83" title="unit of account" label="unit of account"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="116" end="120" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q397840" start="338" end="352" title="convertibility" label="convertibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="402" end="422" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="465" end="477" title="gold reserve" label="gold reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860864" start="499" end="514" title="silver standard" label="silver standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="519" end="530" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q649124" start="668" end="689" title="network externalities" label="network externalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093521" start="695" end="710" title="path dependence" label="path dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="797" end="809" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="830" end="840" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400813" start="1006" end="1022" title="commercial power" label="commercial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1162" end="1178" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1241" end="1253" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="1254" end="1274" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q66143" start="1415" end="1434" title="fixed exchange rate" label="fixed exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="1478" end="1499" title="expansionary policies" label="expansionary policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="1553" end="1562" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2062" end="2078" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="2094" end="2108" title="Banking crisis" label="banking crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417912" start="2171" end="2186" title="Currency crisis" label="currency crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927021" start="2228" end="2244" title="Michael D. Bordo" label="Michael D. Bordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="2518" end="2533" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="2535" end="2559" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="free-market libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="2570" end="2583" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-siders"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="3113" end="3125" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="4054" end="4074" title="French franc" label="French 5-franc coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q539959" start="4076" end="4097" title="Vereinsthaler" label="German 3-mark thalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="4099" end="4112" title="Dutch guilder" label="Dutch guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="4115" end="4127" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785103" start="4139" end="4152" title="Morgan dollar" label="Morgan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="4442" end="4465" title="Bretton Woods Agreement" label="Bretton Woods Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4525" end="4536" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="4740" end="4743" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="4847" end="4852" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4951" end="4962" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4968" end="4977" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="4983" end="4990" title="Solidus (coin)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q649847" start="5000" end="5006" title="bezant" label="bezant"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="5772" end="5777" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q911380" start="5887" end="5912" title="billon (alloy)" label="billon (low-grade silver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q312694" start="7027" end="7045" title="John Law (economist)" label="economist John Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860864" start="7335" end="7350" title="silver standard" label="silver standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="7426" end="7437" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="7472" end="7486" title="Spanish dollar" label="Spanish dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944605" start="7502" end="7514" title="Reichsthaler" label="Reichsthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q570716" start="7519" end="7536" title="Conventionsthaler" label="Conventionsthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="7731" end="7750" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallic standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="7832" end="7837" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="8327" end="8341" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="8846" end="8881" title="Guinea (coin)" label="gold guinea (of 7.6885 g fine gold)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958632" start="9374" end="9393" title="Brazilian Gold Rush" label="Brazilian Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678551" start="9485" end="9506" title="Portuguese real" label="Portuguese gold coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="9747" end="9762" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="10094" end="10104" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599849" start="10125" end="10148" title="Great Recoinage of 1816" label="Great Recoinage of 1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="10171" end="10181" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="10205" end="10224" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="10351" end="10370" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilist policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="10635" end="10656" title="Spanish dollar" label="Spanish silver dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q584496" start="10857" end="10883" title="Sovereign (British coin)" label="20-shilling gold sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599849" start="11030" end="11053" title="Great Recoinage of 1816" label="Great Recoinage of 1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q593337" start="11227" end="11248" title="Bank Charter Act 1844" label="Bank Charter Act 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="11361" end="11376" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="11625" end="11644" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="11846" end="11862" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. gold dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="12185" end="12204" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallic standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="12247" end="12259" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="12616" end="12636" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="12985" end="13005" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="13022" end="13044" title="Australian gold rushes" label="Australian gold rushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q613420" start="13888" end="13908" title="Latin Monetary Union" label="Latin Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="13943" end="13955" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054739" start="13968" end="14002" title="international monetary conferences" label="international monetary conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="14379" end="14392" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107017221" start="14431" end="14450" title="North German thaler" label="North German thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q586290" start="14455" end="14474" title="South German gulden" label="South German gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="14482" end="14498" title="German gold mark" label="German gold mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250113" start="14532" end="14571" title="Paris Monetary Conference (1867)" label="first international monetary conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="14656" end="14666" title="metric ton" label="metric ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="14721" end="14740" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="15155" end="15169" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="15175" end="15180" title="pound sterling" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="15242" end="15255" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107017221" start="15261" end="15280" title="North German thaler" label="North German thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q586290" start="15286" end="15305" title="South German gulden" label="South German gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="15340" end="15356" title="German gold mark" label="German gold mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q613420" start="15404" end="15424" title="Latin Monetary Union" label="Latin Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="15495" end="15515" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981910" start="15524" end="15543" title="Coinage Act of 1873" label="Coinage Act of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="15606" end="15633" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944605" start="15635" end="15651" title="Reichsthaler" label="Rigsdaler specie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="15686" end="15691" title="Danish krone" label="krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="15696" end="15701" title="Swedish krona" label="krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="15767" end="15780" title="Dutch Guilder" label="Dutch Guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="15840" end="15854" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042194" start="15860" end="15872" title="Ottoman lira" label="Ottoman lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="15882" end="15897" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q306306" start="15903" end="15926" title="Austro-Hungarian florin" label="Austro-Hungarian florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q303713" start="15963" end="15985" title="Austro-Hungarian krone" label="Austro-Hungarian krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="16034" end="16048" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="16054" end="16059" title="ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q809032" start="16226" end="16243" title="Barry Eichengreen" label="Barry Eichengreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="16864" end="16877" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="17453" end="17473" title="French franc" label="French 5-franc coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q539959" start="17475" end="17503" title="Vereinsthaler" label="German 3-mark Vereinsthalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="17505" end="17518" title="Dutch guilder" label="Dutch guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785103" start="17533" end="17546" title="Morgan dollar" label="Morgan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="17786" end="17798" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="18311" end="18330" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="19303" end="19316" title="fiat currency" label="fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="19485" end="19500" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="19848" end="19871" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="20003" end="20016" title="Dutch guilder" label="Dutch guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054739" start="20027" end="20061" title="international monetary conferences" label="international monetary conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="20448" end="20460" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q261447" start="20621" end="20635" title="Straits dollar" label="Straits dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="20843" end="20846" title="Japanese yen" label="yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="20850" end="20854" title="Mexican peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="20926" end="20937" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="21176" end="21195" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534676" start="21420" end="21447" title="price–specie flow mechanism" label="price–specie flow mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123642" start="22233" end="22259" title="fractional reserve banking" label="fractional reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="22611" end="22625" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534676" start="23349" end="23376" title="price–specie flow mechanism" label="price–specie flow mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="23399" end="23409" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q613420" start="25719" end="25739" title="Latin Monetary Union" label="Latin Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q204992" start="25745" end="25757" title="Italian lira" label="Italian lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="25766" end="25780" title="Spanish peseta" label="Spanish peseta"/>
<link wikidata="Q204992" start="26130" end="26142" title="Italian lira" label="Italian lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="26222" end="26236" title="Spanish peseta" label="Spanish peseta"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="26302" end="26314" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="27113" end="27129" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q464876" start="27131" end="27144" title="Robert Morris (financier)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="27149" end="27167" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860864" start="27297" end="27312" title="silver standard" label="silver standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="27326" end="27347" title="Spanish dollar" label="Spanish milled dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003189" start="27435" end="27454" title="Coinage Act of 1792" label="Coinage Act of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q832721" start="27499" end="27513" title="eagle (United States coin)" label="$10 gold eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="27607" end="27618" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="27624" end="27643" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallic standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370372" start="27774" end="27795" title="Spanish real" label="reales (1/8th dollar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="28226" end="28244" title="United States Mint" label="United States Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q934187" start="28415" end="28446" title="First Bank of the United States" label="First Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="28463" end="28495" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="28524" end="28538" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981912" start="28855" end="28874" title="Coinage Act of 1834" label="Coinage Act of 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="29037" end="29067" title="California gold rush" label="Gold discoveries in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="30132" end="30141" title="US Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="30454" end="30464" title="fiat money" label="fiat money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022028" start="30558" end="30568" title="Demand Note" label="greenbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="30779" end="30788" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981910" start="31083" end="31102" title="Coinage Act of 1873" label="Coinage Act of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="31318" end="31329" title="Free silver" label="Free silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q635737" start="31520" end="31537" title="Bland–Allison Act" label="Bland–Allison Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481968" start="31550" end="31577" title="Sherman Silver Purchase Act" label="Sherman Silver Purchase Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785103" start="31660" end="31673" title="Morgan dollar" label="Morgan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417454" start="32021" end="32040" title="Silver certificate (United States)" label="silver certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="32188" end="32201" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="32365" end="32387" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="32393" end="32412" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="32421" end="32432" title="Free Silver" label="Free Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q397840" start="33932" end="33946" title="convertibility" label="convertibility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34023" end="34034" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262906" start="34102" end="34116" title="Richard Lipsey" label="Richard Lipsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417912" start="34617" end="34632" title="Currency crisis" label="run on sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790781" start="34658" end="34675" title="Exchange controls in the United Kingdom" label="exchange controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="34902" end="34911" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="35403" end="35425" title="balance of payments" label="deficits and surpluses"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="35515" end="35530" title="trade union" label="unionized labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="35725" end="35741" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="35805" end="35812" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="35899" end="35914" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="35965" end="35987" title="occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupation of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q560183" start="36013" end="36023" title="Reichsbank" label="Reichsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="36200" end="36240" title="Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic" label="German hyperinflation of the early 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="36366" end="36381" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563203" start="36437" end="36446" title="Sterilization (economics)" label="sterilize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="37663" end="37674" title="troy ounce" label="ounces troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="37686" end="37695" title="fine gold" label="fine gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="37703" end="37722" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="37907" end="37934" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37936" end="37945" title="Winston Churchill#Chancellor of the Exchequer: 1924–1929" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="38023" end="38042" title="1926 United Kingdom general strike" label="1926 general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q508131" start="38074" end="38089" title="Andrew Turnbull, Baron Turnbull" label="Andrew Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="38617" end="38633" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="38908" end="38911" title="Bank run" label="run"/>
<link wikidata="Q694468" start="38915" end="38953" title="Creditanstalt" label="Austria&amp;#x27;s largest commercial bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856009" start="38971" end="38975" title="Bank failure" label="fail"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="41077" end="41085" title="Suffrage" label="Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="41087" end="41098" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656849" start="41384" end="41398" title="capital flight" label="capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251972" start="41639" end="41652" title="Douglas Irwin" label="Douglas Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q809032" start="42029" end="42046" title="Barry Eichengreen" label="Barry Eichengreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177268" start="42048" end="42059" title="Peter Temin" label="Peter Temin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201795" start="42064" end="42076" title="Ben Bernanke" label="Ben Bernanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="42133" end="42152" title="Depression (economics)" label="economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="42192" end="42208" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q13576850" start="43376" end="43390" title="money creation" label="money creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="43579" end="43598" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740221" start="43678" end="43702" title="American Economic Review" label="American Economic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747582" start="43968" end="43989" title="Federal Reserve Notes" label="Federal Reserve Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="44119" end="44130" title="speculation" label="speculative"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="44536" end="44543" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578821" start="45324" end="45340" title="Gold Reserve Act" label="Gold Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="45759" end="45769" title="troy ounce" label="troy ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q692412" start="45905" end="45915" title="trade wars" label="trade wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="45937" end="45956" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585491" start="45984" end="46003" title="Smoot–Hawley Tariff" label="Smoot–Hawley Tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11976992" start="46024" end="46043" title="Imperial Preference" label="Imperial Preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242034" start="46192" end="46207" title="Davis–Bacon Act" label="Davis–Bacon Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="46432" end="46447" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="46668" end="46677" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="46684" end="46699" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="46766" end="46780" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q377638" start="46991" end="47005" title="Niall Ferguson" label="Niall Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202188" start="47080" end="47111" title="European banking crisis of 1931" label="European banking crisis of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902537" start="47151" end="47166" title="Marriner Eccles" label="Marriner Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237182" start="47549" end="47573" title="Financial crisis of 1914" label="Financial crisis of 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q687013" start="47575" end="47598" title="World War I reparations" label="World War I reparations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47600" end="47635" title="Herbert Hoover#Mining engineer" label="Herbert Hoover gold mining engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="47643" end="47654" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="47776" end="47791" title="Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47793" end="47800" title="Hyperinflation#Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="47975" end="47984" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630916" start="48015" end="48036" title="Quantitative tightening" label="tight monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="48046" end="48049" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="FDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656758" start="48057" end="48077" title="Executive Order 6102" label="Executive Order 6102"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578821" start="48101" end="48117" title="Gold Reserve Act" label="Gold Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="48150" end="48204" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods international monetary agreement of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="48557" end="48584" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="49307" end="49323" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397852" start="49960" end="49976" title="London Gold Pool" label="London Gold Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="50033" end="50050" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="50271" end="50282" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="50347" end="50360" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420512" start="50454" end="50465" title="Nixon Shock" label="Nixon Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040554" start="50771" end="50792" title="Smithsonian Agreement" label="Smithsonian Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661365" start="51387" end="51416" title="international monetary system" label="international monetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="51434" end="51444" title="fiat money" label="fiat money"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="51618" end="51623" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="51680" end="51684" title="GFMS" label="GFMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="51739" end="51749" title="troy ounce" label="troy ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="51788" end="51792" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="52178" end="52183" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="52262" end="52278" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="52479" end="52487" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q125352135" start="52649" end="52662" title="Zimbabwe Gold" label="Zimbabwe Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067684" start="52811" end="52820" title="Zimbabwean dollar (2019–2024)" label="Zimdollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470163" start="53013" end="53028" title="Commodity money" label="Commodity money"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314254" start="53248" end="53268" title="representative money" label="representative money"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="53288" end="53294" title="Coin" label="specie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474273" start="53406" end="53417" title="fungibility" label="fungibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="53736" end="53749" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417454" start="54015" end="54033" title="Silver certificate (United States)" label="silver certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="54163" end="54177" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927021" start="57748" end="57764" title="Michael D. Bordo" label="Michael D. Bordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q194802" start="57970" end="57990" title="financial repression" label="financial repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="58245" end="58253" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="58263" end="58277" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="58290" end="58306" title="Deficit spending" label="Deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q351258" start="58586" end="58601" title="price stability" label="price stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417912" start="58782" end="58797" title="Currency crisis" label="Currency crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534676" start="59197" end="59224" title="price–specie flow mechanism" label="price–specie flow mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q73273" start="60457" end="60478" title="Mainstream economics" label="Mainstream economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q756115" start="60872" end="60882" title="volatility (finance)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="61397" end="61400" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575344" start="61880" end="61898" title="speculative attack" label="speculative attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="63315" end="63339" title="Malaysian Prime Minister" label="Malaysian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="63340" end="63356" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q251484" start="63464" end="63489" title="Modern gold dinar" label="modern Islamic gold dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="63525" end="63530" title="carat (purity)" label="carat"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="63765" end="63775" title="Sharia law" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="63956" end="63972" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="63982" end="64002" title="U.S. Federal Reserve" label="U.S. Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="64201" end="64209" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q439687" start="64706" end="64718" title="Robert Barro" label="Robert Barro"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="65108" end="65136" title="Austrian School of economics" label="Austrian School of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="65138" end="65162" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="free-market libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="65173" end="65186" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-siders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="65228" end="65236" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="65440" end="65444" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136747" start="65466" end="65470" title="Utah Legal Tender Act" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="65833" end="65849" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175034" start="65850" end="65860" title="legislator" label="legislator"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="65882" end="65900" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="65958" end="65970" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747172" start="65986" end="66005" title="Arizona Legislature" label="Arizona Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="66186" end="66212" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="66270" end="66285" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66495" end="66563" title="A Program for Monetary Reform#The Gold Standard" label="&amp;quot;A Program for Monetary Reform&amp;quot; (1939) – The Gold Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q843687" start="66566" end="66585" title="Black Friday (1869)" label="Black Friday (1869)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656758" start="66643" end="66663" title="Executive Order 6102" label="Executive Order 6102"/>
<link wikidata="Q649151" start="66666" end="66686" title="Full-reserve banking" label="Full-reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q791975" start="66689" end="66710" title="Gold as an investment" label="Gold as an investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220294" start="66713" end="66723" title="Gold dinar" label="Gold dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q765902" start="66726" end="66737" title="Gold points" label="Gold points"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655578" start="66740" end="66759" title="Hard money (policy)" label="Hard money (policy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822850" start="66762" end="66776" title="Metal as money" label="Metal as money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822850" start="66779" end="66788" title="Metallism" label="Metallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="66824" end="66858" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="66861" end="66888" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194052" start="66891" end="66939" title="United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference" label="United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="66942" end="66952" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37413" wikidata="Q55767" url="?curid=37413" title="Astrid Lindgren">
<text>Astrid Anna Emilia Lindgren (; ; 14 November 1907 – 28 January 2002) was a Swedish writer of fiction and screenplays. She is best known for several children&#x27;s book series, featuring Pippi Longstocking, Emil of Lönneberga, Karlsson-on-the-Roof, and the Six Bullerby Children (&quot;Children of Noisy Village&quot; in the US), and for the children&#x27;s fantasy novels &quot;Mio, My Son&quot;; &quot;Ronia the Robber&#x27;s Daughter&quot;; and &quot;The Brothers Lionheart&quot;. Lindgren worked on the Children&#x27;s Literature Editorial Board at the Rabén &amp; Sjögren publishing house in Stockholm and wrote more than 30 books for children. In 2017, she was calculated to be the world&#x27;s 18th most translated author. Lindgren had by 2010 sold roughly 167 million books worldwide. In 1994, she was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for &quot;her unique authorship dedicated to the rights of children and respect for their individuality&quot;. Her opposition to corporal punishment of children resulted in the world&#x27;s first law on the matter in 1979, while her campaigning for animal welfare led to a new law, &quot;Lex Lindgren&quot;, in time for her 80th birthday.

== Biography ==

Astrid Lindgren was born on 14 November 1907. She grew up in Näs, near Vimmerby, Småland, Sweden. She was the daughter of Samuel August Ericsson and Johanna (Hanna) Sofia Jonsson. Lindgren had an older brother and two younger sisters; the brother Gunnar became a member of the Swedish parliament.

Upon finishing school, Lindgren took a job with the local newspaper, &quot;Vimmerby Tidning&quot;, in Vimmerby. She had a relationship with the chief editor and became pregnant, causing a local scandal. She moved to the capital city of Stockholm and learnt the skills of a secretary. While there in 1926 she gave birth to her only son, Lars, who was fostered for four years and then returned to her. He died in 1986.

Starting in 1928, Lindgren worked as a secretary at Sweden&#x27;s Royal Automobile Club (). In 1931, she married her boss, Sture Lindgren (1898–1952). In 1934, Lindgren gave birth to her second child, Karin.

Lindgren died in her home in central Stockholm on 28 January 2002 at the age of 94. Her funeral took place in Storkyrkan in Gamla stan. Among those attending were King Carl XVI Gustaf with Queen Silvia and others of the royal family, and Prime Minister Göran Persson. The ceremony was described in &quot;Dagens Nyheter&quot; as &quot;the closest you can get to a state funeral.&quot;

== Career ==

Lindgren worked as a journalist and secretary before becoming a full-time author. She served as a secretary for the 1933 Swedish Summer Grand Prix. In the early 1940s, she worked as a secretary for criminalist Harry Söderman; the &quot;Norsk biografisk leksikon&quot; cites this experience as an inspiration for her fictional detective Bill Bergson.

In 1944, Lindgren won second prize in a competition held by the book publishing company Rabén &amp; Sjögren, with the novel (&quot;The Confidences of Britt-Marie&quot;). In 1945 she won first prize in the same competition with the chapter book (&quot;Pippi Longstocking&quot;), which had been rejected by the book publishing company Bonniers. (Rabén &amp; Sjögren published it with illustrations by Ingrid Vang Nyman, the latter&#x27;s debut in Sweden.) Since then it has become one of the most beloved children&#x27;s books in the world and has been translated into at least 100 languages. While Lindgren almost immediately became a much-appreciated writer, the irreverent attitude towards adult authority that distinguishes many of her characters has occasionally drawn the ire of conservatives.

She travelled to America and wrote what became the 1950 book &quot;Kati in America&quot; as a series of short pieces for the Swedish women&#x27;s magazine &quot;Damernas Värld&quot;. In 1956, the inaugural year of the Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis, the German-language edition of (&quot;Mio, My Son&quot;) won the Children&#x27;s Book Award.

In 1958, Lindgren received the second Hans Christian Andersen Medal for &quot;Rasmus på luffen&quot; (&quot;Rasmus and the Vagabond&quot;), a 1956 novel developed from her screenplay and filmed in 1955. The biennial International Board on Books for Young People, now considered the highest lifetime recognition available to creators of children&#x27;s books, soon came to be called the Little Nobel Prize. In her career, she wrote more than 30 books for children. In 2017, she was calculated to be the world&#x27;s 18th most translated author. By 2010, she had sold roughly 167 million books worldwide.

== Politics ==

In 1976, a scandal arose in Sweden when it was publicised that Lindgren&#x27;s marginal tax rate had risen to 102 per cent. This was to be known as the &quot;Pomperipossa effect&quot;, from a story she published in &quot;Expressen&quot; on 3 March 1976, titled &quot;Pomperipossa in Monismania&quot;, attacking the government and its taxation policies. It was a satirical allegory in response to the marginal tax rate Lindgren had incurred in 1976, which required self-employed individuals to pay both regular income tax and employers&#x27; deductions. In a stormy tax debate, she attracted criticism from Social Democrats and others. She responded by raising the issue of the lack of women involved in the Social Democrats&#x27; campaign. In that year&#x27;s general election, the Social Democratic government was voted out for the first time in 44 years, and the Lindgren tax debate was one of several controversies that may have contributed to that result. Another controversy involved Ingmar Bergman&#x27;s farewell letter to Sweden after charges had been made against him of tax evasion. Lindgren nevertheless remained a Social Democrat for the rest of her life.

In 1978, when she received the &quot;Peace Prize of the German Book Trade&quot;, Lindgren spoke against corporal punishment of children in a speech entitled &quot;Never Violence!&quot; After that, she teamed up with scientists, journalists and politicians to promote non-violent upbringing. In 1979, a law was introduced in Sweden prohibiting violence against children in response to her demands. Until then there was no such law anywhere in the world.

From 1985 to 1989, Lindgren, with veterinarian Kristina Forslund, wrote articles concerning animal protection and mass production in the Swedish newspapers &quot;Expressen&quot; and &quot;Dagens Nyheter&quot;. They wanted to launch an awareness campaign to promote better animal treatment in factory farming. Eventually, their activities led to a new law which was called &quot;Lex Lindgren&quot; was presented to Lindgren on her 80th birthday. During that time it was the strictest law concerning animal welfare in the world. However, Lindgren and Forslund were unsatisfied with it. Not enough had been done and only minor changes occurred. The articles Forslund and Lindgren wrote were later published in the book &quot;Min ko vill ha roligt&quot; (My cow wants to have fun).

Lindgren was well known both for her support for children&#x27;s and animal rights and for her opposition to corporal punishment and the EU. In 1994, she received the Right Livelihood Award, &quot;For her commitment to justice, non-violence and understanding of minorities as well as her love and caring for nature.&quot; She was a member of the freedom of speech-promoting, anti-imperialist organization Folket i Bild/Kulturfront.

== Honours and memorials ==

In 1967, the publisher Rabén &amp; Sjögren established an annual literary prize, the Astrid Lindgren Prize, to mark her 60th birthday. The prize—40,000 Swedish kronor—is awarded to a Swedish-language children&#x27;s writer every year on Lindgren&#x27;s birthday in November. In 1995, she was awarded the Illis quorum gold medal by the Swedish government. On her 90th birthday, she was pronounced International Swede of the Year 1997.
In its entry on Scandinavian fantasy, &quot;The Encyclopedia of Fantasy&quot; named Lindgren the foremost Swedish contributor to modern children&#x27;s fantasy. Its entry on Lindgren stated that &quot;Her niche in children&#x27;s fantasy remains both secure and exalted. Her stories and images can never be forgotten.&quot;

Following Lindgren&#x27;s death, the government of Sweden instituted the Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award in her memory. The award is the world&#x27;s largest monetary award for children&#x27;s and youth literature, in the amount of five million Swedish kronor. The collection of Lindgren&#x27;s original manuscripts in the National Library of Sweden in Stockholm was placed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register in 2005. On 6 April 2011, Sweden&#x27;s central bank Sveriges Riksbank announced that Lindgren&#x27;s portrait would feature on the 20 kronor banknote, beginning in 2014–2015. The banknote had before that featured the Swedish author Selma Lagerlöf. In 2018, Pernille Fischer Christensen directed the film &quot;Becoming Astrid&quot; (Swedish: &quot;Unga Astrid&quot;), a biographical drama about Lindgren&#x27;s early life.

=== Nobel Prize in Literature ===

In 1972, Lindgren was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature by German literary critic Klaus Doderer and Austrian librarian Josef Stummvoll.

=== Asteroid Lindgren ===

Asteroid 3204 Lindgren, discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh, was named after her. The name of the Swedish microsatellite Astrid 1, launched on 24 January 1995, was originally selected only as a common Swedish female name, but within a short time it was decided to name the payload instruments after characters in Lindgren&#x27;s books: PIPPI (Prelude in Planetary Particle Imaging), EMIL (Electron Measurements – In-situ and Lightweight), and MIO (Miniature Imaging Optics).

=== Astrid&#x27;s Wellspring ===

In memory of Lindgren, a memorial sculpture was created next to her childhood home, named (&quot;Astrid&#x27;s Wellspring&quot; in English). It is situated at the spot where Lindgren first heard fairy tales. The sculpture consists of an artistic representation of a young person&#x27;s head (1.37 m high), flattened on top, in the corner of a square pond, and, just above the water, a ring of rosehip thorns.

Lindgren&#x27;s childhood home is near the statue and open to the public. Just from Astrid&#x27;s Wellspring is a museum in her memory. The author is buried in Vimmerby, where the Astrid Lindgren&#x27;s World theme park is located. The children&#x27;s museum Junibacken, in Stockholm, was opened in June 1996 with the main theme of the permanent exhibition being devoted to Lindgren; at the heart of the museum is a theme train ride through the world of Lindgren&#x27;s novels.

== Works ==

=== Bibliography ===

Lindgren is best known for her children&#x27;s book series featuring Pippi Longstocking, Emil of Lönneberga, Karlsson-on-the-Roof, and the Six Bullerby Children, and for the children&#x27;s fantasy novels &quot;Mio, My Son&quot;, &quot;Ronia the Robber&#x27;s Daughter&quot;, and &quot;The Brothers Lionheart&quot;.
Although best known for her children&#x27;s and youth books, she has also worked in many other genres, with for example song lyrics, debate articles, realistic autobiographical works like &quot;Samuel August from Sevedstorp and Hanna i Hult&quot; and contemporary history like &quot;War Diaries, 1939–1945&quot;.

=== Translations ===

By 2012, Lindgren&#x27;s books had been translated into 95 different languages or variants. The first chapter of &quot;Ronja the Robber&#x27;s Daughter&quot; has in addition been translated into Latin. By 1997, some 3,000 editions of her books had been issued internationally. By the time of her death, her books had sold a total of 80 million copies. By 2010 that had risen to around 167 million books worldwide. 

=== Filmography ===
The adaptation of Lindgren&#x27;s books for film started with Rolf Husberg&#x27;s 1947 &quot;Bill Bergson, Master Detective&quot;. This was followed in 1949 by Per Gunvall&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Pippi Longstocking&quot;, and then by many others.

== See also ==
* List of Swedish language writers

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading== 
* Berf, Paul; Astrid Surmatz (2000). &quot;Astrid Lindgren. Zum Donnerdrummel! Ein Werk-Porträt&quot;. Frankfurt: Zweitausendeins 
* Edström, Vivi (1997). &quot;Astrid Lindgren. Im Land der Märchen und Abenteuer&quot; Hamburg: Oetinger 
* Gottschalk, Maren (2006). &quot;Jenseits von Bullerbü. Die Lebensgeschichte der Astrid Lindgren&quot;. Weinheim: Beltz &amp; Gelberg 
* Knobloch, Jörg (2002). &quot;Praxis Lesen: Astrid Lindgren: A4-Arbeitsvorlagen Klasse 2–6&quot;. Lichtenau: AOL-Verlag 
* Metcalf, Eva-Maria (1995). &quot;Astrid Lindgren&quot;. New York: Twayne 
* Schönfeldt, Sybil Gräfin (2000). &quot;Astrid Lindgren&quot;. Reinbek: Rowohlt 
* Strömstedt, Margareta (1977). &quot;Astrid Lindgren: En levnadsteckning&quot;. Stockholm: Rabén &amp; Sjögren 
* Strömstedt, Margareta (2001). &quot;Astrid Lindgren. Ein Lebensbild&quot;. Hamburg: Oetinger 
* Surmatz, Astrid (2005). &quot;Pippi Långstrump als Paradigma. Die deutsche Rezeption Astrid Lindgrens und ihr internationaler Kontext&quot;. Tübingen, Basel: Francke 

== External links ==
* AstridLindgren.se – official site produced by license holders
* Astrid Lindgren&#x27;s World – official site of the theme park
* Astrid Lindgrens Näs – official site produced by the Astrid Lindgren-museum and culture center Astrid Lindgrens Näs in Vimmerby
* Astrid Lindgren – Right Livelihood Award (1994)
* Astrid spacecraft description at NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="0" end="27" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Anna Emilia Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668" start="187" end="205" title="Pippi Longstocking" label="Pippi Longstocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q783843" start="207" end="225" title="Emil i Lönneberga" label="Emil of Lönneberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500349" start="227" end="247" title="Karlsson-on-the-Roof" label="Karlsson-on-the-Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506195" start="253" end="278" title="the Six Bullerby Children" label="the Six Bullerby Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811649" start="342" end="365" title="children&amp;#x27;s fantasy" label="children&amp;#x27;s fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178688" start="379" end="390" title="Mio, My Son" label="Mio, My Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144655" start="404" end="436" title="Ronia the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Ronia the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142693" start="454" end="476" title="The Brothers Lionheart" label="The Brothers Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062729" start="557" end="576" title="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren" label="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren"/>
<link wikidata="Q152770" start="822" end="844" title="Right Livelihood Award" label="Right Livelihood Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q63089276" start="1133" end="1145" title="Lex Lindgren" label="Lex Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q634231" start="1273" end="1281" title="Vimmerby" label="Vimmerby"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="1283" end="1290" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="1479" end="1497" title="Swedish parliament" label="Swedish parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="1773" end="1782" title="secretary" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444531" start="1970" end="2005" title="Royal Automobile Club (Sweden)" label="Sweden&amp;#x27;s Royal Automobile Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q922489" start="2156" end="2173" title="central Stockholm" label="central Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133075" start="2237" end="2247" title="Storkyrkan" label="Storkyrkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="2251" end="2261" title="Gamla stan" label="Gamla stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45068" start="2295" end="2310" title="Carl XVI Gustaf" label="Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q152308" start="2316" end="2328" title="Queen Silvia of Sweden" label="Queen Silvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53747" start="2380" end="2393" title="Göran Persson" label="Göran Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126918" start="2431" end="2445" title="Dagens Nyheter" label="Dagens Nyheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="2490" end="2503" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563277" start="2642" end="2672" title="1933 Swedish Summer Grand Prix" label="1933 Swedish Summer Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q724901" start="2736" end="2750" title="Harry Söderman" label="Harry Söderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563206" start="2762" end="2787" title="Norsk biografisk leksikon" label="Norsk biografisk leksikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261962" start="2862" end="2874" title="Bill Bergson" label="Bill Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062729" start="2965" end="2984" title="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren" label="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073531" start="3108" end="3120" title="chapter book" label="chapter book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668" start="3128" end="3146" title="Pippi Longstocking" label="Pippi Longstocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="3210" end="3218" title="Bonniers" label="Bonniers"/>
<link wikidata="Q446436" start="3276" end="3293" title="Ingrid Vang Nyman" label="Ingrid Vang Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3743" end="3758" title="Kati (book series)#Kati in America" label="Kati in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18289637" start="3837" end="3851" title="Damernas Värld" label="Damernas Värld"/>
<link wikidata="Q691086" start="3894" end="3924" title="Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis" label="Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178688" start="3964" end="3975" title="Mio, My Son" label="Mio, My Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q327154" start="4058" end="4087" title="Hans Christian Andersen Medal" label="Hans Christian Andersen Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742778" start="4098" end="4114" title="Rasmus and the Vagabond" label="Rasmus på luffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q239553" start="4236" end="4281" title="International Board on Books for Young People" label="International Board on Books for Young People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128317" start="4719" end="4736" title="marginal tax rate" label="marginal tax rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405236" start="4798" end="4817" title="Pomperipossa in Monismania" label="Pomperipossa effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q971383" start="4861" end="4870" title="Expressen" label="Expressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405236" start="4907" end="4933" title="Pomperipossa in Monismania" label="Pomperipossa in Monismania"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="5150" end="5160" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q941995" start="5383" end="5416" title="1976 Swedish general election" label="that year&amp;#x27;s general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="5422" end="5439" title="Social Democrats (Sweden)" label="Social Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="5629" end="5643" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q265920" start="5846" end="5882" title="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade" label="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q60639597" start="5972" end="5987" title="Never Violence!" label="Never Violence!"/>
<link wikidata="Q971383" start="6425" end="6434" title="Expressen" label="Expressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126918" start="6451" end="6465" title="Dagens Nyheter" label="Dagens Nyheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q63089276" start="6641" end="6653" title="Lex Lindgren" label="Lex Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q63089276" start="6985" end="7006" title="Min ko vill ha roligt" label="Min ko vill ha roligt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354948" start="7091" end="7106" title="children&amp;#x27;s rights" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="7111" end="7124" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="7151" end="7170" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q152770" start="7209" end="7231" title="Right Livelihood Award" label="Right Livelihood Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="7388" end="7405" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435336" start="7447" end="7472" title="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront" label="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062729" start="7527" end="7546" title="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren" label="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren"/>
<link wikidata="Q378427" start="7569" end="7583" title="literary prize" label="literary prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q386186" start="7589" end="7610" title="Astrid Lindgren Prize" label="Astrid Lindgren Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="7656" end="7670" title="Swedish kronor" label="Swedish kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432215" start="7808" end="7820" title="Illis quorum" label="Illis quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053779" start="7900" end="7931" title="International Swede of the Year" label="International Swede of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732033" start="7982" end="8009" title="The Encyclopedia of Fantasy" label="The Encyclopedia of Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="8300" end="8320" title="government of Sweden" label="government of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q430035" start="8336" end="8366" title="Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award" label="Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q953058" start="8585" end="8611" title="National Library of Sweden" label="National Library of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8639" end="8645" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="8653" end="8681" title="Memory of the World Programme" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q564652" start="8735" end="8752" title="Sveriges Riksbank" label="Sveriges Riksbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="8817" end="8823" title="Swedish krona" label="kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44519" start="8915" end="8929" title="Selma Lagerlöf" label="Selma Lagerlöf"/>
<link wikidata="Q431435" start="8940" end="8968" title="Pernille Fischer Christensen" label="Pernille Fischer Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56598902" start="8993" end="9008" title="Becoming Astrid" label="Becoming Astrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="9053" end="9071" title="Biographical film" label="biographical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q113114793" start="9145" end="9149" title="1972 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="9182" end="9207" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047773" start="9325" end="9338" title="3204 Lindgren" label="3204 Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q318611" start="9380" end="9396" title="Nikolai Chernykh" label="Nikolai Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580082" start="9443" end="9457" title="miniaturized satellite" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q19759" start="9458" end="9466" title="Astrid (satellites)" label="Astrid 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177072" start="9538" end="9557" title="Swedish name days" label="Swedish female name"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="10042" end="10053" title="Fairy tale" label="fairy tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q750684" start="10437" end="10465" title="Astrid Lindgren&amp;#x27;s World" label="Astrid Lindgren&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713506" start="10516" end="10526" title="Junibacken" label="Junibacken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668" start="10840" end="10858" title="Pippi Longstocking" label="Pippi Longstocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q783843" start="10860" end="10878" title="Emil i Lönneberga" label="Emil of Lönneberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500349" start="10880" end="10900" title="Karlsson-on-the-Roof" label="Karlsson-on-the-Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506195" start="10906" end="10931" title="the Six Bullerby Children" label="the Six Bullerby Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811649" start="10945" end="10968" title="children&amp;#x27;s fantasy" label="children&amp;#x27;s fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178688" start="10982" end="10993" title="Mio, My Son" label="Mio, My Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144655" start="11007" end="11039" title="Ronia the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Ronia the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142693" start="11057" end="11079" title="The Brothers Lionheart" label="The Brothers Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="11207" end="11218" title="song lyrics" label="song lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="11220" end="11226" title="debate" label="debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191067" start="11227" end="11234" title="Article (publishing)" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="11237" end="11246" title="Literary realism" label="realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="11247" end="11263" title="Autobiography" label="autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10661018" start="11281" end="11327" title="Samuel August from Sevedstorp and Hanna i Hult" label="Samuel August from Sevedstorp and Hanna i Hult"/>
<link wikidata="Q186075" start="11338" end="11358" title="contemporary history" label="contemporary history"/>
<link wikidata="Q63215846" start="11370" end="11392" title="War Diaries, 1939–1945" label="War Diaries, 1939–1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11618" end="11623" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q778017" start="11921" end="11933" title="Rolf Husberg" label="Rolf Husberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908123" start="11952" end="11982" title="Bill Bergson, Master Detective (film)" label="Bill Bergson, Master Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187031" start="12127" end="12159" title="List of Swedish language writers" label="List of Swedish language writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062729" start="12968" end="12987" title="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren" label="Rabén &amp;amp; Sjögren"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="13620" end="13624" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37417" wikidata="Q1150" url="?curid=37417" title="Mercury (mythology)">
<text>Mercury (; ) is a major god in Roman religion and mythology, being one of the 12 Dii Consentes within the ancient Roman pantheon. He is the god of financial gain, commerce, eloquence, messages, communication (including divination), travelers, boundaries, luck, trickery, and thieves; he also serves as the guide of souls to the underworld and the &quot;messenger of the gods&quot;.

In Roman mythology, he was the son of Maia, one of the seven daughters of the Titan Atlas, and Jupiter. In his earliest forms, he appears to have been related to the Etruscan deity Turms; both gods share characteristics with the Greek god Hermes. He is often depicted holding the caduceus in his left hand. Similar to his Greek equivalent Hermes, he was awarded a magic wand by Apollo, which later turned into the caduceus, the staff with intertwined snakes.
==Etymology==
The name &quot;Mercury&quot; is possibly related to the Latin words &quot;&quot; (&quot;merchandise&quot;; cf. &quot;merchant&quot;, &quot;commerce&quot;, etc.), &#x27; (&quot;to trade&quot;), and &#x27; (&quot;wages&quot;); another possible connection is the Proto-Indo-European root merĝ- for &quot;boundary, border&quot; (cf. Old English &quot;, Old Norse &quot; and Latin &quot;&quot;) and Greek (by analogy of /), as the &quot;keeper of boundaries,&quot; referring to his role as bridge between the upper and lower worlds.

==History==
Mercury did not appear among the &quot;&quot; of early Roman religion. Rather, he subsumed the earlier Dei Lucrii as Roman religion was syncretized with Greek religion during the time of the Roman Republic, starting around the 4th century BC. His cult was introduced also by influence of Etruscan religion in which Turms had similar characteristics. From the beginning, Mercury had essentially the same aspects as Hermes, wearing winged shoes (talaria) and a winged hat (), and carrying the caduceus, a herald&#x27;s staff with two entwined snakes that was Apollo&#x27;s gift to Hermes. He was often accompanied by a rooster, herald of the new day, a ram or goat, symbolizing fertility, and a tortoise, referring to Mercury&#x27;s legendary invention of the lyre from a tortoise shell.

Like Hermes, he was also a god of messages, eloquence and of trade, particularly of the grain trade. He was the patron of travelers and the god of thievery as well. Mercury was also considered a god of abundance and commercial success, particularly in Gaul, where he was said to have been particularly revered. He was also, like Hermes, the Romans&#x27; psychopomp, leading newly deceased souls to the afterlife. Additionally, Ovid wrote that Mercury carried Morpheus&#x27;s dreams from the valley of Somnus to sleeping humans.

Archeological evidence from Pompeii suggests that Mercury was among the most popular of Roman gods. The god of commerce was depicted on two early bronze coins of the Roman Republic, the sextans and the .

==Syncretism==
When they described the gods of Celtic and Germanic tribes, rather than considering them separate deities, the Romans interpreted them as local manifestations or aspects of their own gods, a cultural trait called the &quot;&quot;. Mercury, in particular, was reported as becoming extremely popular among the nations the Roman Empire conquered; Julius Caesar wrote of Mercury being the most popular god in Britain and Gaul, regarded as the inventor of all the arts. This is probably because, in the Roman syncretism, Mercury was equated with the Celtic god Lugus, and in this aspect was commonly accompanied by the Celtic goddess Rosmerta. Although Lugus may originally have been a deity of light or the sun (though this is disputed), similar to the Roman Apollo, his importance as a god of trade made him more comparable to Mercury, and Apollo was instead equated with the Celtic deity Belenus.

Romans associated Mercury with the Germanic god , by &quot;; 1st-century Roman writer Tacitus identifies him as the chief god of the Germanic peoples. This association of Mercury and Wotan is seen in the English language day-name Wednesday and the French Mercredi.

==Names and epithets==
Mercury is known to the Romans as and occasionally in earlier writings as or &quot;, had a number of epithets representing different aspects or roles, or representing syncretisms with non-Roman deities. The most common and significant of these epithets included the following:

*&quot;Mercurius Artaios&quot;, a syncretism of Mercury with the Celtic god Artaios, a deity of bears and hunting who was worshipped at Beaucroissant, France.
*&quot;Mercurius Arvernus&quot;, a syncretism of the Celtic Arvernus with Mercury. Arvernus was worshipped in the Rhineland, possibly as a particular deity of the Arverni tribe, though no dedications to Mercurius Arvernus occur in their territory in the Auvergne region of central France.
*&quot;Mercurius Cimbrianus&quot;, a syncretism of Mercury with a god of the Cimbri sometimes thought to represent Odin.
*&quot;Mercurius Cissonius&quot;, a combination of Mercury with the Celtic god Cissonius, who is written of in the area spanning from Cologne, Germany to Saintes, France.
*&quot;Mercurius Esibraeus&quot;, a syncretism of the Iberian deity Esibraeus with the Roman deity Mercury. Esibraeus is mentioned only in an inscription found at Medelim, Portugal, and is possibly the same deity as Banda Isibraiegus, who is invoked in an inscription from the nearby village of Bemposta.
*&quot;Mercurius Gebrinius&quot;, a syncretism of Mercury with the Celtic or Germanic Gebrinius, known from an inscription on an altar in Bonn, Germany.
*&quot;Mercurius Moccus&quot;, from a Celtic god, Moccus, who was equated with Mercury, known from evidence at Langres, France. The name Moccus (&quot;pig&quot;) implies that this deity was connected to boar-hunting.
*&quot;Mercurius Sobrius&quot; (&quot;Mercury the Teetotaler&quot;), a syncretism of Mercury with a Carthaginian god of commerce.
*&quot;Mercurius Visucius&quot;, a syncretism of the Celtic god Visucius with the Roman god Mercury, attested in an inscription from Stuttgart, Germany. Visucius was worshipped primarily in the frontier area of the empire in Gaul and Germany. Although he was primarily associated with Mercury, Visucius was also sometimes linked to the Roman god Mars, as a dedicatory inscription to &quot;Mars Visucius&quot; and Visucia, Visicius&#x27; female counterpart, was found in Gaul.

==In ancient literature==
In Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Mercury reminds Aeneas of his mission to found the city of Rome. In Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Fasti&quot;, Mercury is assigned to escort the nymph Larunda to the underworld. Mercury, however, falls in love with Larunda and makes love to her on the way. Larunda thereby becomes mother to two children, referred to as the Lares, invisible household gods.

==Temple==
Mercury&#x27;s temple in Rome was situated in the Circus Maximus, between the Aventine and Palatine Hills, and was built in 495 BC.

That year saw disturbances at Rome between the patrician senators and the plebeians, which led to a secession of the plebs in the following year. At the completion of its construction, a dispute emerged between the consuls Appius Claudius Sabinus Regillensis and Publius Servilius Priscus Structus as to which of them should have the honour of dedicating the temple.

The Roman Senate referred the decision to the popular assembly, and also decreed that whichever was chosen should also exercise additional duties, including presiding over the markets, establish a merchants&#x27; guild, and exercising the functions of the . The people, because of the ongoing public discord, and in order to spite the senate and the consuls, instead awarded the honour of dedicating the temple to Marcus Laetorius, the senior military officer of one of the legions. The senate and the consuls, in particular the conservative Appius, were outraged at this decision, and it inflamed the ongoing situation.

The dedication occurred on 15 May, 495 BC.

The temple was regarded as a fitting place to worship a swift god of trade and travel, since it was a major center of commerce as well as a racetrack. Since it stood between the plebeian stronghold on the Aventine and the patrician center on the Palatine, it also emphasized the role of Mercury as a mediator.

==Worship==
Because Mercury was not one of the early deities surviving from the Roman Kingdom, he was not assigned a &quot;&quot; (priest), but he did have his own major festival, on 15 May, the Mercuralia. During the Mercuralia, merchants sprinkled water from his sacred well near the Porta Capena on their heads .

==In popular culture==
Mercury features in the first published comic book story of Jack Kirby, &quot;Mercury in the 20th Century&quot;, published in &quot;Red Raven Comics&quot; 1, 1940.

The United States&#x27; so-called Mercury dime, issued from 1916 to 1945, actually features a Winged Liberty and not the god Mercury, but despite wearing a Phrygian cap instead of a winged helm, the coin bears his name due to resemblance.

The United States E-6B aircraft flown by the United States Navy is a communications platform named after the god.

Mercury is one of the playable gods in the third-person multiplayer online battle arena game &quot;Smite&quot;.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Mercury)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="0" end="7" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="31" end="45" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="50" end="59" title="Roman mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183096" start="81" end="94" title="Dii Consentes" label="Dii Consentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="114" end="128" title="Roman pantheon" label="Roman pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="219" end="229" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q205233" start="421" end="425" title="Maia" label="Maia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="438" end="453" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="seven daughters"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="461" end="466" title="Titans" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="467" end="472" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="478" end="485" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="549" end="563" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704046" start="564" end="569" title="Turms" label="Turms"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="612" end="621" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="622" end="628" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="663" end="671" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="705" end="721" title="Interpretatio graeca" label="Greek equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q148493" start="747" end="757" title="magic wand" label="magic wand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="761" end="767" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="797" end="805" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1185" end="1196" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1205" end="1214" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="1452" end="1466" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252397" start="1500" end="1510" title="Dei Lucrii" label="Dei Lucrii"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="1533" end="1544" title="syncretism" label="syncretized"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="1550" end="1564" title="Religion in ancient Greece" label="Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1588" end="1602" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="1685" end="1702" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704046" start="1712" end="1717" title="Turms" label="Turms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="1811" end="1817" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960423" start="1841" end="1848" title="talaria" label="talaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="1888" end="1896" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1954" end="1960" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="2014" end="2021" title="rooster" label="rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="2073" end="2082" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="2155" end="2159" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="2272" end="2283" title="grain trade" label="grain trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="2436" end="2440" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="2538" end="2548" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2611" end="2615" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194012" start="2643" end="2651" title="Morpheus (mythology)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030618" start="2685" end="2691" title="Somnus" label="Somnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="2741" end="2748" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q548953" start="2899" end="2906" title="Sextans (coin)" label="sextans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3253" end="3265" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="3277" end="3290" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="3437" end="3447" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="3478" end="3488" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic god"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821380" start="3489" end="3494" title="Lugus" label="Lugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118976" start="3562" end="3570" title="Rosmerta" label="Rosmerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q463956" start="3819" end="3826" title="Belenus" label="Belenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="3864" end="3876" title="Germanic paganism" label="Germanic god"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="3915" end="3922" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="4219" end="4227" title="epithets" label="epithets"/>
<link wikidata="Q362943" start="4472" end="4479" title="Artaios" label="Artaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q468213" start="4532" end="4553" title="Beaucroissant" label="Beaucroissant, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q384615" start="4615" end="4623" title="Arvernus" label="Arvernus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="4669" end="4678" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q382553" start="4718" end="4731" title="Arverni" label="Arverni tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="4809" end="4824" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694089" start="4851" end="4871" title="Mercurius Cimbrianus" label="Mercurius Cimbrianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106599" start="4921" end="4927" title="Cimbri" label="Cimbri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093253" start="5044" end="5053" title="Cissonius" label="Cissonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="5099" end="5115" title="Cologne" label="Cologne, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q191126" start="5119" end="5134" title="Saintes, Charente-Maritime" label="Saintes, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="5190" end="5197" title="Iberians" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5204" end="5213" title="Esibraeus" label="Esibraeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5299" end="5306" title="Medelim" label="Medelim"/>
<link wikidata="Q816393" start="5431" end="5439" title="Bemposta (Abrantes)" label="Bemposta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142535" start="5527" end="5536" title="Gebrinius" label="Gebrinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="5579" end="5592" title="Bonn" label="Bonn, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147302" start="5644" end="5650" title="Moccus" label="Moccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203293" start="5705" end="5720" title="Langres" label="Langres, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="5911" end="5923" title="Carthaginian (people)" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583421" start="6005" end="6013" title="Visucius" label="Visucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="6074" end="6092" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="6287" end="6291" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="6447" end="6453" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="6467" end="6473" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="6497" end="6503" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236235" start="6567" end="6572" title="Fasti (poem)" label="Fasti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806391" start="6620" end="6627" title="Larunda" label="Larunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q504377" start="6793" end="6798" title="Lares" label="Lares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761892" start="6810" end="6823" title="household god" label="household god"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229012" start="6838" end="6867" title="Temple of Mercury" label="Mercury&amp;#x27;s temple in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="6888" end="6902" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="6916" end="6924" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="6929" end="6937" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7028" end="7036" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="7045" end="7054" title="Plebs" label="plebeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651483" start="7071" end="7093" title="First secessio plebis in 494 BC" label="secession of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q774066" start="7194" end="7229" title="Appius Claudius Sabinus Regillensis" label="Appius Claudius Sabinus Regillensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q745111" start="7234" end="7268" title="Publius Servilius Priscus Structus" label="Publius Servilius Priscus Structus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7343" end="7355" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="7689" end="7696" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415493" start="7775" end="7798" title="Primus pilus" label="senior military officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="8227" end="8236" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="8305" end="8313" title="mediation" label="mediator"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="8396" end="8409" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916262" start="8511" end="8521" title="Mercuralia" label="Mercuralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632777" start="8602" end="8614" title="Porta Capena" label="Porta Capena"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="8716" end="8726" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110091" start="8788" end="8804" title="Red Raven Comics" label="Red Raven Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4154066" start="8855" end="8867" title="Mercury dime" label="Mercury dime"/>
<link wikidata="Q833490" start="8922" end="8929" title="Liberty (goddess)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="8977" end="8989" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086092" start="9219" end="9231" title="Third-person (video games)" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="9232" end="9263" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357719" start="9275" end="9280" title="Smite (video game)" label="Smite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37419" wikidata="Q1347004" url="?curid=37419" title="Porsche 914">
<text>The Porsche 914 or VW-Porsche 914 is a mid-engined sports car designed, manufactured and marketed collaboratively by Volkswagen and Porsche from 1969 until 1976. It was only available as a targa-topped two-seat roadster powered by either a flat-4 or flat-six engine.

== History ==
=== Pre-development ===

By the late 1960s, both Volkswagen and Porsche were in need of new models; Porsche was looking for a replacement for their entry-level 912, and Volkswagen wanted a new range-topping sports coupé to replace the Volkswagen Type 34 Karmann Ghia coupé. At the time the majority of Volkswagen&#x27;s development work was handled by Porsche as part of an agreement that dated back to Porsche&#x27;s founding. Volkswagen needed to contract out one last project to Porsche to fulfill the contract, and decided to make the 914 that project. Ferdinand Piëch, who was in charge of research and development at Porsche, was put in charge of the 914 project.

In 1966 and 1967, German company Gugelot Design GmbH began showing a proposed design for a sports coupe built with technology developed in partnership with Bayer to several major car builders, including Volkswagen and Porsche. Some sources have suggested that the Gugelot proposal, suitably adapted, was the origin of the design of the 914. The rationale is that an outside design would be able to please both Volkswagen and Porsche without appearing too similar to either of the partners&#x27; existing products. Later sources have rejected this idea. While acknowledging that Porsche was aware of the Gugelot design, they assert that the 914 design was done in-house at Porsche, and is primarily the work of body engineer Heinrich Klie.

===Joint venture===
Originally intending to sell the vehicle with a flat four-cylinder engine as a Volkswagen and with a flat six-cylinder engine as a Porsche, Porsche decided during development that having Volkswagen and Porsche models sharing the same body would be risky for business in the American market, and convinced Volkswagen to allow them to sell both versions as Porsches in North America.On March 1, 1968, the first 914 prototype was presented. However, development became complicated after the death of Volkswagen&#x27;s chairman, Heinrich Nordhoff, on April 12, 1968. His successor, Kurt Lotz, was not connected with the Porsche dynasty and the verbal agreement between Volkswagen and Porsche fell apart.

In Lotz&#x27;s opinion, Volkswagen had all rights to the model, and no incentive to share it with Porsche if they would not share in tooling expenses. With this decision, the price and marketing concept for the 914 had failed before series production had begun. As a result, the price of the chassis went up considerably, and the 914/6 ended up costing only a bit less than the 911T, Porsche&#x27;s next lowest priced car.

The 914 was &quot;Motor Trend&quot;&#x27;s Import Car of the Year for 1970.

Slow sales and rising costs prompted Porsche to discontinue the 914/6 variant in 1972 after producing 3,351 of them.

Production of the 914 ended in 1976. The 2.0 L flat-4 engine continued to be used in the 912E, introduced that year as an entry-level model until the front-engined four-cylinder 924 was introduced the following model year.

The 914/4 became Porsche&#x27;s top seller during its model run, outselling the Porsche 911 by a wide margin with over 118,000 units sold worldwide.

== Features ==

Volkswagen versions originally featured the fuel-injected 1.7 L VW Type 4 flat-four engine producing .

Porsche&#x27;s 914/6 variant featured the 2.0 L air-cooled Type 901/3 flat-six engine from the 1967–1969 911T model. This was the least powerful flat-six in Porsche&#x27;s lineup. This engine had revised pistons that reduced the compression ratio to 8.6:1. The cylinder barrels were entirely made of iron, in contrast to the iron and aluminum &quot;Biral&quot; barrels in the engines in the 911S and 911L. New camshafts had less lift, and relaxed timing characteristics. The venturis in the Weber 40IDT3C carburetors were , smaller than the other 911 engines, and the exhaust pipe diameter was also reduced in size. Power output was . When the 911T got a 2.2 L engine in 1970, the engine in the 914/6 remained at 2.0 L.

All engines were placed amidships in front of a version of the 1969 911&#x27;s &quot;901&quot; gearbox configured for a mid-engined sports car. Karmann manufactured the rolling chassis at their plant, completing Volkswagen production in-house or delivering versions to Porsche for their final assembly.

The 914/6 models came with lower gear ratios and larger brakes to compensate for the greater weight and higher power output of the six-cylinder model. They also featured five-lug wheels and an ignition on the left side of the steering wheel. Suspension and handling were otherwise mostly the same. A Volkswagen-Porsche joint venture, Volkswagen of America, handled export to the U.S., where both versions were badged and sold as Porsches. The four-cylinder cars were sold as Volkswagen-Porsches at European Volkswagen dealerships.

For 1973 the discontinued 914/6 was replaced in the lineup by a variant powered by a new 2.0 L, fuel-injected version of Volkswagen&#x27;s Type 4 engine.

For 1974, the 1.7 L engine was replaced by an 1.8 L, and the new Bosch L-Jetronic fuel injection system was added to American units to help with emissions control.

=== Model year changes ===
Over the seven model years, Porsche made a number of changes to the 914. Some of these changes were cosmetic and others were in response to changing crash protection standards. From 1970 to 1972, the 914 was offered with chrome or painted bumpers. In early 1970, rear bumpers were produced with a straight crease on either side of the license plate indent. Between 1970 and 1972, both front and rear bumpers were smooth without bumper guards. In 1973, bumper guards were added to the front of the car. In 1974, guards were also added to the rear bumper. In 1975 and 1976, the chrome or painted bumpers were replaced with heavy, rubber-covered units which actually made the cars more stable at high speeds.

The headlight surrounds were white from the first 914s to mid-production of 1973 and subsequently black. Cars produced up to early 1972 had a fixed passenger seat and a removable passenger footrest. Later cars featured a movable passenger seat. Other interior differences included changing vinyl designs, gauge appearance, and air vent configurations in the dash.

The most significant performance upgrade during the vehicle&#x27;s lifespan was the introduction of anti-roll bars, significantly improving the handling, and a change from the &quot;tail shifter&quot; to the &quot;side shifter&quot; gearbox for 1973 to 1976, improving the otherwise vague long linkage.

==Technical summaries==
=== Technical specifications of the standard versions ===
The Porsche 914 was produced from 1969 to 1976 in the following models:


=== 914 road car timeline ===
=== Chassis numbers ===
== Concept cars, prototypes, and factory specials ==
===Porsche 914/6 GT, 914/6 R===
On 1 March 1970 the 914/6 was homologated by the Fédération Internationale de l&#x27;Automobile (FIA) for Group 4, Special Grand Touring cars. That same month two cars were sent to the Targa Florio for testing, not as competitors. These were the first two 914/6 GT cars built. Externally the cars were distinguished by squared fender flares that were the full depth permitted by FIA rules. The chassis was reinforced with three welded plates on each side. For rally applications a stone guard protected the power-train and a stone shield did the same for the front of the car.

The GT cars received stronger lower front A-arms, and anti-roll bars were fitted front and rear. Ground clearance was reduced to . Brakes front and rear were upgraded to the same components used on the racing 911S model.

Fiberglass panels for the front and rear bumpers, front and rear deck lids, and left and right rocker panels replaced the original steel parts. The rear air intake grille was doubled in size. An inlet in the front bumper admitted air to a new supplementary oil cooler in the nose. The car&#x27;s nose compartment was nearly filled by a fuel tank. The car weighed ready to race.

The engine remained at 2.0 litres displacement with Weber Carburetor induction, but was extensively upgraded otherwise. New cylinder heads with larger valves topped aluminum cylinder barrels with chrome-plated bores. A dual-ignition system fired two spark plugs per cylinder. High compression pistons and forged steel piston rods were borrowed from the 911S. A special crankshaft was added. Camshafts and rocker arms came from the 901/20 in the Carrera 6. Power output was up to at 8000 rpm.

Although the factory campaigned the car in rallying, it was more successful in road racing.

In the United States the Porsche+Audi distributor called the car the 914/6R.

====M471, kits====
To qualify for SCCA homologation, 500 copies of a car had to be built. It is estimated that Porsche built fewer than 40 GTs with the full race engine. To add to the total, an additional 11 cars were equipped with the Competition Option Group M471 package that included the GT&#x27;s steel fender flares, rocker panels and nose piece as well as wheel spacers, a set of 6-inch wide Fuchs wheels, and 185/70VR15 tires, but did not include the enhanced engine from the GT. Similar appearance-only kits were also supplied to dealers, totaling about 400 units.

Porsche&#x27;s application for homologation was successful, but instead of being added to the C Production class, the SCCA put the 914/6 GT into the more competitive B Production class.

===914/8===

Two prototype 914s, dubbed &quot;914/8&quot; generally and called &quot;914/S&quot; by Porsche, were built during 1969. An orange 914/8 was the first constructed, at the instigation of Ferdinand Piëch (then head of the racing department), to prove the concept. Powered by a Type 908 flat-eight racing engine, it was built using a surplus handbuilt 914 development prototype bodyshell, chassis No. 914111, and included many differences from the standard vehicle, such as quad headlamps. The second 914/8, a silver, road-registered car powered by a carburetted and detuned 908 race engine making , was prepared as a gift to Ferry Porsche on his 60th birthday. Also based on a spare prototype shell (chassis No. 914006), it was much closer to the standard car in detail. By all accounts Ferry didn&#x27;t like the car very much and it is now in the Porsche Museum. Neither car saw a racetrack except for the purposes of testing. The 914/8 was not considered for production as a regular model.

===Porsche Tapiro===

The Porsche Tapiro was a concept car designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro&#x27;s Italdesign studio and built on a 914/6 platform. The car had gullwing doors and two centrally-hinged covers over the rear engine and storage compartments. The Tapiro debuted at the 1970 Turin Auto Show. Sold to Argentine composer Waldo de los Ríos, the car was extensively damaged in a fire. It was later bought by Italdesign.

===Goertz/Eurostyle 914/6R===
This car was a custom-bodied 914/6R that was first shown at the 1970 Turin Auto Show. The design was done by Count Albrecht von Goertz, and was built by the Turinese carrozzeria Eurostyle. Goertz, who had also done the design for the BMW 507 roadster, produced a body with a tapered nose and a roofline that extended straight back, ending with sloping sail panels that gave the car the appearance of a shooting-brake.

===Gerber/Sbarro rotary 914===
In 1970 Swiss Industrialist Dr. Alfred Gerber contracted compatriot car designer Franco Sbarro to build a customized 914. Sbarro installed the 2-rotor Wankel engine and semi-automatic transaxle from Gerber&#x27;s NSU Ro80 in the mid-engined Porsche. The transaxle&#x27;s inboard disc brakes were retained, and special halfshafts and shift-linkage were fabricated. A radiator was installed in the nose of the car, with fans sourced from a Renault R16. The engine produced , and in the 914 returned while allowing the car to reach a top speed of .

===Heuliez Murène===

In 1969 designer Jacques Cooper drew an interpretation of the 914 that he presented to his employer, Brissonneau and Lotz. The French company, a supplier of auto bodies and railcars, approved the project and obtained one of the first 914/6 models built, chassis 1300005, to serve as a basis for the redesigned car. Shortly after this Brissonneau encountered financial difficulties. Cooper, hoping to get the car into production, arranged, with Brissonneau&#x27;s approval, for the Heuliez company to take on responsibility for development. A running prototype was completed in just two and one half months. The car was displayed at the 1970 Paris Auto Show on the Heuliez stand as the Heuliez Murène. It did not reach production. Heuliez bought the Murène from Brissonneau in 1971 for ₣24,250. In 2012 the car was sold at auction for €42,889.

===Hispano Alemán Vizcaya===
Businessman Werner Bernhard Heiderich was the importer of Porsche for Spain. He established a company named Hispano Alemán to build and sell customized cars. Heiderich contracted with Pietro Frua to produce a new body on a Porsche 914 platform. The car, named the Vizcaya, was first shown at the 1971 Geneva Motor Show. Swiss authorities seized the car owing to a dispute over it between Heiderich and Frua. Heiderich eventually prevailed, and the car next appeared at the 1972 Barcelona Motor Show. The Vizcaya did not go into production.

=== Porsche 916 ===

Planned for the 1972 model year, the Porsche 916 program was cancelled after eleven prototypes were built. The car came with aerodynamic front and rear bumpers and either the 2.4 L engine from the 911S, or the 2.7 L from the Carrera. It was also to have a fixed steel roof, wider wheels, double grilled engine lid, and flared fenders as styled from the 914-6 GT cars. Ventilated disc brakes were fitted to all four wheels. The 916 also used a &quot;mid-engined&quot; version of the then-new 915 transmission, giving a conventional shift pattern with one to four in an H and fifth out on a limb. One 916 was built to US specs and on delivery to the US was fitted with air conditioning by the dealer (Brumos) and has been housed at the Automobile Atlanta 914 museum since 1990.

===Nordstadt Carrera Käfer (Nordstadt Carrera Beetle)===
Günter Artz was director of the Hannover Volkswagen dealer Autohaus Nordstadt. In 1973 Artz and Nordstadt unveiled a custom car called the Carrera Käfer that mounted a modified Volkswagen Beetle 1303 body on a Porsche 914/6 chassis. The engine was upgraded to a flat-six from a Porsche 911 Carrera that produced .

===GM XP-897GT===
First shown in 1973, General Motors (GM) built the Corvette XP-897GT concept car to showcase their rotary engine technology. Lacking a suitable mid-engined platform, GM bought a 914/6 and shortened the wheelbase by . The body was designed in-house by GM and built by Pininfarina in Italy. A GM two-rotor Wankel engine powered the car through a new transaxle. The engine displaced and produced . When the rotary engine project was cancelled, GM stored the car at the Vauxhall Design Centre in England. The car was rescued from the crusher by an English enthusiast, who also managed to obtain an original GM rotary engine. The car was scheduled to appear at Amelia Island in 2019.

=== 914 Limited Edition ===

In 1974, Porsche produced a series of Limited Edition cars for the North American market to commemorate Porsche&#x27;s victories in the Can Am racing series. They were equipped with individual color schemes and came standard with otherwise optional equipment. The factory is said to have produced about 1,000 of these vehicles, about 50% Bumblebee and 50% Creamsicle. Variants of this series were manufactured and distributed in very limited numbers to European markets and Japan. Along with the regular Appearance Group option (fog lamps and center console with clock and additional gauges) at $300, the LE package set buyers back another $320. All Limited Editions models came with the 2.0 L (1,971 cc) flat four engine, which was otherwise optional in the standard 914, that produced 91 hp in U.S. trim.

The Creamsicle: With a cream color exterior (paint code U2V9), these cars sported Phoenix red trim, including color matched lower valences and bumpers. This light ivory color scheme concept carried over from the 1973 911 Carrera RS series.

The Bumblebee: Featuring a black exterior (paint code L041), these cars sported a Sunflower yellow trim (paint code L13K). Black body paint color was always an additional cost special option on standard 914 Porsche cars, but was included as a standard component on the black 914 LE cars. Like the Creamsicle All but one photo of the 914 Porsche Can Am prototype cars are Bumblebee cars. The black-based 914 LE color scheme is specific to the 914 LE cars and has no precedent with the Can Am race cars or the 1973 911 Carrera RS series cars. The majority of 914 Limited Editions seem to be Bumblebees.

All 914 LE cars featured a specially designed front spoiler and negative side stripes. Additionally, all Limited Editions were equipped with front and rear anti-roll bars, dual horns, leather covered steering wheel, driving lights, painted rear roll bar trim (as opposed to vinyl clad), Mahle cast aluminum wheels and a center console with an oil temperature gauge, clock, and voltmeter.

===Other===
A factory prototype 914/6, (chassis no. 914114), surfaced in the US in 2001. Together with a surviving prototype Sportomatic 914/6 (chassis No. 914120), reputedly in Southern Germany, they are a special part of Porsche history.

==Motorsport==
A 914/6 GT driven by Frenchmen Claude Ballot-Léna and Guy Chasseuil won the GTS class and finished sixth overall at the 1970 24 Hours of Le Mans.

Brian Redman used a 914/6 to scout the course in practice runs for the 1970 Targa Florio.

===F1 Safety Car===
The Porsche 914 is renowned for having been Formula One&#x27;s first Safety Car following its deployment at the 1973 Canadian Grand Prix to help manage the race, which had seen various incidents due to treacherous weather conditions.

==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1347004" start="4" end="15" title="Porsche 914" label="Porsche 914"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347004" start="19" end="33" title="Porsche 914" label="VW-Porsche 914"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="39" end="50" title="Mid-engine design" label="mid-engined"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="51" end="61" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="117" end="127" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="132" end="139" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535526" start="189" end="201" title="targa top" label="targa-topped"/>
<link wikidata="Q828170" start="211" end="219" title="Roadster (automobile)" label="roadster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="240" end="246" title="Volkswagen air-cooled engine#Type 4: 1.7–2.0 litres" label="flat-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295589" start="250" end="265" title="flat-six engine" label="flat-six engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="331" end="341" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="346" end="353" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126576" start="442" end="445" title="Porsche 912" label="912"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="489" end="495" title="Sports car" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="496" end="501" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="517" end="548" title="Volkswagen Karmann Ghia#Type 34 Karmann Ghia" label="Volkswagen Type 34 Karmann Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78713" start="839" end="854" title="Ferdinand Piëch" label="Ferdinand Piëch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="1109" end="1114" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269254" start="1761" end="1779" title="flat-four engine" label="flat four-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295589" start="1814" end="1831" title="flat-six engine" label="flat six-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q68625" start="2238" end="2255" title="Heinrich Nordhoff" label="Heinrich Nordhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q98000" start="2291" end="2300" title="Kurt Lotz" label="Kurt Lotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104548" start="2792" end="2796" title="Porsche 911T" label="911T"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109600" start="2856" end="2867" title="Motor Trend" label="Motor Trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918171" start="2881" end="2903" title="Import Car of the Year" label="Import Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3122" end="3126" title="Porsche 912#912E (1976)" label="912E"/>
<link wikidata="Q615865" start="3211" end="3214" title="Porsche 924" label="924"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="3467" end="3480" title="fuel injection" label="fuel-injected"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3487" end="3496" title="Volkswagen air-cooled engine#Type 4: 1.7–2.0 litres" label="VW Type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269254" start="3497" end="3513" title="flat-four engine" label="flat-four engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="4018" end="4023" title="Weber Carburetors" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="4368" end="4379" title="mid-engine design" label="mid-engined"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="4380" end="4390" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q698588" start="4392" end="4399" title="Karmann" label="Karmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940324" start="4886" end="4907" title="Volkswagen of America" label="Volkswagen of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q933636" start="5223" end="5229" title="Volkswagen Type 4" label="Type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q234021" start="5304" end="5309" title="Robert Bosch GmbH" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261816" start="5310" end="5320" title="Jetronic" label="L-Jetronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13697" start="5670" end="5676" title="Bumper (car)" label="bumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="5766" end="5779" title="license plate" label="license plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q869713" start="6142" end="6151" title="headlight" label="headlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14973416" start="6327" end="6335" title="footrest" label="footrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="6603" end="6616" title="anti-roll bar" label="anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="6736" end="6743" title="gearbox" label="gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="7151" end="7197" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="8333" end="8349" title="Weber Carburetors" label="Weber Carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q78713" start="9905" end="9920" title="Ferdinand Piëch" label="Ferdinand Piëch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295336" start="10003" end="10013" title="Flat-eight engine" label="flat-eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q78769" start="10342" end="10355" title="Ferry Porsche" label="Ferry Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="10782" end="10800" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283754" start="10808" end="10818" title="Italdesign Giugiaro" label="Italdesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124439" start="10869" end="10883" title="gullwing doors" label="gullwing doors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10989" end="11009" title="Turin Auto Show#1970" label="1970 Turin Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q556980" start="11038" end="11055" title="Waldo de los Ríos" label="Waldo de los Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11230" end="11250" title="Turin Auto Show#1970" label="1970 Turin Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q66754" start="11281" end="11300" title="Albrecht von Goertz" label="Albrecht von Goertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q796414" start="11400" end="11407" title="BMW 507" label="BMW 507"/>
<link wikidata="Q862376" start="11568" end="11582" title="shooting-brake" label="shooting-brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363908" start="12666" end="12681" title="Heuliez" label="Heuliez company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="12826" end="12841" title="Paris Auto Show" label="Paris Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606587" start="13166" end="13180" title="Hispano Aleman" label="Hispano Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345767" start="13242" end="13253" title="Pietro Frua" label="Pietro Frua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13354" end="13376" title="Geneva Motor Show#1971" label="1971 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117914" start="13536" end="13556" title="Automobile Barcelona" label="Barcelona Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13845" end="13852" title="Porsche 911#911 Carrera RS (1973 and 1974)" label="Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417649" start="13973" end="13981" title="Porsche 914-6 GT" label="914-6 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="14631" end="14648" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="14808" end="14822" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="15054" end="15065" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q182883" start="15091" end="15104" title="Wankel engine" label="Wankel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335180" start="15443" end="15456" title="Amelia Island Concours d&amp;#x27;Elegance" label="Amelia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358981" start="16467" end="16472" title="ivory (color)" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="16572" end="16577" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141366" start="17392" end="17400" title="roll cage" label="roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q659379" start="17434" end="17439" title="Mahle GmbH" label="Mahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179741" start="17524" end="17533" title="voltmeter" label="voltmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417649" start="17794" end="17802" title="Porsche 914-6 GT" label="914/6 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096468" start="17823" end="17841" title="Claude Ballot-Léna" label="Claude Ballot-Léna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557454" start="17846" end="17859" title="Guy Chasseuil" label="Guy Chasseuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216444" start="17912" end="17936" title="1970 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1970 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171746" start="17939" end="17951" title="Brian Redman" label="Brian Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574181" start="18010" end="18027" title="1970 Targa Florio" label="1970 Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="18094" end="18105" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18119" end="18129" title="Safety car#History" label="Safety Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q65387" start="18162" end="18186" title="1973 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1973 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37420" wikidata="Q1901211" url="?curid=37420" title="East Malaysia">
<text>East Malaysia (), or the Borneo States, also known as Malaysian Borneo, is the part of Malaysia on and near the island of Borneo, the world&#x27;s third-largest island. East Malaysia comprises the states of Sabah, Sarawak, and the Federal Territory of Labuan. The small independent nation of Brunei comprises two enclaves in Sarawak. To the south and southeast is the Indonesian portion of Borneo, Kalimantan. East Malaysia lies to the east of Peninsular Malaysia (also known as the States of Malaya), the part of the country on the Malay Peninsula. The two are separated by the South China Sea.

East Malaysia is less populated and has fewer developed settlements than West Malaysia. While West Malaysia contains the country&#x27;s major cities (Kuala Lumpur, Johor Bahru, and Georgetown), East Malaysia is larger and much more abundant in natural resources, particularly oil and gas reserves. In the pan-regional style, city status is reserved for only a few settlements, including Kuching, Kota Kinabalu and Miri. Various other significant settlements are classified as towns, including many with over 100,000 residents. East Malaysia includes a significant portion of the biodiverse Borneo lowland rain forests and Borneo montane rain forests.

== States and territories ==
East Malaysia or the Borneo States comprise 2 of the 13 states, and one out of the three federal territories of Malaysia.

* The State of Sabah
* The State of Sarawak
* The Federal Territory of Labuan

==History==
Some parts of present-day East Malaysia, especially the coastal regions, were once part of the thalassocracy of the Sultanate of Brunei. However, most parts of the interior region consisted of independent tribal societies.

In 1658, the northern and eastern coasts of Sabah were ceded to the Sultanate of Sulu while the west coast of Sabah and most of Sarawak remained part of Brunei. In 1888, Sabah and Sarawak together with Brunei became British protectorates. In 1946, they became separate British colonies.

==Federation==
Sabah (formerly British North Borneo) and Sarawak were separate British colonies from Malaya, and did not become part of the Federation of Malaya in 1957. Later on however, the then Federation merged with the self-governing State of Singapore and the British Colonies of North Borneo (now known as Sabah) and Sarawak under the Malaysia Agreement as the States of Malaya, the Borneo States of Sabah and Sarawak, and the State of Singapore of the new Federation called Malaysia on 16 September 1963, now known as Malaysia Day. Singapore left the Federation two years later in 1965 after being expelled by then the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman. Previously, there were efforts to unite Brunei, Sabah, and Sarawak under the North Borneo Federation but that failed after the Brunei Revolt occurred.

The Borneo States retained a higher degree of local government and legislative autonomy than the States of Malaya. For example, both states have their own immigration controls, requiring Malaysian citizens from West Malaysia to carry passports or identity cards when visiting East Malaysia.

The islands of Labuan were once part of North Borneo in 1946 before becoming a Federal Territory in Malaysia on 16 April 1984. It was used to establish a centre for offshore finance in 1990.

Since 2010, there has been some speculation and discussion, at least on the ground level, about the possibility of secession from the Federation of Malaysia because of allegations of resource mishandling, illegal processing of immigrants, etc.

==Administration==
The Borneo States of Sabah and Sarawak joined the Federation of Malaysia as equal partners with Malaya and Singapore. Sabah and Sarawak retained their rights covered under the Malaysia Agreement of 1963 and their degree of autonomy compared to the other states in Peninsular Malaysia. For example, the Malaysian Borneo States have separate laws regulating the entry of citizens from other states in Malaysia (including the other East Malaysian state), whereas, in Peninsular Malaysia, there are no restrictions on interstate travel or migration, including visitors from East Malaysia. There are also separate land laws governing Sabah and Sarawak, as opposed to the National Land Code, which governs Peninsular Malaysia.

In December 2021, constitutional amendments were passed to restore the status of Sabah and Sarawak as equal partners to Malaya, with 199 members of Parliament backing the amendment bill without opposition. Apart from restoring Article 1(2) to its pre-1976 wording, the bill defines Malaysia Day for the first time and redefines the federation with the inclusion of Malaysia Agreement (MA63). Previously, only Merdeka Day (independence day of the Federation of Malaya) was defined, and the federation was defined merely by the Malaya Agreement 1957. The Constitution (Amendment) Act 2022 received royal assent on 19 January 2022 and came into force on 11 February 2022.

With regard to the administration of justice, the courts in East Malaysia are part of the federal court system in Malaysia. The Constitution of Malaysia provides that there shall be two High Courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction. The High Court in Malaya and the High Court in Sabah and Sarawak (formerly the High Court in Borneo). The current Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak is Abang Iskandar Abang Hashim from Sarawak. His office is the fourth highest in the Malaysian judicial system (behind the Chief Judge of Malaya, President of the Court of Appeal, and Chief Justice of Malaysia).

==Politics==
Compared to West Malaysia, political parties in Sarawak and Sabah started relatively late. This first political party in Sarawak emerged in 1959 while the first political party in Sabah emerged in August 1961. Sarawak held its first local authorities election in 1959 and did not have any directly elected legislature until 1970. Sabah only held its first district council election in December 1962 and first direct election in April 1967. Both the states were new and had little experience in organised, competitive politics. Therefore, there had been the appearance and rapid disappearance of political parties in Sarawak and Sabah within a short period of time, with some parties took opportunistic moves to form alliances without a definite loyalty to a certain political alignment. The ethnic composition of East Malaysia is also different from West Malaysia. The indigenous people in both Sarawak and Sabah do not form an absolute majority, while the non-native population in East Malaysia mainly consisting of entirely Chinese. Political parties in Sarawak and Sabah were formed largely based on communal lines and can be categorised roughly into native non-Muslim, native Muslim, and non-native parties. With the support of the Malaysia federal government, native Muslim parties in Sabah and Sarawak were strengthened. In Sabah, the native Muslim party United Sabah National Organisation (USNO) first clinged on the chief minister post in 1965 and later consolidated its power in 1967. In Sarawak, native Muslim party named Parti Bumiputera (which later regrouped into Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu (PBB) held the chief minister post since 1970.

In 1976, all the Sabah and Sarawak MPs (except 4 absentees) supported the Malaysian parliament bill which downgraded both the states from being equal partners to Malaya as a whole, to one of the 13 states in the federation.

Since 2008, East Malaysia played a more significant role in the national political landscape. The loss of two-thirds majority of Barisan Nasional (BN) government in the West Malaysia caused the BN to rely on East Malaysian politicians to cling on power. After the conclusion of 2013 Malaysian general election, there was an increase in ministers and deputy ministers allocation for East Malaysia in the Malaysian Cabinet from 11 out of 57 portfolios in 2008 election to 20 out of 61 portfolios. There had been no prime minister or deputy prime minister coming from East Malaysia until 2022, when Fadillah Yusof became the first deputy prime minister from East Malaysia. On several occasions, the federal government chaired its weekly cabinet meetings in Kuching instead of Putrajaya.

As of 2012, Sarawak, Sabah and Labuan held a total of 57 out 222 seats (25.68%) in the Malaysian parliament. Since 2014, Sarawak have been actively seeking for devolution of powers from the Malaysian federal government. In October 2018, both Sabah and Sarawak chief ministers met to discuss common goals in demanding from the Malaysian federal government regarding the rights stipulated inside the Malaysia Agreement. In December 2021, constitutional amendments were passed to restore the status of Sabah and Sarawak as equal partners to Malaya, with 199 members of Parliament backing the amendment bill without opposition. Apart from restoring Article 1(2) to its pre-1976 wording, the bill defines Malaysia Day for the first time and redefines the federation with the inclusion of Malaysia Agreement (MA63). Previously, only Merdeka Day (independence day of the Federation of Malaya) was defined, and the federation was defined merely by the Malaya Agreement 1957. The Constitution (Amendment) Act 2022 received royal assent on 19 January 2022 and came into force on 11 February 2022.

==Physical geography==

The landscape of East Malaysia is mostly lowland rain forests with areas of mountain rain forest towards the hinterland.

The total area of East Malaysia is 198,447 km2, representing approximately 60% of the total land area of Malaysia and 26.4% of the total area of Borneo, which is 50% bigger than Peninsular Malaysia at , comparable with South Dakota or Great Britain.

East Malaysia contains the five highest mountains in Malaysia, the highest being Mount Kinabalu at 4095 m, which is also the highest mountain in Borneo and the 10th highest mountain peak in Southeast Asia. It also contains the two longest rivers in Malaysia – Rajang River and Kinabatangan River.

Banggi Island in Sabah and Bruit Island in Sarawak are the two largest islands that are located entirely within Malaysia. The largest island is Borneo, which is shared with Indonesia and Brunei. The second largest island is Sebatik Island, in Sabah, which is shared with Indonesia.

Sarawak contains the Mulu Caves within Gunung Mulu National Park. Its Sarawak Chamber is the largest (by area) known cave chamber in the world. The Gunung Mulu National Park was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in November 2000.

Sabah&#x27;s attractions include World Heritage Site Kinabalu Park (which includes Mount Kinabalu), and Sipadan Island (a diving and bio-diversity hot-spot).

==Geology==
Several oil and gas fields have been discovered offshore, including the Samarang oil field (1972) offshore Sabah, the Baronia oil field (1967) offshore Sarawak, and the Central Luconia natural gas fields (1968), also offshore Sarawak. The Baronia Field is a domal structural trap between two east–west growth faults, which produces from late Miocene sandstones interbedded with siltstones and clays at 2 km depth in 75 m of water. The Samarang Field produces from late Miocene sandtones in an alternating sequence of sandstones, siltstones and clays in an anticline at a depth of about 3 km in water 9–45 m. The Central Luconia Gas Fields produce from middle to late Miocene carbonate platform and pinnacle reefs from 1.25 to 3.76 km deep and water depths 60-100m.

==Population==

The total population of East Malaysia in 2010 was 5.77 million (3.21 million in Sabah, 2.47 million in Sarawak, and 0.09 million in Labuan), which represented 20.4% of the population of Malaysia. A significant part of the population of East Malaysia today reside in towns and cities. The largest city and urban centre is Kuching, which is also the capital of Sarawak and has a population of over 600,000 people. Kota Kinabalu is the second largest, and one of the most important cities in East Malaysia. Kuching, Kota Kinabalu, and Miri are the only three places with city status in East Malaysia. Other important towns include Sandakan and Tawau in Sabah, Sibu and Bintulu in Sarawak, and Victoria in Labuan. The 2020 estimated population is 6 million (3,418,785 in Sabah, 2,453,677 in Sarawak and 95,120 in Labuan).

The earliest inhabitants of East Malaysia were the Dayak people and other related ethnic groups such as the Kadazan-Dusun people. These indigenous people form a significant portion, but not the majority, of the population. For hundreds of years, there has been significant migration into East Malaysia and Borneo from many parts of the Malay Archipelago, including Java, the Lesser Sunda Islands, Sulawesi, and Sulu. More recently, there has been immigration from India and China.

The indigenous inhabitants were originally animists. Islamic influence began as early as the 15th century, while Christian influence started in the 19th century.

The indigenous inhabitants are generally partisan and maintain culturally distinct dialects of the Malay language, in addition to their own ethnic languages. Approximately over one-tenth of the population of Sabah and Labuan, and almost a quarter of the population of Sarawak, is composed of local Chinese communities. The local Malay consists approximately 13.6% in East Malaysia, with over two-thirds of Malay in East Malaysia resides in the state of Sarawak, predominantly found in the city of Kuching and the surrounding areas. While among Indian communities, unlike their fellows in Peninsular Malaysia where they are considered as one of the several major ethnic groups in Peninsula, their population in East Malaysia was quite tiny, consists just about 0.3%, with the majority of them resides in the urban areas such as Kota Kinabalu, Tawau, Labuan and Miri, in addition to Kuching.

However, the demography of Sabah has been altered dramatically with the alleged implementation of Project IC in the 1990s. Citizenships are alleged to be granted to immigrants from Indonesia and Philippines in order to keep the UMNO ruling party in power. Royal Commission of Inquiry (RCI) has been conducted from 11 August 2012 to 20 September 2013. The outcome of the investigation was submitted to the prime minister on 19 May 2014. The report was released on 3 December 2014 after 6 months delay. It stated that Project IC might have existed, which was responsible for a sudden spike in the state population. However, the report did not pinpoint any responsibility except for &quot;corrupt officials&quot; who took advantage of the system.

==Education==
East Malaysia currently has two public universities, namely Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS) and Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS). Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM) also has branch campuses in both states. Labuan&#x27;s own institution of higher education is Universiti Malaysia Sabah Labuan International Campus, which has a branch in Sepanggar Bay, Kota Kinabalu. All prospective university entrants from Sabah, Sarawak, and Labuan must sit the examinations of one matriculation college, Kolej Matrikulasi Labuan.

UCSI University, Sarawak Campus, University College of Technology Sarawak (UCTS) Tunku Abdul Rahman University College (Sabah campus), International University College of Technology Twintech (Sabah campus), and Open University Malaysia (Sabah campus) have local private university branch campuses in East Malaysia. Curtin University, Malaysia and Swinburne University of Technology Sarawak Campus are foreign university branch campuses in Sarawak.

There are 4 teacher training colleges (Malay: &quot;Maktab Perguruan&quot;) in Sarawak, and 4 teacher training colleges in Sabah.

==Transport==
The Pan Borneo Highway connects Sabah, Sarawak, and Brunei. The road has been poorly maintained since it was built. The narrow road is dark at night without any street lights and there are many danger spots, sharp bends, blind spots, potholes, and erosion. However, federal government funds have been allocated for the upgrade of the highway, which will be carried out in stages until completion in 2025.

The major airports in East Malaysia are Kuching International Airport, Labuan Airport and Kota Kinabalu International Airport. Kota Kinabalu International Airport has also become the second largest airport in Malaysia, with an annual capacity of 12 million passengers – 9 million for Terminal 1 and 3 million for Terminal 2. There are frequent air flights by including Malaysia Airlines (MAS) and AirAsia between East Malaysia and Peninsular Malaysia. Other ports of entry to East Malaysia include Sibu Airport, Bintulu Airport, and Miri Airport in Sarawak, Sandakan Airport and Tawau Airport in Sabah. MAS also operates international flights to major cities in East Malaysia.

The rural areas in Borneo can only be accessed by air or river boat. River transport is especially prevalent in Sarawak because there are many large and long rivers, with Rajang River being the most used. Rivers are used by boats and ferries for communications (i.e. mail) and passenger transport between inland areas and coastal towns. Timber is also transported via vessels and log carriers down the rivers of Sarawak.

The Labuan Ferry operates boat express and vehicle ferries from Labuan Island to Sabah, Sarawak and Brunei. Ferries have overtaken air travel as the chief transportation mode on and off the island.

==Economy==
Shipyards in Sabah and Sarawak build steel vessels for offshore supply, tug, barge and river ferries when compared to shipyards in Peninsular Malaysia that focus on building steel and aluminium vessels for the government as well as oil and gas companies. This makes the shipyards in Sabah and Sarawak more competitive and innovative in design, process and material, compared to the shipyards in peninsular Malaysia, where the big projects are dependent on government funding.

==Security==

The state of Sabah has been subjected to attacks by Moro pirates and militants since the 1960s and intensification in 1985, 2000, 2013. The Eastern Sabah Security Zone (ESSZONE) and Eastern Sabah Security Command (ESSCOM) were established on 25 March 2013 to tighten security in the region. Since 2014, a 12-hour dusk-to-dawn curfew has been imposed on six Sabah east coast districts.

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* James Chin Tun Razak and East Malaysia (2024) UM Press
* Andrew Harding &amp; James Chin, 50 years of Malaysia: Federalism revisited (Marshall Cavendish 2014)
* James Chin The 1963 Malaysia Agreement (MA63): Sabah And Sarawak and the Politics of Historical Grievances (Amsterdam University Press, 2919)
* 
* Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom 

==External links==
* Virtual Malaysia – The Official Portal of the Ministry of Tourism, Malaysia
* mulucaves.org Mulu Caves Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="0" end="13" title="East Malaysia" label="East Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="25" end="38" title="East Malaysia" label="Borneo States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="54" end="70" title="East Malaysia" label="Malaysian Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="87" end="95" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="122" end="128" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="207" end="212" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="214" end="221" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="252" end="258" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="292" end="298" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="398" end="408" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="444" end="463" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="533" end="548" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="579" end="594" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="747" end="759" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="761" end="772" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092" start="778" end="788" title="George Town, Penang" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="984" end="991" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="993" end="1006" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="1011" end="1015" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913503" start="1187" end="1214" title="Borneo lowland rain forests" label="Borneo lowland rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913201" start="1219" end="1246" title="Borneo montane rain forests" label="Borneo montane rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="1416" end="1421" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="1437" end="1444" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="1472" end="1478" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="1587" end="1600" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="1608" end="1627" title="Sultanate of Brunei" label="Sultanate of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="1784" end="1801" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sultanate of Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="2035" end="2055" title="British North Borneo" label="British North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="2083" end="2099" title="Crown colony" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="2105" end="2111" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="2144" end="2164" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="2317" end="2322" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="2328" end="2335" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="2346" end="2364" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2486" end="2494" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="2498" end="2515" title="Malaysia Day" label="16 September 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="2530" end="2542" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q296317" start="2659" end="2677" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="2719" end="2725" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801529" start="2756" end="2779" title="North Borneo Federation" label="North Borneo Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="2806" end="2819" title="Brunei Revolt" label="Brunei Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="3138" end="3144" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="3163" end="3175" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008803" start="3202" end="3219" title="Federal Territories (Malaysia)" label="Federal Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="3288" end="3304" title="Offshore Financial Centre" label="offshore finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="3755" end="3781" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149275" start="4188" end="4196" title="Property law" label="land law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="4583" end="4595" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="4710" end="4721" title="Merdeka Day" label="Merdeka Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755248" start="5157" end="5168" title="High Courts of Malaysia" label="High Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755248" start="5231" end="5262" title="High Court in Sabah and Sarawak" label="High Court in Sabah and Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60544005" start="5312" end="5344" title="Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak" label="Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q86326068" start="5348" end="5375" title="Abang Iskandar Abang Hashim" label="Abang Iskandar Abang Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178325" start="5508" end="5523" title="Court of Appeal of Malaysia" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362926" start="5529" end="5554" title="Chief Justice of Malaysia" label="Chief Justice of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423432" start="5895" end="5899" title="Sarawak state election, 1969" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243071" start="6932" end="6966" title="United Sabah National Organisation" label="United Sabah National Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918646" start="7148" end="7179" title="Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu" label="Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="7390" end="7396" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q808210" start="7582" end="7598" title="Barisan Nasional" label="Barisan Nasional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742054" start="7731" end="7762" title="2013 Malaysian general election" label="2013 Malaysian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q846488" start="7856" end="7873" title="Cabinet of Malaysia" label="Malaysian Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q564736" start="7906" end="7919" title="2008 Malaysian general election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429257" start="8049" end="8063" title="Fadillah Yusof" label="Fadillah Yusof"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="8226" end="8235" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="8325" end="8345" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Malaysian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937123" start="8480" end="8485" title="Chief Minister of Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566938" start="8490" end="8497" title="Chief Minister of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="8636" end="8654" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="8938" end="8950" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="9065" end="9076" title="Merdeka Day" label="Merdeka Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913503" start="9391" end="9411" title="Borneo lowland rain forests" label="lowland rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913201" start="9426" end="9446" title="Borneo montane rain forests" label="mountain rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="9577" end="9585" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="9617" end="9623" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="9650" end="9669" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="9691" end="9703" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="9707" end="9720" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629438" start="9763" end="9784" title="List of mountains in Malaysia" label="mountains in Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60967" start="9804" end="9818" title="Mount Kinabalu" label="Mount Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="9983" end="9995" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532371" start="10000" end="10018" title="Kinabatangan River" label="Kinabatangan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368627" start="10021" end="10034" title="Banggi Island" label="Banggi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="10038" end="10043" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q543233" start="10048" end="10060" title="Bruit Island" label="Bruit Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="10064" end="10071" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="10194" end="10203" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="10208" end="10214" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q737814" start="10245" end="10259" title="Sebatik Island" label="Sebatik Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="10325" end="10335" title="Mulu Caves" label="Mulu Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="10343" end="10368" title="Gunung Mulu National Park" label="Gunung Mulu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q555991" start="10374" end="10389" title="Sarawak Chamber" label="Sarawak Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="10493" end="10499" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="10500" end="10519" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q834893" start="10592" end="10605" title="Kinabalu Park" label="Kinabalu Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60967" start="10622" end="10636" title="Mount Kinabalu" label="Mount Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412482" start="10643" end="10657" title="Sipadan" label="Sipadan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="10791" end="10800" title="oil field" label="oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="10895" end="10912" title="natural gas field" label="natural gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236743" start="10968" end="10973" title="Dome (geology)" label="domal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261773" start="10974" end="10989" title="structural trap" label="structural trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="11019" end="11025" title="fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="11052" end="11059" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="11060" end="11069" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q565731" start="11088" end="11097" title="siltstone" label="siltstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="11103" end="11107" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="11266" end="11275" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="11385" end="11403" title="carbonate platform" label="carbonate platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="11813" end="11820" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="11904" end="11917" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="12024" end="12028" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q137203" start="12120" end="12128" title="Sandakan" label="Sandakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q995163" start="12133" end="12138" title="Tawau" label="Tawau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048700" start="12149" end="12153" title="Sibu" label="Sibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="12158" end="12165" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363616" start="12182" end="12190" title="Victoria, Labuan" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="12362" end="12374" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q427838" start="12419" end="12432" title="Kadazan-Dusun" label="Kadazan-Dusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="12647" end="12664" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803" start="12686" end="12706" title="Lesser Sunda Islands" label="Lesser Sunda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="12708" end="12716" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13887" start="12722" end="12726" title="Sulu" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12775" end="12780" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="13055" end="13069" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200528" start="13254" end="13261" title="Malaysian Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543292" start="13285" end="13290" title="Malaysian Malays" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="13453" end="13460" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189494" start="13500" end="13506" title="Malaysian Indians" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="13783" end="13796" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q995163" start="13798" end="13803" title="Tawau" label="Tawau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363616" start="13805" end="13811" title="Victoria, Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="13816" end="13820" title="Miri" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249156" start="13945" end="13955" title="Project IC" label="Project IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="14028" end="14037" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="14042" end="14053" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="14075" end="14079" title="United Malays National Organisation" label="UMNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334871" start="14103" end="14130" title="Royal Commission of Inquiry on illegal immigrants in Sabah" label="Royal Commission of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141386" start="14666" end="14693" title="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak" label="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142275" start="14707" end="14732" title="Universiti Malaysia Sabah" label="Universiti Malaysia Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576899" start="14740" end="14765" title="Universiti Teknologi Mara" label="Universiti Teknologi Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958679" start="15125" end="15156" title="UCSI University, Sarawak Campus" label="UCSI University, Sarawak Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600080" start="15158" end="15198" title="University College of Technology Sarawak" label="University College of Technology Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853255" start="15206" end="15243" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman University College" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12690299" start="15260" end="15315" title="International University College of Technology Twintech" label="International University College of Technology Twintech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390612" start="15336" end="15360" title="Open University Malaysia" label="Open University Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195645" start="15440" end="15467" title="Curtin University, Malaysia" label="Curtin University, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568961" start="15472" end="15521" title="Swinburne University of Technology Sarawak Campus" label="Swinburne University of Technology Sarawak Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="15613" end="15618" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202293" start="15723" end="15741" title="Pan Borneo Highway" label="Pan Borneo Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305028" start="16165" end="16194" title="Kuching International Airport" label="Kuching International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267866" start="16196" end="16210" title="Labuan Airport" label="Labuan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q645760" start="16215" end="16250" title="Kota Kinabalu International Airport" label="Kota Kinabalu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q645760" start="16252" end="16287" title="Kota Kinabalu International Airport" label="Kota Kinabalu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="16494" end="16511" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q406643" start="16522" end="16529" title="AirAsia" label="AirAsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267807" start="16623" end="16635" title="Sibu Airport" label="Sibu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q598738" start="16637" end="16652" title="Bintulu Airport" label="Bintulu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432050" start="16658" end="16670" title="Miri Airport" label="Miri Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432733" start="16683" end="16699" title="Sandakan Airport" label="Sandakan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433031" start="16704" end="16717" title="Tawau Airport" label="Tawau Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="16974" end="16986" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="17289" end="17295" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="17306" end="17311" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="17313" end="17320" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="17325" end="17331" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q334166" start="17380" end="17399" title="Mode of transport" label="transportation mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048545" start="17979" end="17983" title="Moro people" label="Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12712876" start="18067" end="18094" title="Eastern Sabah Security Zone" label="Eastern Sabah Security Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219106" start="18109" end="18139" title="Eastern Sabah Security Command" label="Eastern Sabah Security Command"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37421" wikidata="Q753705" url="?curid=37421" title="Bowline">
<text>The bowline ( or ) is an ancient and simple knot used to form a fixed loop at the end of a rope. It has the virtues of being both easy to tie and untie; most notably, it is easy to untie after being subjected to a load. The bowline is sometimes referred to as &quot;king of the knots&quot; because of its importance. Along with the sheet bend and the clove hitch, the bowline is often considered one of the most essential knots. 

The common bowline shares some structural similarity with the sheet bend. Virtually all end-to-end joining knots (i.e., bends) have a corresponding loop knot. 

Although the bowline is generally considered a reliable knot, its main deficiencies are a tendency to work loose when not under load (or under cyclic loading), to slip when pulled sideways, and the bight portion of the knot to capsize in certain circumstances. To address these shortcomings, a number of more secure variations of the bowline have been developed for use in safety-critical applications, or by securing the knot with an overhand knot backup.

==History==
The bowline&#x27;s name has an earlier meaning, dating to the age of sail. On a square-rigged ship, a bowline (sometimes spelled as two words, &quot;bow line&quot;) is a rope that holds the edge of a square sail towards the bow of the ship and into the wind, preventing it from being . A ship is said to be on a &quot;taut bowline&quot; when these lines are made as taut as possible in order to sail close-hauled to the wind.

The bowline knot is thought to have been first mentioned in John Smith&#x27;s 1627 work &quot;A Sea Grammar&quot; under the name Boling knot. Smith considered the knot to be strong and secure, saying, &quot;The &quot;Boling knot&quot; is also so firmly made and fastened by the bridles into the cringles of the sails, they will break, or the sail split before it will slip.&quot;

Another possible finding was discovered on the rigging of the Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Khufu&#x27;s solar ship during an excavation in 1954.

==Usage==
The bowline is used to make a loop at one end of a line. It is tied with the rope&#x27;s working end also known as the &quot;tail&quot; or &quot;end&quot;. The loop may pass around or through an object during the making of the knot. The knot tightens when loaded at (pulled by) the standing part of the line.

The bowline is commonly used in sailing small craft, for example to fasten a halyard to the head of a sail or to tie a jib sheet to a clew of a jib. The bowline is well known as a rescue knot for such purposes as rescuing people who might have fallen down a hole, or off a cliff onto a ledge. This knot is particularly useful in such a situation because it is possible to tie with one hand. As such, a person needing rescue could hold onto the rope with one hand and use the other to tie the knot around their waist before being pulled to safety by rescuers. The Federal Aviation Administration recommends the bowline knot for tying down light aircraft.

A rope with a bowline retains approximately 2/3 of its strength, with variances depending upon the nature of the rope, as in practice the exact strength depends on a variety of factors.

In the United Kingdom, the knot is listed as part of the training objectives for the Qualified Firefighter Assessment.

==Tying==

A mnemonic used to teach the tying of the bowline is to imagine the working end of the rope as a rabbit.

* 1,2 – a loop is made into the standing part which will act as the rabbit&#x27;s hole
* 3 – the &quot;rabbit&quot; comes up the hole,
* 4 – goes round the tree (standing part) right to left
* 5 – and back down the hole

This can be taught to children with the rhyme: &quot;Up through the rabbit hole, round the big tree; down through the rabbit hole and off goes he.&quot;

A single handed method can also be used; see this animation.

There is a potential with beginners to wrongly tie the bowline. This faulty knot stems from an incorrect first step while tying the rabbit hole. If the loop is made backwards so that the working end of the rope is on the bottom, the resulting knot will be the Eskimo bowline, looking like a sideways bowline, which is also a stable knot.

==Security==
As noted above, the simplicity of the bowline makes it a good knot for a general purpose end-of-line loop. However, in situations that require additional security, several variants have been developed:

===Round turn bowline===

The round turn bowline is made by the addition of an extra turn in the formation of the &quot;rabbit hole&quot; before the working end is threaded through.

===Water bowline===

Similar to the double bowline, the water bowline is made by forming a clove hitch before the working end is threaded through. It is said to be stronger and also more resistant to jamming than the other variations, especially when wet.

===Yosemite bowline===

In this variation the knot&#x27;s working end is taken round the loop in the direction of the original round turn, then threaded back up through the original round turn before the knot is drawn tight. The Yosemite bowline is often used in climbing.

==Other variants==
The cowboy bowline (also called Dutch bowline), French bowline, and Portuguese bowline are variations of the bowline, each of which makes one loop. (Names of knots are mostly traditional and may not reflect their origins.) A running bowline can be used to make a noose which draws tighter as tension is placed on the standing part of the rope. The &quot;Birmingham bowline&quot; has two loops; the working part is passed twice around the standing part (the &quot;rabbit&quot; makes two trips out of the hole and around the tree). Other two-loop bowline knots include the Spanish bowline and the bowline on the bight; these can be tied in the middle of a rope without access to the ends. A triple bowline is used to make three loops. A Cossack knot is a bowline where the running end goes around the loop-start rather than the main part and has a more symmetric triangular shaped knot. A slipped version of the Cossack knot is called Kalmyk loop.

==See also==
*List of knots
*Karash double loop
*Eye splice
*Bowline on a bight

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Video of the Lightning Method
* YouTube animation of a Bowline knot
===Variants===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="4" end="11" title="Bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="44" end="48" title="knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136533" start="332" end="342" title="sheet bend" label="sheet bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="351" end="362" title="clove hitch" label="clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005650" start="551" end="556" title="Bend knot" label="bends"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="790" end="795" title="bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="819" end="826" title="Knot#Capsizing" label="capsize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="965" end="980" title="safety-critical" label="safety-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q332491" start="1027" end="1040" title="overhand knot" label="overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="1124" end="1135" title="age of sail" label="age of sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166049" start="1142" end="1160" title="square rig" label="square-rigged ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="1269" end="1273" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="1286" end="1289" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q119781" start="1462" end="1474" title="points of sail" label="close-hauled"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="1549" end="1566" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928602" start="1784" end="1791" title="cringle" label="cringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1932" end="1945" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="1949" end="1956" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q161904" start="1957" end="1969" title="Khufu" label="Khufu&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711677" start="1970" end="1980" title="Khufu ship" label="solar ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="2111" end="2122" title="working end" label="working end"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394451" start="2409" end="2416" title="halyard" label="halyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q477494" start="2451" end="2460" title="jib sheet" label="jib sheet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2466" end="2470" title="Parts of a sail#The corners" label="clew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286778" start="2476" end="2479" title="jib" label="jib"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="2895" end="2926" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="2976" end="2984" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="3307" end="3315" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532732" start="4108" end="4122" title="Eskimo bowline" label="Eskimo bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631207" start="4488" end="4492" title="Turn (knot)" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="4677" end="4688" title="clove hitch" label="clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="5106" end="5114" title="climbing" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952374" start="5140" end="5154" title="cowboy bowline" label="cowboy bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999186" start="5184" end="5198" title="French bowline" label="French bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888382" start="5204" end="5222" title="Portuguese bowline" label="Portuguese bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989722" start="5361" end="5376" title="running bowline" label="running bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q588831" start="5707" end="5722" title="Spanish bowline" label="Spanish bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243406" start="5731" end="5751" title="bowline on the bight" label="bowline on the bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347328" start="5825" end="5839" title="triple bowline" label="triple bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532732" start="5871" end="5883" title="Cossack knot" label="Cossack knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808719" start="6069" end="6080" title="Kalmyk loop" label="Kalmyk loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854739" start="6097" end="6110" title="List of knots" label="List of knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347329" start="6112" end="6130" title="Karash double loop" label="Karash double loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q351951" start="6132" end="6142" title="Eye splice" label="Eye splice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243406" start="6144" end="6162" title="Bowline on a bight" label="Bowline on a bight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37422" wikidata="Q232632" url="?curid=37422" title="Loop">
<text>Loop or LOOP may refer to:
==Brands and enterprises==
* Loop (mobile), a Bulgarian virtual network operator and co-founder of Loop Live
* Loop, clothing, a company founded by Carlos Vasquez in the 1990s and worn by Digable Planets
* Loop Mobile, an Indian mobile phone operator
* Loop, a reusable container program announced in 2019 by TerraCycle

==Geography==
* Loop, Germany, a municipality in Schleswig-Holstein
* Loop (Texarkana), a roadway loop around Texarkana, Arkansas, United States
* Loop, Blair County, Pennsylvania, United States
* Loop, Indiana County, Pennsylvania, United States
* Loop, West Virginia, United States
* Loop 101, a semi-beltway of the Phoenix Metropolitan Area
* Loop 202, a semi-beltway of the Phoenix Metropolitan Area
* Loop 303, a semi-beltway of the Phoenix Metropolitan Area
* Chicago Loop, the downtown neighborhood of Chicago bounded by the elevated railway The Loop
** Loop Retail Historic District, a shopping district in the Chicago Loop
* Delmar Loop, an entertainment district in St. Louis, Missouri
* London Outer Orbital Path (LOOP), a signed walk around the edge of Outer London, England
* Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP), a deep-water port in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Louisiana

==People==
* Call Me Loop (born 1991), English singer and songwriter
* Liza Loop (active from 1975), American technology pioneer
* Uno Loop (1930–2021), Estonian singer, musician, athlete, actor, and educator
* Victoria Loop, brass and guitar player with English band Half Man Half Biscuit

==Arts, entertainment, and media==

===Film===
* &quot;Loop&quot; (1991 film), a British romantic comedy
* &quot;Loop&quot; (1999 film), a Venezuelan film
* &quot;Loop&quot; (2020 film), an American animated short
* Film loop, the slack portion of the film around the projector lens in a movie projector
* Porn loop, an 8 or 16 mm video &quot;short&quot; of a pornographic nature that could be purchased from men&#x27;s magazines starting in the 1950s

===Music===

====Groups====
* Loop (band), a London rock band

====Other uses in music====
* &quot;Loop&quot; (album), a 2002 album by Keller Williams
* Loop (music), a finite element of sound which is repeated by technical means
* &quot;Loop&quot; (Maaya Sakamoto song), 2005
* &quot;Loop&quot; (Sarah Bonnici song), the entry for Malta in the Eurovision Song Contest 2024
* &quot;Loop&quot;, a 2020 mini-album by Peakboy

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Loop&quot; (novel), a novel in the &quot;Ring&quot; series by Koji Suzuki
* LOOP Barcelona, an annual meeting point for video art in Barcelona, Spain

==Computing and technology==
* Loop (computing), a method of control flow in computer science
* LOOP (programming language), the pedagogical primitive recursive programming language with bounded loops
* Loop (telecommunication), sending a signal on a channel and receiving it back at the sending terminal
* Audio induction loop, an aid for the hard of hearing
* Local loop, the physical link in telephony that links the customer premises to the telephone company (telco)
* Loop device, a Unix device node that allows a file to be mounted as if it were a device
* LOOPS, the object system for Interlisp-D
* &quot;continue&quot; statement (in some languages &quot;skip&quot;, &quot;cycle&quot;, &quot;next&quot;, &quot;loop&quot;, or &quot;iterate&quot;), a structured control statement that skips ahead to the next iteration of the loop containing it
* Microsoft Loop, collaborative software

==Mathematics==
* Loop (algebra), a quasigroup with an identity element
* Loop (graph theory), an edge that begins and ends on the same vertex
* Loop (topology), a path that starts and ends at the same point, possibly reduced to a single point

==Sports==
* Aerobatic loop, a type of aerobatic maneuver
* Ground loop (aviation), a rapid horizontal (yawing) rotation of a fixed-wing aircraft used in emergencies to bleed of energy while landing
* Loop, a type of canoe freestyle maneuver
* Loop (cricket), an aspect of bowling in cricket
* Loop jump, a figure skating jump
* Loop, a type of offensive shot in table tennis

==Roller coasters==
* Loop (roller coaster), a basic roller coaster inversion
* Pretzel loop, a roller coaster element

==Transportation==
* &quot;Loop&quot; (Amtrak train), a discontinued Amtrak train
* The Loop (CTA), a rapid transit section bounding Chicago&#x27;s Loop neighborhood
* Loop, underground public transportation system of The Boring Company in Tesla cars, including a proposed DC-to-Baltimore system
* Balloon loop, a section of track that allows reversal of direction without stopping
* Circle route, a public transport route that travels around and connecting the peripheral zones of an area.
* Loop line (railway), a branch line that deviates from a direct route and rejoins it at another location
* Loop route, a main route or highway that forms a closed loop
* Passing loop, a short section of track that allows trains to pass on a single track route
* Ring road or loop, a main route or highway that encircles a town or city
* Spiral (railway), a section of track that allows a train to climb a steep hill

==Other uses==
* Compulsion loop, a habitual chain of activities that will be repeated by the user to cause them to continue the activity
* Loop (biochemistry), a flexible region in a protein&#x27;s secondary structure
* Loop (education), the process of advancing an elementary school teacher with his or her class
* Loop (knot), one of the fundamental structures used to tie knots
* Loop, the end of some dead-end streets
* Loop, a type of fingerprint pattern

==See also==
* 
* The Loop (disambiguation)
* Circle
* Cycle (disambiguation)
* Cycle graph
* Electronic circuit
* Hoop (disambiguation)
* Inner loop (disambiguation)
* Line echo wave pattern (LEWP)
* Loophole
* Looping (disambiguation)
* Loopy (disambiguation)
* Loupe, a small magnifying glass used by jewelers, watchmakers, and other precision craftsmen
* Möbius strip
* Ring (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232632" start="0" end="4" title="Loop" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q232632" start="8" end="12" title="Loop" label="LOOP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56" end="69" title="Loop (mobile)" label="Loop (mobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072827" start="126" end="135" title="Loop Live" label="Loop Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027728" start="215" end="230" title="Digable Planets" label="Digable Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328981" start="233" end="244" title="Loop Mobile" label="Loop Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896156" start="336" end="346" title="TerraCycle" label="TerraCycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q667261" start="364" end="377" title="Loop, Germany" label="Loop, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431395" start="418" end="434" title="Loop (Texarkana)" label="Loop (Texarkana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456331" start="495" end="527" title="Loop, Blair County, Pennsylvania" label="Loop, Blair County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456042" start="545" end="579" title="Loop, Indiana County, Pennsylvania" label="Loop, Indiana County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675767" start="597" end="616" title="Loop, West Virginia" label="Loop, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q670457" start="634" end="642" title="Loop 101" label="Loop 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q658427" start="694" end="702" title="Loop 202" label="Loop 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q815147" start="754" end="762" title="Loop 303" label="Loop 303"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="814" end="826" title="Chicago Loop" label="Chicago Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675813" start="909" end="938" title="Loop Retail Historic District" label="Loop Retail Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254258" start="982" end="993" title="Delmar Loop" label="Delmar Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670641" start="1046" end="1071" title="London Outer Orbital Path" label="London Outer Orbital Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242994" start="1137" end="1164" title="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port" label="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q97125850" start="1254" end="1266" title="Call Me Loop" label="Call Me Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675578" start="1312" end="1321" title="Liza Loop" label="Liza Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12377779" start="1372" end="1380" title="Uno Loop" label="Uno Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q834084" start="1509" end="1530" title="Half Man Half Biscuit" label="Half Man Half Biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675787" start="1581" end="1609" title="Loop (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25208973" start="1639" end="1667" title="Loop (1999 film)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (1999 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83962045" start="1689" end="1717" title="Loop (2020 film)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (2020 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1820" end="1835" title="movie projector#Film loop" label="movie projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="1838" end="1847" title="Porn loop" label="Porn loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259261" start="2015" end="2026" title="Loop (band)" label="Loop (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675782" start="2078" end="2102" title="Loop (album)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="2138" end="2150" title="Loop (music)" label="Loop (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061539" start="2217" end="2255" title="Loop (Maaya Sakamoto song)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (Maaya Sakamoto song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124608043" start="2264" end="2301" title="Loop (Sarah Bonnici song)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (Sarah Bonnici song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109407273" start="2400" end="2407" title="Peakboy" label="Peakboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431808" start="2462" end="2486" title="Loop (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944895" start="2544" end="2558" title="LOOP Barcelona" label="LOOP Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="2650" end="2666" title="Loop (computing)" label="Loop (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798261" start="2715" end="2742" title="LOOP (programming language)" label="LOOP (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758736" start="2822" end="2846" title="Loop (telecommunication)" label="Loop (telecommunication)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603863" start="2926" end="2946" title="Audio induction loop" label="Audio induction loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117061" start="2981" end="2991" title="Local loop" label="Local loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q622559" start="3092" end="3103" title="Loop device" label="Loop device"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386338" start="3211" end="3220" title="Interlisp" label="Interlisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="3225" end="3255" title="continue statement" label="&amp;quot;continue&amp;quot; statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q109620998" start="3471" end="3485" title="Microsoft Loop" label="Microsoft Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="3529" end="3543" title="Loop (algebra)" label="Loop (algebra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q512604" start="3585" end="3604" title="Loop (graph theory)" label="Loop (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558786" start="3656" end="3671" title="Loop (topology)" label="Loop (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q32015063" start="3795" end="3813" title="aerobatic maneuver" label="aerobatic maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153620" start="3816" end="3838" title="Ground loop (aviation)" label="Ground loop (aviation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3973" end="3997" title="canoe freestyle#Moves" label="canoe freestyle maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459132" start="4000" end="4014" title="Loop (cricket)" label="Loop (cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756266" start="4050" end="4059" title="Loop jump" label="Loop jump"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4101" end="4131" title="table tennis#Loop" label="offensive shot in table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832461" start="4155" end="4176" title="Loop (roller coaster)" label="Loop (roller coaster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265817" start="4213" end="4225" title="Pretzel loop" label="Pretzel loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675792" start="4274" end="4305" title="Loop (Amtrak train)" label="&amp;quot;Loop&amp;quot; (Amtrak train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225459" start="4337" end="4351" title="The Loop (CTA)" label="The Loop (CTA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28874479" start="4471" end="4489" title="The Boring Company" label="The Boring Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q659909" start="4551" end="4563" title="Balloon loop" label="Balloon loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q145179" start="4637" end="4649" title="Circle route" label="Circle route"/>
<link wikidata="Q145179" start="4746" end="4765" title="Loop line (railway)" label="Loop line (railway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574863" start="4852" end="4862" title="Loop route" label="Loop route"/>
<link wikidata="Q784159" start="4915" end="4927" title="Passing loop" label="Passing loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="5007" end="5016" title="Ring road" label="Ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q846907" start="5082" end="5098" title="Spiral (railway)" label="Spiral (railway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686626" start="5179" end="5194" title="Compulsion loop" label="Compulsion loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q290042" start="5302" end="5321" title="Loop (biochemistry)" label="Loop (biochemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675882" start="5383" end="5399" title="Loop (education)" label="Loop (education)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624682" start="5479" end="5490" title="Loop (knot)" label="Loop (knot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="5568" end="5583" title="dead-end street" label="dead-end street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5603" end="5614" title="fingerprint#Classifying fingerprints" label="fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013094" start="5642" end="5667" title="The Loop (disambiguation)" label="The Loop (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="5670" end="5676" title="Circle" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q225014" start="5679" end="5701" title="Cycle (disambiguation)" label="Cycle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622506" start="5704" end="5715" title="Cycle graph" label="Cycle graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="5718" end="5736" title="Electronic circuit" label="Electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267034" start="5739" end="5760" title="Hoop (disambiguation)" label="Hoop (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16797643" start="5763" end="5790" title="Inner loop (disambiguation)" label="Inner loop (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553246" start="5793" end="5815" title="Line echo wave pattern" label="Line echo wave pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995606" start="5825" end="5833" title="Loophole" label="Loophole"/>
<link wikidata="Q164695" start="5836" end="5860" title="Looping (disambiguation)" label="Looping (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675903" start="5863" end="5885" title="Loopy (disambiguation)" label="Loopy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474207" start="5888" end="5893" title="Loupe" label="Loupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="5983" end="5995" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q534381" start="5998" end="6019" title="Ring (disambiguation)" label="Ring (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37423" wikidata="Q408760" url="?curid=37423" title="Bend">
<text>Bend may refer to:
==Places==

===Canada===
* Bend, British Columbia, a railway point

===United States===
* Bend, California
* Bend, Missouri
* Bend, Oregon 
* Bend, South Dakota
* Bend, Texas

==Science, technology and engineering==
* Bending, the deformation of an object due to an applied load
* Bend, a curvature in a pipe, tube, sheet, cable or hose; see Bend radius
* Bend (knot), a type of knot used to tie two ropes together

==Music==
===Techniques===
* Bend (guitar), a guitar technique
* Note bending, a glide from one pitch to another

===Albums and songs===
* &quot;Bend&quot; (8stops7 album), 2006
* &quot;Bend&quot; (The Origin album), 1992
* &quot;Bend&quot; (song), a 2015 song by Chet Faker

==People with the surname Bend==
* George H. Bend (1838–1900), American banker and financier
* Lin Bend (1922–1978), Canadian ice hockey player
* Robert Bend (1914–1999), Manitoba politician

==Other uses==
* Bend (heraldry), a diagonal band used as a heraldic charge
* Curl (association football), a playing technique also called &quot;bend&quot;

==See also==
* 
* Bends (disambiguation)
* Bendable (disambiguation)
* Bender (disambiguation)
* Bending (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408760" start="0" end="4" title="Bend" label="Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886971" start="46" end="68" title="Bend, British Columbia" label="Bend, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886973" start="109" end="125" title="Bend, California" label="Bend, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985871" start="128" end="142" title="Bend, Missouri" label="Bend, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q671288" start="145" end="157" title="Bend, Oregon" label="Bend, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23709327" start="161" end="179" title="Bend, South Dakota" label="Bend, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886974" start="182" end="193" title="Bend, Texas" label="Bend, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072476" start="237" end="244" title="Bending" label="Bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984090" start="361" end="372" title="Bend radius" label="Bend radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005650" start="375" end="386" title="Bend (knot)" label="Bend (knot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q816791" start="464" end="477" title="Bend (guitar)" label="Bend (guitar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="500" end="512" title="Note bending" label="Note bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886978" start="574" end="606" title="Bend (8stops7 album)" label="&amp;quot;Bend&amp;quot; (8stops7 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096396" start="615" end="650" title="Bend (The Origin album)" label="&amp;quot;Bend&amp;quot; (The Origin album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646927" start="659" end="682" title="Bend (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bend&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29908661" start="746" end="760" title="George H. Bend" label="George H. Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549990" start="806" end="814" title="Lin Bend" label="Lin Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342017" start="857" end="868" title="Robert Bend" label="Robert Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q805079" start="920" end="935" title="Bend (heraldry)" label="Bend (heraldry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="981" end="1008" title="Curl (association football)" label="Curl (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110440283" start="1078" end="1100" title="Bends (disambiguation)" label="Bends (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887015" start="1103" end="1128" title="Bendable (disambiguation)" label="Bendable (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q248461" start="1131" end="1154" title="Bender (disambiguation)" label="Bender (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178056" start="1157" end="1181" title="Bending (disambiguation)" label="Bending (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37424" wikidata="Q4562860" url="?curid=37424" title="Colorimeter">
<text>For articles on Colorimeter see:

* Colorimeter (chemistry)
* Tristimulus colorimeter

==See also==

* Colorimetry
* Colorimetry (chemical method)
* Calorimeter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4562860" start="16" end="27" title="Colorimeter" label="Colorimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q374869" start="36" end="59" title="Colorimeter (chemistry)" label="Colorimeter (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983984" start="62" end="85" title="Tristimulus colorimeter" label="Tristimulus colorimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q374535" start="103" end="114" title="Colorimetry" label="Colorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497892" start="117" end="146" title="Colorimetry (chemical method)" label="Colorimetry (chemical method)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189783" start="149" end="160" title="Calorimeter" label="Calorimeter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37425" wikidata="Q423481" url="?curid=37425" title="Equilibrium">
<text>Equilibrium may refer to:

== Film and television ==
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (film), a 2002 science fiction film
* &quot;The Story of Three Loves&quot;, also known as &quot;Equilibrium&quot;, a 1953 romantic anthology film
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (&quot;seaQuest 2032&quot;)
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot;, short film by Steven Soderbergh, a segment of &quot;Eros&quot;
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (&quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot;), Star Trek DS9 Episode 4, Season 3

== Music ==
* Equilibrium (band), a folk metal band from Germany
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (Crowbar album), 2000
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (Erik Mongrain album), 2008
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (God Forbid album), 2012
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (Whitecross album), 1995
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (Matthew Shipp album), 2003
* &quot;IX Equilibrium&quot;, a 1999 album by Emperor
* &quot;Equilibrium&quot;, an album by Fergie Frederiksen

== Natural sciences ==
* Chemical equilibrium
* Equilibrium chemistry
* Equilibrium point of differential equations
* Mechanical equilibrium
* Thermodynamic equilibrium

== Social sciences ==
* Cognitive equilibration in psychology, see 
* Economic equilibrium
* Nash equilibrium in game theory

== See also ==
* List of types of equilibrium
* Disequilibrium (disambiguation)
* Non-equilibrium (disambiguation)
* Balance (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423481" start="0" end="11" title="Equilibrium" label="Equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q507461" start="55" end="85" title="Equilibrium (film)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137375" start="123" end="147" title="The Story of Three Loves" label="The Story of Three Loves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638032" start="227" end="278" title="Equilibrium (seaQuest 2032)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;seaQuest 2032&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742092" start="358" end="362" title="Eros (film)" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="" start="371" end="435" title="Equilibrium (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q326074" start="486" end="504" title="Equilibrium (band)" label="Equilibrium (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384472" start="539" end="578" title="Equilibrium (Crowbar album)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (Crowbar album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759960" start="587" end="632" title="Equilibrium (Erik Mongrain album)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (Erik Mongrain album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384473" start="641" end="683" title="Equilibrium (God Forbid album)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (God Forbid album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011592" start="692" end="734" title="Equilibrium (Whitecross album)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (Whitecross album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892637" start="743" end="788" title="Equilibrium (Matthew Shipp album)" label="&amp;quot;Equilibrium&amp;quot; (Matthew Shipp album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753368" start="803" end="817" title="IX Equilibrium" label="IX Equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="879" end="906" title="Dennis Frederiksen#Discography" label="album by Fergie Frederiksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="933" end="953" title="Chemical equilibrium" label="Chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384482" start="956" end="977" title="Equilibrium chemistry" label="Equilibrium chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530271" start="980" end="997" title="Equilibrium point" label="Equilibrium point"/>
<link wikidata="Q716915" start="1026" end="1048" title="Mechanical equilibrium" label="Mechanical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="1051" end="1076" title="Thermodynamic equilibrium" label="Thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="1148" end="1168" title="Economic equilibrium" label="Economic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23389" start="1171" end="1187" title="Nash equilibrium" label="Nash equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644161" start="1221" end="1249" title="List of types of equilibrium" label="List of types of equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282158" start="1252" end="1283" title="Disequilibrium (disambiguation)" label="Disequilibrium (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131817480" start="1286" end="1318" title="Non-equilibrium (disambiguation)" label="Non-equilibrium (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911050" start="1321" end="1345" title="Balance (disambiguation)" label="Balance (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37426" wikidata="Q762464" url="?curid=37426" title="Squeak">
<text>Squeak is an object-oriented, class-based, and reflective programming language. It was derived from Smalltalk-80 by a group that included some of Smalltalk-80&#x27;s original developers, initially at Apple Computer, then at Walt Disney Imagineering, where it was intended for use in internal Disney projects. The group later was supported by HP Labs, SAP, and most recently, Y Combinator.

Squeak runs on a virtual machine (VM), allowing for a high degree of portability. The Squeak system includes code for generating a new version of the VM on which it runs, along with a VM simulator written in Squeak.

==Developers==
Dan Ingalls, an important contributor to the Squeak project, wrote the paper upon which Squeak is built, and constructed the architecture for five generations of the Smalltalk language.

Alan Kay is an important contributor to the Squeak project, and Squeak incorporates many elements of his proposed Dynabook concept.

==User interface frameworks==
Squeak includes four user interface frameworks:
* An implementation of Morphic, Self&#x27;s graphical direct manipulation interface framework. This is Squeak&#x27;s main interface.
* Tile-based, limited visual programming scripting in Etoys, based on Morphic.
* A novel, experimental interface called Tweak. In 2001 it became clear that the Etoy architecture in Squeak had reached its limits in what the Morphic interface infrastructure could do. Hewlett-Packard researcher Andreas Raab proposed defining a &quot;script process&quot; and providing a default scheduling-mechanism that avoids several more general problems. This resulted in a new user interface, proposed to replace the Squeak Morphic user interface in the future. Tweak added mechanisms of islands, asynchronous messaging, players and costumes, language extensions, projects, and tile scripting. Its underlying object system is class-based, but to users, during programming (scripting), it acts like it is prototype-based. Tweak objects are created and run in Tweak project windows.
* A model–view–controller (MVC) interface was the primary UI in Squeak versions 3.8 and earlier. It derived from the original Smalltalk-80 user interface framework which first introduced and popularized the MVC architectural pattern. MVC takes its name from the three core classes of the framework. Thus, the term &quot;MVC&quot; in the context of Squeak refers to both one of the available user interface frameworks and the pattern the framework follows. MVC is still provided for those wishing to use this older type of interface.

==Uses==
Many Squeak contributors collaborate on Open Cobalt, a free and open source virtual world browser and construction toolkit built on Squeak.

The first version of Scratch was implemented in Squeak.

OpenQwaq, a virtual conferencing and collaboration system, is based on Squeak.

Squeak is also used in the Nintendo ES operating system.

==License==
Squeak 4.0 and later may be downloaded at no cost, including source code, as a prebuilt virtual machine image licensed under the MIT License, with the exception of some of the original Apple code, which is governed by the Apache License.

Squeak was originally released by Apple under its own &quot;Squeak License&quot;. While source code was available and modification permitted, the Squeak License contained an indemnity clause that prevented it from qualifying as true free and open-source software.

In 2006, Apple relicensed Squeak twice. First, in May, Apple used its own Apple Public Source License, which satisfies the Free Software Foundation&#x27;s concept of a Free Software License and has attained official approval from the Open Source Initiative as an Open Source License. However, The Apple Public Source License fails to conform to the Debian Free Software Guidelines. To enable inclusion of Etoys in the One Laptop Per Child project, a second relicensing was undertaken using the Apache License. At this point, an effort was also made to address the issue of code contributed by members of the Squeak community, which it was not in Apple&#x27;s power to unilaterally relicense.

For each contribution made under the Squeak License since 1996, a relicensing statement was obtained authorizing distribution under the MIT license, and finally in March 2010, the result was released as Squeak 4.0, now under combined MIT and Apache licenses.

==See also==

* Alice (software)
* Croquet Project
* Pharo
* Seaside (software)

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="0" end="6" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="13" end="28" title="Object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="30" end="41" title="Class (computer programming)" label="class-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="47" end="57" title="Reflective programming" label="reflective"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="58" end="78" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="100" end="109" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="200" end="214" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140930" start="224" end="248" title="Walt Disney Imagineering" label="Walt Disney Imagineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q266936" start="342" end="349" title="HP Labs" label="HP Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="351" end="354" title="SAP" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616400" start="375" end="387" title="Y Combinator" label="Y Combinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="407" end="422" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="622" end="633" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="809" end="817" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="923" end="931" title="Dynabook" label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="993" end="1007" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948370" start="1043" end="1050" title="Morphic (software)" label="Morphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864529" start="1052" end="1056" title="Self (programming language)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292289" start="1074" end="1103" title="direct manipulation interface" label="direct manipulation interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q683111" start="1175" end="1193" title="visual programming language" label="visual programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044290" start="1207" end="1212" title="Etoys (programming language)" label="Etoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857453" start="1273" end="1278" title="Tweak programming environment" label="Tweak"/>
<link wikidata="Q180868" start="1944" end="1959" title="prototype-based programming" label="prototype-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q44860" start="2025" end="2046" title="model–view–controller" label="model–view–controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045889" start="2604" end="2615" title="Open Cobalt" label="Open Cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="2619" end="2623" title="free software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="2628" end="2639" title="open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="2640" end="2653" title="virtual world" label="virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q275131" start="2726" end="2733" title="Scratch (programming language)" label="Scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095860" start="2762" end="2770" title="OpenQwaq" label="OpenQwaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="3000" end="3015" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334661" start="3041" end="3052" title="MIT License" label="MIT License"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="3134" end="3148" title="Apache License" label="Apache License"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="3325" end="3334" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="3384" end="3413" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885225" start="3431" end="3441" title="Software relicensing" label="relicensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q621330" start="3490" end="3517" title="Apple Public Source License" label="Apple Public Source License"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="3539" end="3563" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845918" start="3650" end="3672" title="Open Source Initiative" label="Open Source Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367020" start="3765" end="3796" title="Debian Free Software Guidelines" label="Debian Free Software Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044290" start="3821" end="3826" title="Etoys (programming language)" label="Etoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q842120" start="3834" end="3854" title="One Laptop Per Child" label="One Laptop Per Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q334661" start="4245" end="4256" title="MIT license" label="MIT license"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335388" start="4385" end="4401" title="Alice (software)" label="Alice (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567305" start="4404" end="4419" title="Croquet Project" label="Croquet Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q369096" start="4422" end="4427" title="Pharo" label="Pharo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476809" start="4430" end="4448" title="Seaside (software)" label="Seaside (software)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37427" wikidata="Q192690" url="?curid=37427" title="Le Chatelier's principle">
<text>In chemistry, Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle (pronounced or ) is a principle used to predict the effect of a change in conditions on chemical equilibrium. Other names include Chatelier&#x27;s principle, Braun–Le Chatelier principle, Le Chatelier–Braun principle or the equilibrium law.

The principle is named after French chemist Henry Louis Le Chatelier who enunciated the principle in 1884 by extending the reasoning from the Van &#x27;t Hoff relation of how temperature variations changes the equilibrium to the variations of pressure and what&#x27;s now called chemical potential, and sometimes also credited to Karl Ferdinand Braun, who discovered it independently in 1887. It can be defined as:

In scenarios outside thermodynamic equilibrium, there can arise phenomena in contradiction to an over-general statement of Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle.

Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle is sometimes alluded to in discussions of topics other than thermodynamics.

==Thermodynamic statement==
Le Chatelier–Braun principle analyzes the qualitative behaviour of a thermodynamic system when a particular one of its externally controlled state variables, say formula_1 changes by an amount formula_2 the &#x27;driving change&#x27;, causing a change formula_3 the &#x27;response of prime interest&#x27;, in its conjugate state variable formula_4 all other externally controlled state variables remaining constant. The response illustrates &#x27;moderation&#x27; in ways evident in two related thermodynamic equilibria. Obviously, one of formula_1 formula_6 has to be intensive, the other extensive. Also as a necessary part of the scenario, there is some particular auxiliary &#x27;moderating&#x27; state variable formula_7, with its conjugate state variable formula_8 For this to be of interest, the &#x27;moderating&#x27; variable formula_7 must undergo a change formula_10 or formula_11 in some part of the experimental protocol; this can be either by imposition of a change formula_12, or with the holding of formula_13 constant, written formula_14 For the principle to hold with full generality, formula_7 must be extensive or intensive accordingly as formula_6 is so. Obviously, to give this scenario physical meaning, the &#x27;driving&#x27; variable and the &#x27;moderating&#x27; variable must be subject to separate independent experimental controls and measurements.

===Explicit statement===

The principle can be stated in two ways, formally different, but substantially equivalent, and, in a sense, mutually &#x27;reciprocal&#x27;. The two ways illustrate the Maxwell relations, and the stability of thermodynamic equilibrium according to the second law of thermodynamics, evident as the spread of energy amongst the state variables of the system in response to an imposed change.

The two ways of statement differ in their experimental protocols. They share an &quot;index protocol&quot; (denoted formula_17 that may be described as &#x27;changed driver, moderation permitted&#x27;. Along with the driver change formula_2 it imposes a constant formula_19 with formula_20 and allows the uncontrolled &#x27;moderating&#x27; variable response formula_21 along with the &#x27;index&#x27; response of interest formula_22

The two ways of statement differ in their respective &quot;compared protocols&quot;. One form of &quot;compared protocol&quot; posits &#x27;changed driver, no moderation&#x27; (denoted formula_23 The other form of &quot;compared protocol&quot; posits &#x27;fixed driver, imposed moderation&#x27; (denoted formula_24)

====Forced &#x27;driver&#x27; change, free or fixed &#x27;moderation&#x27;====

This way compares formula_25 with formula_26 to compare the effects of the imposed the change formula_27 with and without moderation. The protocol formula_28 prevents &#x27;moderation&#x27; by enforcing that formula_29 through an adjustment formula_30 and it observes the &#x27;no-moderation&#x27; response formula_31 Provided that the observed response is indeed that formula_32 then the principle states that formula_33.

In other words, change in the &#x27;moderating&#x27; state variable formula_7 moderates the effect of the driving change in formula_35 on the responding conjugate variable formula_36

====Forcedly changed or fixed &#x27;driver&#x27;, respectively free or forced &#x27;moderation&#x27;====

This way also uses two experimental protocols, formula_37 and formula_38, to compare the index effect formula_39 with the effect formula_40 of &#x27;moderation&#x27; alone. The &quot;index protocol&quot; formula_37 is executed first; the response of prime interest, formula_42 is observed, and the response formula_43 of the &#x27;moderating&#x27; variable is also measured. With that knowledge, then the &quot;fixed driver, imposed moderation protocol&quot; formula_38 enforces that formula_45 with the driving variable formula_35 held fixed; the protocol also, through an adjustment formula_47 imposes a change formula_43 (learnt from the just previous measurement) in the &#x27;moderating&#x27; variable, and measures the change formula_49 Provided that the &#x27;moderated&#x27; response is indeed that formula_50 then the principle states that the signs of formula_39 and formula_40 are opposite.

Again, in other words, change in the &#x27;moderating&#x27; state variable formula_7 opposes the effect of the driving change in formula_35 on the responding conjugate variable formula_36

==Other statements==
The duration of adjustment depends on the strength of the negative feedback to the initial shock. The principle is typically used to describe closed negative-feedback systems, but applies, in general, to thermodynamically closed and isolated systems in nature, since the second law of thermodynamics ensures that the disequilibrium caused by an instantaneous shock is eventually followed by a new equilibrium.

While well rooted in chemical equilibrium, Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle can also be used in describing mechanical systems in that a system put under stress will respond in such a way as to reduce or minimize that stress. Moreover, the response will generally be via the mechanism that most easily relieves that stress. Shear pins and other such sacrificial devices are design elements that protect systems against stress applied in undesired manners to relieve it so as to prevent more extensive damage to the entire system, a practical engineering application of Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle.

==Chemistry==
===Effect of change in concentration===
Changing the concentration of a chemical will shift the equilibrium to the side that would counter that change in concentration. The chemical system will attempt to partly oppose the change affected to the original state of equilibrium. In turn, the rate of reaction, extent, and yield of products will be altered corresponding to the impact on the system.

This can be illustrated by the equilibrium of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gas, reacting to form methanol. 

:CO + 2 H2 ⇌ CH3OH

Suppose we were to increase the concentration of CO in the system. Using Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle, we can predict that the concentration of methanol will increase, decreasing the total change in CO. If we are to add a species to the overall reaction, the reaction will favor the side opposing the addition of the species. Likewise, the subtraction of a species would cause the reaction to &quot;fill the gap&quot; and favor the side where the species was reduced. This observation is supported by the collision theory. As the concentration of CO is increased, the frequency of successful collisions of that reactant would increase also, allowing for an increase in forward reaction, and generation of the product. Even if the desired product is not thermodynamically favored, the end-product can be obtained if it is continuously removed from the solution.

The effect of a change in concentration is often exploited synthetically for condensation reactions (i.e., reactions that extrude water) that are equilibrium processes (e.g., formation of an ester from carboxylic acid and alcohol or an imine from an amine and aldehyde). This can be achieved by physically sequestering water, by adding desiccants like anhydrous magnesium sulfate or molecular sieves, or by continuous removal of water by distillation, often facilitated by a Dean-Stark apparatus.

===Effect of change in temperature===

The effect of changing the temperature in the equilibrium can be made clear by 1) incorporating heat as either a reactant or a product, and 2) assuming that an increase in temperature increases the heat content of a system. When the reaction is exothermic (Δ&quot;H&quot; is negative and energy is released), heat is included as a product, and when the reaction is endothermic (Δ&quot;H&quot; is positive and energy is consumed), heat is included as a reactant. Hence, whether increasing or decreasing the temperature would favor the forward or the reverse reaction can be determined by applying the same principle as with concentration changes.

Take, for example, the reversible reaction of nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas to form ammonia:

:N2(g) + 3 H2(g) ⇌ 2 NH3(g)    Δ&quot;H&quot; = −92 kJ mol−1

Because this reaction is exothermic, it produces heat:

:N2(g) + 3 H2(g) ⇌ 2 NH3(g) + &quot;heat&quot;

If the temperature were increased, the heat content of the system would increase, so the system would consume some of that heat by shifting the equilibrium to the left, thereby producing less ammonia. More ammonia would be produced if the reaction were run at a lower temperature, but a lower temperature also lowers the rate of the process, so, in practice (the Haber process) the temperature is set at a compromise value that allows ammonia to be made at a reasonable rate with an equilibrium concentration that is not too unfavorable.

In exothermic reactions, an increase in temperature decreases the equilibrium constant, &quot;K&quot;, whereas in endothermic reactions, an increase in temperature increases &quot;K&quot;.

Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle applied to changes in concentration or pressure can be understood by giving &quot;K&quot; a constant value. The effect of temperature on equilibria, however, involves a change in the equilibrium constant. The dependence of &quot;K&quot; on temperature is determined by the sign of Δ&quot;H&quot;. The theoretical basis of this dependence is given by the Van &#x27;t Hoff equation.

===Effect of change in pressure===
The equilibrium concentrations of the products and reactants do not directly depend on the total pressure of the system. They may depend on the partial pressure of the products and reactants, but if the number of moles of gaseous reactants is equal to the number of moles of gaseous products, pressure has no effect on equilibrium.

Changing total pressure by adding an inert gas at constant volume does not affect the equilibrium concentrations (see ).

Changing total pressure by changing the volume of the system changes the partial pressures of the products and reactants and can affect the equilibrium concentrations (see below).

===Effect of change in volume===
Changing the volume of the system changes the partial pressures of the products and reactants and can affect the equilibrium concentrations. With a pressure increase due to a decrease in volume, the side of the equilibrium with fewer moles is more favorable and with a pressure decrease due to an increase in volume, the side with more moles is more favorable. There is no effect on a reaction where the number of moles of gas is the same on each side of the chemical equation.

Considering the reaction of nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas to form ammonia:

: ⇌     ΔH = −92kJ mol−1

Note the number of moles of gas on the left-hand side and the number of moles of gas on the right-hand side. When the volume of the system is changed, the partial pressures of the gases change. If we were to decrease pressure by increasing volume, the equilibrium of the above reaction will shift to the left, because the reactant side has a greater number of moles than does the product side. The system tries to counteract the decrease in partial pressure of gas molecules by shifting to the side that exerts greater pressure. Similarly, if we were to increase pressure by decreasing volume, the equilibrium shifts to the right, counteracting the pressure increase by shifting to the side with fewer moles of gas that exert less pressure. If the volume is increased because there are more moles of gas on the reactant side, this change is more significant in the denominator of the equilibrium constant expression, causing a shift in equilibrium.
===Effect of adding an inert gas===
{{See also|#Effect of change in pressure}}
An inert gas (or noble gas), such as helium, is one that does not react with other elements or compounds. Adding an inert gas into a gas-phase equilibrium at constant volume does not result in a shift. This is because the addition of a non-reactive gas does not change the equilibrium equation, as the inert gas appears on both sides of the chemical reaction equation. For example, if A and B react to form C and D, but X does not participate in the reaction: &lt;chem&gt;\mathit{a}A{} + \mathit{b}B{} + \mathit{x}X &lt;=&gt; \mathit{c}C{} + \mathit{d}D{} + \mathit{x}X&lt;/chem&gt;. While it is true that the total pressure of the system increases, the total pressure does not have any effect on the equilibrium constant; rather, it is a change in partial pressures that will cause a shift in the equilibrium. If, however, the volume is allowed to increase in the process, the partial pressures of all gases would be decreased resulting in a shift towards the side with the greater number of moles of gas. The shift will never occur on the side with fewer moles of gas. It is also known as Le Chatelier&#x27;s postulate.

===Effect of a catalyst===
A catalyst increases the rate of a reaction without being consumed in the reaction. The use of a catalyst does not affect the position and composition of the equilibrium of a reaction, because both the forward and backward reactions are sped up by the same factor.

For example, consider the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia (NH3):

:N2 + 3 H2 ⇌ 2 NH3

In the above reaction, iron (Fe) and molybdenum (Mo) will function as catalysts if present. They will accelerate any reactions, but they do not affect the state of the equilibrium.

==General statements==
===Thermodynamic equilibrium processes===
Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle refers to states of thermodynamic equilibrium. The latter are stable against perturbations that satisfy certain criteria; this is essential to the definition of thermodynamic equilibrium.

OR

It states that changes in the temperature, pressure, volume, or concentration of a system will result in predictable and opposing changes in the system in order to achieve a new equilibrium state.

For this, a state of thermodynamic equilibrium is most conveniently described through a fundamental relation that specifies a cardinal function of state, of the energy kind, or of the entropy kind, as a function of state variables chosen to fit the thermodynamic operations through which a perturbation is to be applied.

In theory and, nearly, in some practical scenarios, a body can be in a stationary state with zero macroscopic flows and rates of chemical reaction (for example, when no suitable catalyst is present), yet not in thermodynamic equilibrium, because it is metastable or unstable; then Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle does not necessarily apply.

===Non-equilibrium processes===
A simple body or a complex thermodynamic system can also be in a stationary state with non-zero rates of flow and chemical reaction; sometimes the word &quot;equilibrium&quot; is used in reference to such a state, though by definition it is not a thermodynamic equilibrium state. Sometimes, it is proposed to consider Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle for such states. For this exercise, rates of flow and of chemical reaction must be considered. Such rates are not supplied by equilibrium thermodynamics. For such states, there are no simple statements that echo Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle. Prigogine and Defay demonstrate that such a scenario may exhibit moderation, or may exhibit a measured amount of anti-moderation, though not a run-away anti-moderation that goes to completion. The example analysed by Prigogine and Defay is the Haber process.

This situation is clarified by considering two basic methods of analysis of a process. One is the classical approach of Gibbs, the other uses the near- or local equilibrium approach of De Donder. The Gibbs approach requires thermodynamic equilibrium. The Gibbs approach is reliable within its proper scope, thermodynamic equilibrium, though of course it does not cover non-equilibrium scenarios. The De Donder approach can cover equilibrium scenarios, but also covers non-equilibrium scenarios in which there is only local thermodynamic equilibrium, and not thermodynamic equilibrium proper. The De Donder approach allows state variables called extents of reaction to be independent variables, though in the Gibbs approach, such variables are not independent. Thermodynamic non-equilibrium scenarios can contradict an over-general statement of Le Chatelier&#x27;s Principle.

==Related system concepts==
It is common to treat the principle as a more general observation of systems, such as

{{quote|&quot;When a settled system is disturbed, it will adjust to diminish the change that has been made to it.&quot;|author=|title=|source=}}

or, &quot;roughly stated&quot;:

{{quote|Any change in status quo prompts an opposing reaction in the responding system.}}

The concept of systemic maintenance of a stable steady state despite perturbations has a variety of names, and has been studied in a variety of contexts, chiefly in the natural sciences. In chemistry, the principle is used to manipulate the outcomes of reversible reactions, often to increase their yield. In pharmacology, the binding of ligands to receptors may shift the equilibrium according to Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle, thereby explaining the diverse phenomena of receptor activation and desensitization. In biology, the concept of homeostasis is different from Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle, in that homoeostasis is generally maintained by processes of active character, as distinct from the passive or dissipative character of the processes described by Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle in thermodynamics. In economics, even further from thermodynamics, allusion to the principle is sometimes regarded as helping explain the price equilibrium of efficient economic systems. In some dynamic systems, the end-state cannot be determined from the shock or perturbation.

==Economics==
In economics, a similar concept also named after Le Chatelier was introduced by American economist Paul Samuelson in 1947. There the generalized Le Chatelier principle is for a maximum condition of economic equilibrium: Where all unknowns of a function are independently variable, auxiliary constraints—&quot;just-binding&quot; in leaving initial equilibrium unchanged—reduce the response to a parameter change. Thus, factor-demand and commodity-supply elasticities are hypothesized to be lower in the short run than in the long run because of the fixed-cost constraint in the short run.

Since the change of the value of an objective function in a neighbourhood of the maximum position is described by the envelope theorem, Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle can be shown to be a corollary thereof.

==See also==
*Homeostasis
*Common-ion effect
*Response reactions

==References==
{{reflist}}
{{refbegin}}
{{refend}}

==Bibliography of cited sources==
*{{cite book | first = P.W. | last = Atkins | title = The Elements of Physical Chemistry | edition = 3rd | publisher = Oxford University Press | year = 1993 }}
*Bailyn, M. (1994). &quot;A Survey of Thermodynamics&quot;, American Institute of Physics Press, New York, {{ISBN|0-88318-797-3}}.
*Callen, H.B. (1960/1985). &quot;Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics&quot;, (1st edition 1960) 2nd edition 1985, Wiley, New York, {{ISBN|0-471-86256-8}}.
*Münster, A. (1970), &quot;Classical Thermodynamics&quot;, translated by E.S. Halberstadt, Wiley–Interscience, London, {{ISBN|0-471-62430-6}}.
*Prigogine, I., Defay, R. (1950/1954). &quot;Chemical Thermodynamics&quot;, translated by D.H. Everett, Longmans, Green &amp; Co, London.
*{{cite book|last=Samuelson|first=Paul A|title=Foundations of Economic Analysis|publisher=Harvard University Press|year=1983|isbn=0-674-31301-1|url-access=registration|url=https://archive.org/details/foundationsofeco0000samu}}

==External links==
*YouTube video of Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle and pressure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="12" end="43" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle" label=", Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="132" end="152" title="chemical equilibrium" label="chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="174" end="200" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="202" end="260" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Braun–Le Chatelier principle, Le Chatelier–Braun principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="268" end="283" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle" label="equilibrium law"/>
<link wikidata="Q121926" start="330" end="354" title="Henry Louis Le Chatelier" label="Henry Louis Le Chatelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q574862" start="428" end="453" title="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation" label="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q737004" start="565" end="583" title="chemical potential" label="chemical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q57077" start="616" end="636" title="Karl Ferdinand Braun" label="Karl Ferdinand Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q911916" start="1561" end="1570" title="Intensive and extensive properties" label="intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q911916" start="1582" end="1591" title="Intensive and extensive properties" label="extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380794" start="2696" end="2712" title="Entropy (energy dispersal)" label="spread of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="5509" end="5526" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q129302" start="5542" end="5547" title="Shock (mechanics)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380794" start="5722" end="5750" title="Entropy (energy dispersal)" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466686" start="5768" end="5782" title="Disequilibrium (thermodynamics)" label="disequilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="6012" end="6018" title="stress (mechanics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q331920" start="6182" end="6192" title="Shear pin" label="Shear pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397371" start="6208" end="6227" title="Sacrificial device" label="sacrificial devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="6917" end="6932" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="6937" end="6945" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="6968" end="6976" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6981" end="6982" title="Carbon" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6982" end="6983" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q907823" start="7506" end="7522" title="collision theory" label="collision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="7754" end="7767" title="thermodynamic" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="7852" end="7860" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q910058" start="7940" end="7961" title="condensation reaction" label="condensation reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="8054" end="8059" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q408057" start="8099" end="8104" title="imine" label="imine"/>
<link wikidata="Q910229" start="8246" end="8261" title="molecular sieve" label="molecular sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q902057" start="8338" end="8358" title="Dean–Stark apparatus" label="Dean-Stark apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="8645" end="8655" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="8765" end="8776" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q686980" start="9070" end="9089" title="reversible reaction" label="reversible reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="9093" end="9101" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="9111" end="9119" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="9132" end="9139" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="9194" end="9196" title="Kilojoule" label="kJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="9671" end="9684" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="9743" end="9750" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205949" start="9850" end="9869" title="exothermic reaction" label="exothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="9913" end="9933" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="9961" end="9981" title="endothermic reaction" label="endothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q574862" start="10421" end="10446" title="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation" label="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181328" start="10575" end="10589" title="Total pressure (fluids)" label="total pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q27165" start="10628" end="10644" title="partial pressure" label="partial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="11754" end="11759" title="mole (unit)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="12619" end="12639" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136680" start="12766" end="12775" title="inert gas" label="inert gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="12780" end="12789" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="12800" end="12806" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="13915" end="13923" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="14573" end="14598" title="thermodynamic equilibrium" label="thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q716915" start="14615" end="14621" title="Mechanical equilibrium" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="14776" end="14787" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="14789" end="14797" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="14799" end="14805" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="14810" end="14823" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="14924" end="14941" title="Thermodynamic equilibrium" label="equilibrium state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474109" start="15032" end="15052" title="Fundamental thermodynamic relation" label="fundamental relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="16473" end="16486" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315965" start="16532" end="16574" title="response reactions" label="two basic methods of analysis of a process"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="16609" end="16614" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q558384" start="16674" end="16683" title="Théophile de Donder" label="De Donder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17006" end="17037" title="Thermodynamic equilibrium#local and global equilibrium" label="local thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q899046" start="17134" end="17153" title="Extent of reaction" label="extents of reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="17462" end="17468" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="17681" end="17691" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="17919" end="17934" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q686980" start="18003" end="18022" title="reversible reaction" label="reversible reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q777948" start="18049" end="18054" title="Yield (chemistry)" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="18059" end="18071" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="18088" end="18095" title="Ligand (biochemistry)" label="ligands"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="18267" end="18274" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="18291" end="18302" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="18567" end="18576" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="18683" end="18700" title="Economic equilibrium" label="price equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18735" end="18755" title="Dynamical systems theory#Chaos theory" label="some dynamic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="18938" end="18952" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="19037" end="19057" title="economic equilibrium" label="economic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="19120" end="19141" title="Constraint (mathematics)" label="auxiliary constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q223639" start="19292" end="19304" title="Elasticity (economics)" label="elasticities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="19488" end="19501" title="Neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478371" start="19546" end="19562" title="envelope theorem" label="envelope theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343870" start="19615" end="19624" title="corollary" label="corollary"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="19649" end="19660" title="Homeostasis" label="Homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754887" start="19662" end="19679" title="Common-ion effect" label="Common-ion effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315965" start="19681" end="19699" title="Response reactions" label="Response reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608008" start="20079" end="20091" title="Herbert Callen" label="Callen, H.B."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37428" wikidata="Q3820" url="?curid=37428" title="Beirut">
<text>Beirut ( ; ) is the capital and largest city of Lebanon. , Greater Beirut has a population of 2.5 million, just under half of Lebanon&#x27;s population, which makes it the third-largest city in the Levant region and the sixteenth-largest in the Arab world. The city is situated on a peninsula at the midpoint of Lebanon&#x27;s Mediterranean coast. Beirut has been inhabited for more than 5,000 years, making it one of the oldest cities in the world.

Beirut is Lebanon&#x27;s seat of government and plays a central role in the Lebanese economy, with many banks and corporations based in the city. Beirut is an important seaport for the country and region, and rated a Beta + World City by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Beirut was severely damaged by the Lebanese Civil War, the 2006 Lebanon War, and the 2020 massive explosion in the Port of Beirut. Its architectural and demographic structure underwent major change in recent decades.

==Etymology==
The English name Beirut is an early transcription of the Arabic name (). The same name&#x27;s transcription into French is , which was sometimes used during Lebanon&#x27;s French mandate. The Arabic name derives from Phoenician &quot;bēʾrūt&quot; ( ). This was a modification of the Canaanite and Phoenician word later &quot;bēʾrūt&quot;, meaning &quot;wells&quot;, in reference to the site&#x27;s accessible water table. The name is first attested in the 14thcenturyBC, when it was mentioned in three Akkadian cuneiform tablets of the Amarna letters, letters sent by King Ammunira of &quot;Biruta&quot; to or of Egypt. &quot;Biruta&quot; was also mentioned in the Amarna letters from King Rib-Hadda of Byblos.

The Greeks hellenised the name as (), which the Romans latinised as . When it attained the status of a Roman colony, it was notionally refounded and its official name was emended to to include its imperial sponsors.

At the time of the crusades, the city was known in French as Barut or Baruth.

==History==

The earliest settlement of Beirut was on an island in the Beirut River, but the channel that separated it from the banks silted up and the island ceased to be. Excavations in the downtown area have unearthed layers of Phoenician, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, Arab, Crusader, Persian and Ottoman remains.

===Prehistory===
Beirut was settled over 5,000 years ago, and there is evidence that the surrounding area had already been inhabited for tens of thousands of years prior to this. Several prehistoric archaeological sites have been discovered within the urban area of Beirut, revealing flint tools from sequential periods dating from the Middle Palaeolithic and Upper Paleolithic through the Neolithic to the Bronze Age.

BeirutI (&quot;Minet el-Hosn&quot;) was listed as &quot;the town of Beirut&quot; () by Louis Burkhalter and said to be on the beach near the Orient and Bassoul hotels on the Avenue des Français in central Beirut. The site was discovered by Lortet in 1894 and discussed by Godefroy Zumoffen in 1900. The flint industry from the site was described as Mousterian and is held by the Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon.

BeirutII (&quot;Umm el-Khatib&quot;) was suggested by Burkhalter to have been south of Tarik el Jedideh, where P.E. Gigues discovered a Copper Age flint industry at around above sea level. The site had been built on and destroyed by 1948.

BeirutIII (&quot;Furn esh-Shebbak&quot;), listed as , was suggested to have been located on the left bank of the Beirut River. Burkhalter suggested that it was west of the Damascus road, although this determination has been criticized by Lorraine Copeland. P. E. Gigues discovered a series of Neolithic flint tools on the surface along with the remains of a structure suggested to be a hut circle. Auguste Bergy discussed polished axes that were also found at this site, which has now completely disappeared as a result of construction and urbanization of the area.

BeirutIV (&quot;Furn esh-Shebbak&quot;, river banks) was also on the left bank of the river and on either side of the road leading eastwards from the Furn esh Shebbak police station towards the river that marked the city limits. The area was covered in red sand that represented Quaternary river terraces. The site was found by Jesuit Father Dillenseger and published by fellow Jesuits Godefroy Zumoffen, Raoul Describes and Auguste Bergy. Collections from the site were made by Bergy, Describes and another Jesuit, Paul Bovier-Lapierre. Many Middle Paleolithic flint tools were found on the surface and in side gullies that drain into the river. They included around 50 varied bifaces accredited to the Acheulean period, some with a lustrous sheen, now held at the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory. Henri Fleisch also found an Emireh point amongst material from the site, which has now disappeared beneath buildings.

BeirutV (&quot;Nahr Beirut&quot;, Beirut River) was discovered by Dillenseger and said to be in an orchard of mulberry trees on the left bank of the river, near the river mouth, and to be close to the railway station and bridge to Tripoli. Levallois flints and bones and similar surface material were found amongst brecciated deposits. The area has now been built on.

BeirutVI (Patriarchate) was a site discovered while building on the property of the Lebanese Evangelical School for Girls in the Patriarchate area of Beirut. It was notable for the discovery of a finely styled Canaanean blade javelin suggested to date to the early or middle Neolithic periods of Byblos and which is held in the school library.

BeirutVII, the Rivoli Cinema and Byblos Cinema sites near the Bourj in the Rue el Arz area, are two sites discovered by Lorraine Copeland, Peter Wescombe, and Marina Hayek in 1964 and examined by Diana Kirkbride and Roger Saidah. One site was behind the parking lot of the Byblos Cinema and showed collapsed walls, pits, floors, charcoal, pottery and flints. The other, overlooking a cliff west of the Rivoli Cinema, was composed of three layers resting on limestone bedrock. Fragments of blades and broad flakes were recovered from the first layer of black soil, above which some Bronze Age pottery was recovered in a layer of grey soil. Pieces of Roman pottery and mosaics were found in the upper layer. Middle Bronze Age tombs were found in this area, and the ancient tell of Beirut is thought to be in the Bourj area.

===Phoenician period===

The Phoenician port of Beirut was located between Rue Foch and Rue Allenby on the north coast. The port or harbour was excavated and reported on several years ago and now lies buried under the city. Another suggested port or dry dock was claimed to have been discovered around to the west in 2011 by a team of Lebanese archaeologists from the Directorate General of Antiquities of Lebanese University. Controversy arose on 26 June 2012 when authorization was given by Lebanese Minister of Culture Gaby Layoun for a private company called Venus Towers Real Estate Development Company to destroy the ruins (archaeological site BEY194) in the $500 million construction project of three skyscrapers and a garden behind Hotel Monroe in downtown Beirut. Two later reports by an international committee of archaeologists appointed by Layoun, including Hanz Curver, and an expert report by Ralph Pederson, a member of the institute of Nautical Archaeology and now teaching in Marburg, Germany, dismissed the claims that the trenches were a port, on various criteria. The exact function of site BEY194 may never be known, and the issue raised heated emotions and led to increased coverage on the subject of Lebanese heritage in the press.

===Hellenistic period===
In 140BC, the Phoenician city was destroyed by Diodotus Tryphon during his conflict with Antiochus VII Sidetes for the throne of the Hellenistic Seleucid monarchy. Laodicea in Phoenicia was built upon the same site on a more conventional Hellenistic plan. Present-day Beirut overlies this ancient one, and little archaeology was carried out until after the civil war in 1991. The salvage excavations after 1993 have yielded new insights into the layout and history of this period of Beirut&#x27;s history. Public architecture included several areas and buildings.

Mid-1st-century coins from Berytus bear the head of Tyche, goddess of fortune; on the reverse, the city&#x27;s symbol appears: a dolphin entwines an anchor. This symbol was later taken up by the early printer Aldus Manutius in 15th century Venice. After a state of civil war and decline the Seleucid Empire faced, King Tigranes the Great of the Kingdom of Armenia conquered Beirut and placed it under effective Armenian control. However, after the Battle of Tigranocerta, Armenia forever lost their holdings in Syria and Beirut was conquered by Roman general Pompey.

=== Roman period ===
Laodicea was conquered by Pompey in 64 BC and the name Berytus was restored to it. The city was assimilated into the Roman Empire, soldiers were sent there, and large building projects were undertaken. From the 1st century BC, the Bekaa Valley served as a source of grain for the Roman provinces of the Levant and even for Rome itself. Under Claudius, Berytus expanded to reach the Bekaa Valley and include Heliopolis (Baalbek). The city was settled by Roman colonists who promoted agriculture in the region.

As a result of this settlement, the city quickly became Romanized, and the city became the only mainly Latin-speaking area in the Syria-Phoenicia province. In 14BC, during the reign of Herod the Great, Berytus became a colony, one of four in the Syria-Phoenicia region and the only one with full Italian rights (&quot;&quot;) exempting its citizens from imperial taxation. Beirut was considered the most Roman city in the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire. Furthermore, the veterans of two Roman legions were established in the city of Berytus by emperor Augustus: the 5th Macedonian and the 3rd Gallic Legions.

Berytus&#x27;s law school was widely known; two of Rome&#x27;s most famous jurists, Papinian and Ulpian, were natives of Phoenicia and taught there under the Severan emperors. Ecclesiastical historian Sozomen studied at the law school in Beirut between 400-402. When Justinian assembled his &quot;Pandects&quot; in the 6th century, a large part of the corpus of laws was derived from these two jurists, and in AD533 Justinian recognised the school as one of the three official law schools of the empire.

In 551, a major earthquake struck Berytus, causing widespread damage. The earthquake reduced cities along the coast to ruins and killed many, 30,000 in Berytus alone by some measurements. As a result, the students of the law school were transferred to Sidon.

Salvage excavations since 1993 have yielded new insights in the layout and history of Roman Berytus. Public architecture included several bath complexes, Colonnaded Streets, a circus and theatre; residential areas were excavated in the Garden of Forgiveness, Martyrs&#x27; Square and the Beirut Souks.

===Middle Ages===
Beirut was conquered by the Muslims in 635. Prince Arslan bin al-Mundhir founded the Principality of Sin el Fil in Beirut in 759. From this principality developed the later Principality of Mount Lebanon, which was the basis for the establishment of Greater Lebanon, today&#x27;s Lebanon. As a trading center of the eastern Mediterranean, Beirut was as important as Acre (in modern-day Israel) during the Middle Ages. From 1110 to 1291, the town and Lordship of Beirut was part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The city was taken by Saladin in 1187 and recaptured in 1197 by Henry I of Brabant as part of the German Crusade of 1197. John of Ibelin, known as the Old Lord of Beirut, was granted the lordship of the city in 1204. He rebuilt the city after its destruction by the Ayyubids and also built the House of Ibelin palace in Beirut.

In 1291 Beirut was captured and the Crusaders expelled by the Mamluk army of Sultan al-Ashraf Khalil.

===Ottoman rule===

Under the Ottoman sultan Selim I (1512–1520), the Ottomans conquered Syria including present-day Lebanon. Beirut was controlled by local Druze emirs throughout the Ottoman period. One of them, Fakhr-al-Din II, fortified it early in the 17th century, but the Ottomans reclaimed it in 1763. With the help of Damascus, Beirut successfully broke Acre&#x27;s monopoly on Syrian maritime trade and for a few years supplanted it as the main trading center in the region. During the succeeding epoch of rebellion against Ottoman hegemony in Acre under Jezzar Pasha and Abdullah Pasha, Beirut declined to a small town with a population of about 10,000 and was an object of contention between the Ottomans, the local Druze, and the Mamluks. After Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt captured Acre in 1832, Beirut began its revival.

After the Albanian fighter Tafil Buzi was interned and then pardoned by the Ottoman administration for his constant uprisings, he raised 3,000 Albanian mercenaries to fight in Lebanon; some of them became notorious shortly afterwards for having been responsible for the widespread disorders in Beirut.

By the second half of the nineteenth century, Beirut was developing close commercial and political ties with European imperial powers, particularly France. European interests in Lebanese silk and other export products transformed the city into a major port and commercial center. This boom in cross-regional trade allowed certain groups, such as the Sursock family, to establish trade and manufacturing empires that further strengthened Beirut&#x27;s position as a key partner in the interests of imperial dynasties. Meanwhile, Ottoman power in the region continued to decline. Sectarian and religious conflicts, power vacuums, and changes in the political dynamics of the region culminated in the 1860 Lebanon conflict. Beirut became a destination for Maronite Christian refugees fleeing from the worst areas of the fighting on Mount Lebanon and in Damascus. This in turn altered the religious composition of Beirut itself, sowing the seeds of future sectarian and religious troubles there and in greater Lebanon. However, Beirut was able to prosper in the meantime. This was again a product of European intervention, and also a general realization amongst the city&#x27;s residents that commerce, trade, and prosperity depended on domestic stability. After petitions by the local bourgeois, the governor of Syria Vilayet Mehmed Rashid Pasha authorized the establishment of the Beirut Municipal Council, the first municipality established in the Arab provinces of the Empire. The council was elected by an assembly of city notables and played an instrumental role governing the city through the following decades.

====Vilayet of Beirut====
In 1888, Beirut was made capital of a vilayet (governorate) in Syria, including the sanjaks (prefectures) Latakia, Tripoli, Beirut, Acre and Bekaa. By this time, Beirut had grown into a cosmopolitan city and had close links with Europe and the United States. It also became a centre of missionary activity that spawned educational institutions such as the American University of Beirut. Provided with water from a British company and gas from a French one, silk exports to Europe came to dominate the local economy. After French engineers established a modern harbour in 1894 and a rail link across Lebanon to Damascus and Aleppo in 1907, much of the trade was carried by French ships to Marseille. French influence in the area soon exceeded that of any other European power. Though French infrastructure investments in the region were supportive, the local merchant elites were able to independently maintain economic power even after the end of the First World War. In contrast, although Beirut was not the only city to receive French attention in this time, it was able to leverage its critical position to its advantage over others (e.g. Damascus). The 1911 &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; reported a population consisting of 36,000 Muslims, 77,000 Christians, 2,500 Jews, 400 Druze and 4,100 foreigners. At the start of the 20th century, Salim Ali Salam was one of the most prominent figures in Beirut, holding numerous public positions including deputy from Beirut to the Ottoman parliament and President of the Municipality of Beirut. Given his modern way of life, the emergence of Salim Ali Salam as a public figure constituted a transformation in terms of the social development of the city.
In his 2003 book entitled &quot;Beirut and its Seven Families&quot;, Yussef Bin Ahmad Bin Ali Al Husseini says:

===Modern era===

====Capital of Lebanon====

After World War I and the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, Beirut, along with the rest of Lebanon, was placed under the French Mandate. Lebanon achieved independence in 1943, and Beirut became the capital city. The city remained a regional intellectual capital, becoming a major tourist destination and a banking haven, especially for the Persian Gulf oil boom.

Beirut International Airport was opened on 23 April 1954.

This era of relative prosperity ended in 1975 when the Lebanese Civil War broke out throughout the country, During most of the war, Beirut was divided between the Muslim west part and the Christian east. The downtown area, previously the home of much of the city&#x27;s commercial and cultural activity, became a no man&#x27;s land known as the Green Line. Many inhabitants fled to other countries. About 60,000 people died in the first two years of the war (1975–1976), and much of the city was devastated. A particularly destructive period was the 1978 Syrian siege of Achrafiyeh, the main Christian district of Beirut. Syrian troops relentlessly shelled the eastern quarter of the city, but Christian militias defeated multiple attempts by Syria&#x27;s elite forces to capture the strategic area in a three-month campaign later known as the Hundred Days&#x27; War.

Another destructive chapter was the 1982 Lebanon War, during which most of West Beirut was under siege by Israeli troops. In 1983, French and US barracks were bombed, killing 241 American servicemen, 58 French servicemen, six civilians and the two suicide bombers.

Between 1989 and 1990 parts on East Beirut were destroyed in fighting between Lebanese army units loyal to General Aoun and Samir Geagea&#x27;s Maronite Christian Lebanese Forces with the Syrian Armed Forces-backed Elias Hrawi and Salim Al-Huss Lebanese army forces.

Since the end of the war in 1990, the people of Lebanon have been rebuilding Beirut, whose urban agglomeration was mainly constituted during war time through an anarchic urban development stretching along the littoral corridor and its nearby heights. By the start of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict the city had somewhat regained its status as a tourist, cultural and intellectual centre in the Middle East and as a center for commerce, fashion, and media. The reconstruction of downtown Beirut has been largely driven by Solidere, a development company established in 1994 by Prime Minister Rafic Hariri. The city has hosted both the Asian Club Basketball Championship and the Asian Football Cup, and has hosted the Miss Europe pageant nine times: 1960–1964, 1999, 2001–2002, and 2016.

Rafic Hariri was assassinated in 2005 near the Saint George Hotel in Beirut. A month later about one million people gathered for an opposition rally in Beirut. The Cedar Revolution was the largest rally in Lebanon&#x27;s history at that time. The last Syrian troops withdrew from Beirut on 26 April 2005, and the two countries established diplomatic relations on 15 October 2008.

During the 2006 Lebanon War, Israeli bombardment caused damage in many parts of Beirut, especially the predominantly Shiite southern suburbs of Beirut. On 12 July 2006, the &quot;Operation Truthful Promise&quot; carried out by Hezbollah ended with 8 Israeli deaths and 6 injuries. In response, the IDF targeted Hezbollah&#x27;s main media outlets. There were then artillery raids against targets in southern Lebanon, and the Israeli cabinet held Beirut responsible for the attacks. Then on 13 July 2006 Israel began implementing a naval and air blockade over Lebanon; during this blockade Israel bombed the runways at Beirut International Airport and the major Beirut-Damascus highway in Eastern Lebanon.

In May 2008, after the government decided to disband Hezbollah&#x27;s communications network (a decision it later rescinded), violent clashes broke out briefly between government allies and opposition forces, before control of the city was handed over to the Lebanese Army. After this a national dialogue conference was held in Doha at the invitation of the Prince of Qatar. The conference agreed to appoint a new president of Lebanon and to establish a new national government involving all the political adversaries. As a result of the Doha Agreement, the opposition&#x27;s barricades were dismantled and so were the opposition&#x27;s protest camps in Martyrs&#x27; Square. On 19 October 2012, a car bomb killed eight people in the Beirut&#x27;s neighborhood of Achrafiyeh, including Brigadier General Wissam al-Hassan, chief of the Intelligence Bureau of the Internal Security Forces. In addition, 78 others were wounded in the bombing. It was the largest attack in the capital since 2008. On 27 December 2013, a car bomb exploded in the Central District killing at least five people, including the former Lebanese ambassador to the U.S. Mohamad Chatah, and wounding 71 others.

In the 12 November 2015 Beirut bombings, two suicide bombers detonated explosives outside a mosque and inside a bakery, killing 43 people and injuring 200. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant immediately claimed responsibility for the attacks.

On 4 August 2020, a massive explosion in the Port of Beirut resulted in the death of at least 203 people (with an additional three missing) and the wounding of more than 6,500. Foreigners from at least 22 countries were among the casualties. Furthermore, at least 108 Bangladeshis were injured in the blasts, making them the most affected foreign community. The cause of the blast is believed to be from government-confiscated and stored ammonium nitrate. As many as 300,000 people have been left homeless by the explosion. Protesters in Lebanon called on the government on 8 August 2020 for the end of the alleged negligence that resulted in the 4 August explosion. On 10 August 2020, as a result of the protests, Prime Minister Hassan Diab announced his resignation. Weeks later, a huge fire erupted in an oil and tyre warehouse in the port&#x27;s duty-free zone, on 10 September 2020.

==Geography==
Beirut sits on a peninsula extending westward into the Mediterranean Sea. It is flanked by the Lebanon Mountains and has taken on a triangular shape, largely influenced by its situation between and atop two hills: Al-Ashrafieh and Al-Musaytibah. The Beirut Governorate occupies , and the city&#x27;s metropolitan area . The coast is rather diverse, with rocky beaches, sandy shores and cliffs situated beside one another.

===Climate===
Beirut has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: &quot;Csa&quot;, bordering on &quot;As&quot;, Trewartha: &quot;Csal&quot;) characterized by mild days and nights, as its coastal location allows temperatures to be moderated by the sea. Autumn and spring are warm, but short. Winter is mild and rainy; frost has never been recorded. Summer is prolonged, hot and humid. The prevailing wind during the afternoon and evening is from the west (onshore, blowing in from the Mediterranean); at night it reverses to offshore, blowing from the land out to sea.

The average annual rainfall is , with the large majority of it falling from October to April. Much of the autumn and spring rain falls in heavy downpours on a limited number of days, but in winter it is spread more evenly over many days. Summer receives very little rainfall, if any. Snow is rare, except in the mountainous eastern suburbs, where snowfall occurs due to the region&#x27;s high altitudes. Hail (which can often be heavy) occurs a few times per year, mostly during winter.

===Environmental issues===
Lebanon, especially Beirut and its suburbs, suffered a massive garbage crisis, mainly from July 2015 up to March 2016. The issue began when authorities shut down the main landfill site originally used for Beirut&#x27;s garbage south-east of the city and failed to provide any alternative solutions for months. As a result, garbage mounted in the streets in Greater Beirut and caused protests to erupt, which sometimes invoked police action. This problem was commonly blamed on the country&#x27;s political situation. This garbage crisis birthed a movement called &quot;You Stink&quot; which was directed at the country&#x27;s politicians. In March 2016, the government came up with a so-called temporary solution to establish two new landfills East and South of the city to store the garbage, while several municipalities across the country, in an unprecedented move, began recycling and managing waste more efficiently, building waste-management facilities and relying on themselves rather than the central government. Moreover, Beirut has a lack of green areas with just two main public gardens (sanayeh and horch Beirut). In fact, concrete roofs cover 80% of the capital area.

===Quarters and sectors===
Beirut is divided into 12 quarters ():
* Achrafieh
* Dar Mreisse 
* Bachoura
* Mazraa (with the neighbourhood Badaro)
* Medawar (with the neighbourhood Mar Mikhaël)
* Minet El Hosn
* Moussaitbeh (with Ramlet al-Baida)
* Port
* Ras Beirut
* Rmeil
* Saifi
* Zuqaq al-Blat

These quarters are divided into 59 sectors ().

Badaro is an edgy, bohemian style neighborhood, within the green district of Beirut () which also include the Beirut Hippodrome and the Beirut Pine Forest and the French ambassador&#x27;s Pine Residence. It is one of Beirut&#x27;s favorite hip nightlife destination.

Two of the twelve official Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon are located in the southern suburbs of Beirut: Bourj el-Barajneh and Shatila. There is also one within its municipal boundaries: Mar Elias.
Southern suburban districts include Chiyah, Ghobeiry (Bir Hassan, Jnah and Ouzai are part of the Ghobeiry municipality), Haret Hreik, Burj al Barajneh, Laylake-Mreijeh, Hay al Sillum and Hadath. Eastern suburbs include Burj Hammoud, Sin el Fil, Dekwane and Mkalles. Hazmiyeh is also considered as an eastern suburb with its close proximity to the capital. Of the 15 unregistered or unofficial refugee camps, Sabra, which lies adjacent to Shatila, is also located in southern Beirut and was the scene of a massacre during the civil war.

People in Lebanon often use different names for the same geographic locations, and few people rely on official, government-provided street numbers. Instead, historic and commercial landmarks are more commonly used.

==Demographics==
No population census has been taken in Lebanon since 1932, but estimates of Beirut&#x27;s population range from as low as 938,940 through 1,303,129 to as high as 2,200,000 as part of Greater Beirut.

===Religion===


Beirut is one of the most cosmopolitan and religiously diverse cities of Lebanon and all of the Middle East. Before the civil war the neighborhoods of Beirut were fairly heterogeneous, but they became largely segregated by religion since the conflict. East Beirut has a mainly Christian population with a small Muslim minority, whilst West Beirut has a Sunni Muslim majority with small minorities of Shia, Christians and Druze. Since the end of the civil war, East and West Beirut have begun to see an increase in Muslims and Christians moving into each half. Christians comprise 35% of Beirut&#x27;s population, Muslims 63%, Druze 1%, and others 1%.

Family matters such as marriage, divorce and inheritance are still handled by the religious authorities representing a person&#x27;s faith (the Ottoman &quot;millet&quot; system). Calls for civil marriage are unanimously rejected by the religious authorities, but civil marriages held in another country are recognized by Lebanese civil authorities.

==Beirut Central District==

The Beirut Central District (BCD) or &quot;Centre Ville&quot; is the name given to Beirut&#x27;s historical and geographical core by &quot;Solidere&quot;, the &quot;vibrant financial, commercial, and administrative hub of the country&quot;. It is an area thousands of years old, traditionally a focus of business, finance, culture and leisure. Its reconstruction constitutes one of the most ambitious contemporary urban developments. Due to the devastation incurred on the city center from the Lebanese Civil War, the Beirut Central District underwent a thorough reconstruction and development plan that gave it back its cultural and economic position in the region. Ever since, Beirut Central District has evolved into an integrated business and commercial environment and the focus of the financial activity in the region. That evolution was accompanied with the relocation of international organizations, reoccupation of civic and government buildings, expansion of financial activities, and establishment of regional headquarters and global firms in the city center.
Assessment of the demand for build-up space in the BCD has been done in reference to a number of macro-economic, demographic, and urban planning considerations at a time of marked need for new activity poles in the city, such as Souks, financial, cultural and recreational centers. The district&#x27;s total area is , the majority of which is dedicated to residential space (). The Beirut Central District contains over 60 gardens, squares and open spaces. These spaces comprise landscaped streets, gardens, historical squares, pedestrian areas and sea promenades thus totaling to an area of of open spaces.

The central district is Lebanon&#x27;s prime location for shopping, entertainment, and dining. There are over 100 cafes, restaurants, pubs and nightclubs open in the Beirut Central District, and over 350 retail outlets distributed along its streets and quarters. Beirut Souks alone are home to over 200 stores and a handful of restaurants and cafes. Beirut Souks are the Central District&#x27;s old medieval market, recently renovated along with the original Hellenistic street grid that characterized the old souks and the area&#x27;s historical landmarks along long vaulted shopping alleys and arcades. Solidere, the company responsible for the reconstruction and renovation of the district, organizes music and entertainment events all throughout the year like the Beirut Marathon, Fête de la Musique, Beirut Jazz Festival.

However, the means of urban development in this particular area of the city was subject to much criticism and controversy. Rafic Hariri, who would later become prime minister, was the majority stakeholder of the company, which raises concerns of conflict of interest in the context of a public-private partnership. Many of the expropriations that have made the project possible have been made at undervalued land rates, and partly paid in company share. Strict urbanization laws were put in order to oblige people to sell and not renovate themselves. Today, Solidere acts as a de facto municipality, thus this quarter of the city is effectively privatized. It is for example forbidden to ride bikes on Zeituna Bay, a marina where many restaurants are located, and these laws are enforced by private security guards not national or municipal police.

The project was also criticized for destroying some of the city&#x27;s architectural and cultural heritage. &quot;Among the hundreds of destroyed buildings were &quot;the last Ottoman and medieval remains in Beirut&quot; wrote American University of Beirut professor Nabil Beyhum in the &quot;Journal The Beirut Review&quot; in 1992. Much of the damage had been done through unapproved demolitions in the 1980s and early 1990s, bringing down &quot;some of the capital&#x27;s most significant buildings and structures,&quot; wrote UCLA professor Saree Makdisi in the journal, Critical Inquiry, in 1997.&quot;. Moreover, many of the traditional privately owned shops in the Beirut Downtown were replaced by luxury outlets and high-end restaurants that only few people could afford. And most of public spaces promised by Solidere since the start of the reconstruction, such as &quot;The Garden of Forgiveness&quot;, a central park, and an archaeological museum, remain unfinished until today, putting into question the actual benefit of the project to the population.

The actual success of the project has recently been in doubt, given that large quarters of the BCD are today empty, due to strong military presence, the Nejmeh Square where the parliament is located is most frequently completely deserted, and the businesses located there have mostly moved.

==Economy==

Beirut&#x27;s economy is service-oriented with the main growth sectors being banking and tourism.

Beirut became a banking hub by leveraging its position as a commercial port and cultural center within the world economy. Under French mandate after World War I, France heavily invested in the city, reinforcing its role as a regional financial center. The Open Door Policy facilitated foreign capital inflows, with French firms dominating investments and four of Beirut&#x27;s five leading banks being French-owned by the 1920s, after which the city further solidified its status as a key financial link between the West and the decolonizing Middle East.

In an area dominated by authoritarian or militarist regimes, the Lebanese capital was generally regarded as a haven of libertarianism, though a precarious one, as the Lebanese Civil War (1975-1990) and subsequent conflicts significantly altered the political landscape. With its seaport and airport—coupled with Lebanon&#x27;s free economic and foreign exchange system, solid gold-backed currency, banking-secrecy law, and favorable interest rates—Beirut became an established banking center for Arab wealth, much of which was invested in construction, commercial enterprise, and industry (mostly the manufacture of textiles and shoes, food processing, and printing). The economy of Beirut is diverse, including publishing, banking, trade and various industries. During that period, Beirut was the region&#x27;s financial services center. At the onset of the oil boom starting in the 1960s, Lebanon-based banks were the main recipients of the region&#x27;s petrodollars.

Beirut is the focal point of the Economy of Lebanon. The capital hosts the headquarters of Banque du Liban (Lebanon&#x27;s central bank), the Beirut Stock Exchange, the head office of Lebanon&#x27;s flag-carrier Middle East Airlines, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, the Union of Arab Banks, and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges.

===Banking and finance===
The banking system is the backbone of the local economy with a balance sheet of $152 billion at the end of 2012, nearing 3.5 times the GDP estimated at $43 billion by the IMF. Bank deposits also increased in 2012 by 8% to 125 billion dollars, 82 percent of the sector&#x27;s assets. &quot;Banks are still attracting deposits because the interest rates offered are higher than the ones in Europe and the United States&quot;, says Marwan Mikhael, head of research at BLOM Bank.

Beirut&#x27;s foreign reserves were still close to an all-time high when they reached $32.5 billion in 2011 and analysts say that the Central Bank can cover nearly 80 percent of the Lebanese currency in the market. This means that the Central Bank can easily cope with any unforeseen crisis in the future thanks to the massive foreign currency reserves.

The Lebanese banking system is endowed with several characteristics that promote the role of Beirut as a regional financial center, in terms of ensuring protection for foreign capital and earnings. The Lebanese currency is fully convertible and can be exchanged freely with any other currency. Moreover, no restrictions are put on the free flow of capital and earnings into and out of the Lebanese economy. The passing of the banking secrecy law on 3 September 1956, subjected all banks established in Lebanon as well as foreign banks&#x27; branches to the &quot;secret of the profession&quot;. Both article 16 of law No. 282 dated 30 December 1993 and article 12 of decree No. 5451 dated 26 August 1994, offer exemptions from income tax on all interest and revenues earned on all types of accounts opened in Lebanese banks. On the first of April 1975, decree No. 29 established a free banking zone by granting the Lebanese government the right to exempt non-residents&#x27; deposits and liabilities in foreign currency from: the income tax on interest earned, the required reserves imposed by the Banque Du Liban by virtue of article 76 of the Code of Money and Credit, the premium of deposit guarantee imposed on bank deposits to the profit of the National Deposit Guarantee Institution.

===Tourism===

The tourism industry in Beirut has been historically important to the local economy and remains to this day to be a major source of revenue for the city, and Lebanon in general. Before the Lebanese Civil War, Beirut was widely regarded as the &quot;Paris of the Middle East&quot;, and also &quot;Switzerland of the Middle East&quot;, often cited as a financial and business hub where visitors could experience the Levantine Mediterranean culture. Beirut&#x27;s diverse atmosphere and ancient history make it an important destination which is slowly rebuilding itself after continued turmoil. However, in recent times, certain countries, such as the United States, have frequently placed Lebanon, and Beirut in particular, on their travel warnings lists due to the many car bombings and orchestrated acts of political violence.

According to the 2012 tourist statistics, 34% of the tourists in Beirut came from states within the Arab League, 33% came from European countries (mainly France, Germany, and Britain), and 16% from the Americas (about half of which are from the United States).

The largely pedestrianized Beirut Central District is the core of the Beirut tourism scene. The district is a cluster of stone-façade buildings lining arcaded streets and radial alleyways. The architecture of the area is a mix of French Architecture and Venetian Gothic architecture mixed with Arabesque and Ottoman Architecture. The district contains numerous old mosques and crusader churches, as well as uncovered remnants and ruins of the Roman era. The District contains dozens of restaurants, cafes and pubs, as well as a wide range of shopping stores mainly in Beirut Souks. High-rise hotels and towers line the district&#x27;s New Waterfront, marina and seaside promenade.

Another popular tourist destination in Beirut is the Corniche Beirut, a pedestrian promenade that encircles the capital&#x27;s seafront from the Saint George Bay in the north all the way to Avenue de Paris and Avenue General de Gaulle south of the city. The corniche reaches its maximum height above sea level at Raouché, a high-rise residential neighbourhood rising over a giant white limestone cliff and facing the recognisable off-shore Raouché Rocks.

Badaro is one of Beirut&#x27;s most appealing neighborhoods, a lovely place to stroll during daytime and a destination for going out in the evening. Badaro is within Beirut&#x27;s green district with a public park (The Beirut Pine forest) and a hippodrome. It is a neighborhood on a very human scale with small groceries around every corner. The neighborhood residents, a mix of old impoverished Christian bourgeoisie, bohemian style people in their 30s and well-established urban professionals, are loyal to local bakery and pastry shops. Because of the blossoming café and bar scene it has become lately a hip destination for Beirut&#x27;s young and restless but old Beirutis remember that Badaro was already Beirut&#x27;s version of the Village in the swinging sixties. Groceries and eateries can be found on almost every street of the area. There are dozens of restaurants, pubs and footpath cafés of virtually every style. Badaro &quot;Village&quot; thrives on local residents, day-trippers and hipsters from all over Beirut, office employees and many expatriates.

Hamra Street is a long cobblestone street connecting the Beirut Central District with the coastal Raouche area. The street is a large concentration of shopping stores, boutiques, restaurants, banks, street vendors, footpath cafes, newspaper kiosks, and a booming nightlife spurred by students from the neighboring American University of Beirut. The AUB campus is another popular visitor destination, composed of a cluster of 19th century red-roofed buildings dispersed on a wooded hillside overlooking the Mediterranean.

Gemmayzeh is Beirut&#x27;s artistic bohemian quarter, full of narrow streets and historic buildings from the French era. It is located East of the Beirut Central District, bordering the Saifi Village. The neighborhood is well known for its trendy bars and pubs, cafes, restaurants and lounges; most are directly located on Rue Gouraud, the main thoroughfare that cuts through the middle of the district. Travel + Leisure magazine called Gemmayzeh &quot;SoHo by the Sea,&quot; due to its colorful and chic cafés amid 1950s apartment buildings and hole-in-the-wall shops. However, Gemmayzeh received the most damage by the Beirut explosion in 2020.
 
Beirut is a destination for tourists from both the Arab world and West. In &quot;Travel + Leisure&quot; magazine&#x27;s World Best Awards 2006, it was ranked the 9th best city in the world. That list was voted upon shortly before the 2006 Lebanon War broke out, but in 2008 &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed Beirut as one of its top ten cities in the world. &quot;The New York Times&quot; ranked it at number one on its &quot;44 places to go&quot; list of 2009. 2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totaling $6.5 billion. Beirut was chosen in 2012 by Condé Nast Traveller as the best city in the Middle East, beating Tel Aviv and Dubai.

Many of the tourists are returning Lebanese expatriates, but many are from Western countries. Approximately 3 million visitors visited in 2010; the previous record was 1.4 million in 1974.

Like other forms of tourism, medical tourism in Lebanon is on the rise recently. Although visitors from neighboring Arab nations make up the bulk of medical tourism patients here due to its proximity, Beirut is strongly trying to woo more Southern Europeans, Asians and North Americans to its land. Its Agency for Investment Development in Lebanon reports that growth in the medical tourism industry is growing by up to 30% a year since 2009. The country&#x27;s tourism ministry is working closely with the medical sector and top-class hotels to create an organized, quality medical destination. Major hotel and spa chains work with local clinics, travel agencies and the tourism ministry to create comprehensive healthcare and recuperation packages for foreign visitors. The government is highly involved in this industry and strives to make the process as easy as possible.
Cosmetic surgery is a major component of medical tourism in Lebanon. Most of the foreign patients come for routine operations like plastic surgery, dental or eye surgery, and Beirut&#x27;s hospitals are also capable of performing specialized procedures such as internal bypass surgery and other technical treatments. Its top clinics and hospitals like Sahel General are equipped to handle the full range of surgical procedures. Beirut-based Clemenceau Medical Center (CMC), affiliated with Johns Hopkins International, was ranked one of the world&#x27;s top ten best hospitals for medical tourism in 2012.

==Government==
Beirut is the capital of Lebanon and its seat of government. The Lebanese Parliament, all the Ministries and most of the public administrations, embassies and consulates are there. Beirut Governorate is one of eight &quot;mohafazat&quot; (plural of &quot;mohafazah&quot;, or governorate).

===International organizations===
The city is home to numerous international organizations. The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) is headquartered in downtown Beirut, The Arab Air Carriers&#x27; Organization (AACO), the Union of Arab Banks and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges and the World youth alliance are also headquartered in the city. The International Labour Organization (ILO) and UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) both have regional offices in Beirut covering the Arab world.

==Education==
Higher education throughout Lebanon is provided by universities, colleges and technical and vocational institutes. The Directorate General of Higher Education is responsible for managing universities, colleges, and institutes in Beirut and nationwide.

The American University of Beirut (AUB) and Université Saint-Joseph (USJ) are the oldest English-language and French-language universities in the country, respectively. AUB was founded in 1866, and USJ in 1875. The Lebanese University is the only public institution for higher education in Beirut. Beirut is also home to Lebanese American University (LAU), American University of Science and Technology (AUST), University of Balamand, École Supérieure des Affaires (ESA), Beirut Arab University (BAU), Haigazian University (HU), Lebanese International University (LIU), Notre Dame University – Louaize (NDU), and Université La Sagesse (ULS).

Among the private secondary schools in Beirut are Lycee Abdel Kader, Grand Lycée Franco-Libanais, Lycée Franco-Libanais Verdun, American Community School, International College, Collège Louise Wegmann, Rawdah High School, Saint Mary&#x27;s Orthodox College, Collège Notre Dame de Nazareth, Collège du Sacré-Coeur Gemmayzé, Collège Protestant Français, Armenian Evangelical Central High School, German School of Beirut, and the Armenian Hamazkayin Arslanian College.

==Transportation==
The city&#x27;s renovated airport is the Rafic Hariri International Airport, located in the southern suburbs. The Port of Beirut, one of the largest and most commercial in the eastern Mediterranean, is another port of entry. As a final destination, Lebanon can be reached by road from Damascus via the Beqaa valley in the east.

Beirut has frequent bus connections to other cities in Lebanon and major cities in Syria such as Homs and its capital Damascus. There are a number of different companies providing public transport in Lebanon. The publicly owned buses are managed by Office des Chemins de Fer et des Transports en Commun (OCFTC – &quot;Railway and Public Transportation Authority&quot;). Buses for northern destinations and Syria leave from Charles Helou Station.

The ministry of transport and public works purchased an extra 250 intra and inter-buses in 2012 to better serve regions outside the capital as well as congestion-choked Beirut, hoping to lessen the use of private cars.

Beirut has also private buses that are provided by the Lebanese Commuting Company.

In 2017, Beirut introduced a bike sharing service in certain areas of the city.

==Culture==

The culture of Beirut has evolved under the influence of many different peoples and civilizations, such as Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Ottoman Turks and French. The law school in downtown Beirut was one of the world&#x27;s earliest and was considered to be a leading center of legal studies in the Eastern Roman Empire.

Beirut hosted the Francophonie and Arab League summits in 2002, and in 2007 it hosted the ceremony for the Prix Albert Londres, which rewards outstanding francophone journalists every year. The city also hosted the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009. In the same year, it was proclaimed World Book Capital by UNESCO.

Beirut has also been called the &quot;party capital of the Arab world&quot;. Rue Monnot has an international reputation among clubbers, and Rue Gouraud in districts such as Gemmayze and Mar Mikhael have emerged as new hotspots for bar patrons and clubbers, as well as &quot;The Alleyway&quot; in Hamra Street.

===Museums===
The National Museum of Beirut is the principal museum of archaeology in Lebanon. It has about 1,300 exhibits ranging in date from prehistoric times to the medieval Mamluk period. The Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut is the third-oldest museum in the Middle East, exhibiting a wide range of artefacts from Lebanon and neighboring countries. Sursock Museum was built by the illustrious Sursock family at the end of the 19th century as a private villa for Nicolas Sursock, and then donated to the Lebanese state upon his death. It now houses Beirut&#x27;s most influential and popular art museum. The permanent collection shows a set of Japanese engravings, numerous works of Islamic art and classic Italian paintings, while temporary exhibitions are also shown throughout the year. The Robert Mouawad Private Museum near Beirut&#x27;s Grand Serail exhibits Henri Pharaon&#x27;s private collection of archaeology and antiques.

Planet Discovery is a children&#x27;s science museum with interactive experiments, exhibitions, performances, workshops and awareness competitions. The Saint Joseph University opened the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory in 2000, the first prehistory museum in the Arabic Middle East, displaying bones, stone tools and neolithic pottery collected by Jesuits.

In October 2013, Mim Museum, a private mineral museum, opened its doors to the public. It has on display some 2000 minerals from more than 70 countries. Mim museum&#x27;s collection is considered to be one of the world&#x27;s paramount private collection for the variety and quality of its minerals. A didactic circuit, accompanied by screens showing films and scientific applications of mineralogy, will reveal a world of unsuspected marvels—priceless both from an aesthetic and scientific point of view. &quot;Mimodactylus libanensis&quot; &quot;mimo&quot;, the fossil of a pterodactyl, is featured in a special wing. This one-of-a-kind complete specimen in the Middle-East was found in Lebanon. It is promoted by means of state-of-the-art modern techniques: a hologram, an auto-stereoscopic movie, a full-scale reconstitution and a game &quot;fly with mimo&quot; – an entertainment that delights children and adults. Moreover, Mim hosts a thematic exhibition of 200 marine fossils. &quot;Fish&#x27;n&#x27;Stone&quot; was organised with the collaboration of Mémoire du Temps. Known throughout the world, those fossils were quarried in the Lebanese mountains. The history of the fossil formation is shown through an animation that submerses you in the marine life – a time capsule that takes you in a journey to some 100 million of years ago.

===Tourism===
Beirut was named the top place to visit by &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 2009, and as one of the ten liveliest cities in the world by Lonely Planet in the same year. According to a 2010 study by the American global consulting firm Mercer comparing high-end items such as upscale residential areas and entertainment venues, Beirut was ranked as the 4th most expensive city in the Middle East and 15th among the Upper Middle Income Countries included in the survey. Beirut came in first place regionally and 10th place internationally in a 2010 study by &quot;EuroCost International&quot; about the rental markets for high quality housing. Beirut is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight.
The 2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totaling $6.5 billion. Beirut was chosen in 2012 by Condé Nast Traveller as the best city in the Middle East. In 2013, Condé Nast Traveller ranked Beirut in the top 20 best cities in the world.

On 7 December 2014, Beirut was selected to be among the New 7 Wonders of Cities, along with Doha, Durban, La Paz, Havana, Kuala Lumpur and Vigan. The campaign was held by New 7 Wonders.

In 2016, Yahoo listed Beirut as the best international city for food. Travel and Leisure ranked Beirut in the top 15 of the world&#x27;s best cities.

It was voted the must-visit city for the year 2019 by World Tourists.

Due to anti-government protests as of October 2019 followed by dire economic situation and travel bans due to coronavirus outbreak, the tourism sector was badly affected resulting in decrease of number of tourists.

===Media===
Beirut is a main centre for the television, radio stations, newspaper, and book publishing industries.

Television stations based in Beirut include Télé Liban, LBC, ÓTV (Orange TV), MTV Lebanon, Tele Lumiere (Catholic TV), Future TV, New TV, NBN, ANB and Saudi TV 1 on 33 UHF and MBC 1, MBC 4, MBC Action, Fox, Al Jazeera, Rotana, OSN First, OSN News, Al Yawm and Arabic Series Channel on 45 UHF.

Radio Stations include Mix FM Lebanon, Virgin Radio Lebanon, Radio One Lebanon, Sawt el Ghad, RLL, Jaras Scoop, NRJ Lebanon...

Newspapers include Daily Beirut An-Nahar, Al Joumhouria, As-Safir, Al Mustaqbal, Al-Akhbar, Al-Balad, Ad-Diyar, Al Anwar, Al Sharq.

Newspapers and magazines published in French include L&#x27;Orient Le Jour (since 1970), La Revue Du Liban, Al Balad-French Version, Al Intiqad, Magazine L&#x27;Hebdo and Le Commerce du Levant.

English newspapers published in Beirut include Executive Magazine (weekly), Beirut Online, Beirut Times (weekly) and Monday Morning.

===Sports===
The Lebanese capital hosted the Mediterranean Games in 1959, FIBA Asia Champions Cup in 1999, 2000, 2012, the AFC Asian Cup in 2000, and the FIBA Asia Cup in 2010. Beirut was the host city for the 6th Annual Games of the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009. Beirut also hosted the Pan Arab Games in 1957 and 1997. In 2017, Beirut also hosted the 2017 FIBA Asia Cup.

Beirut, with Sidon and Tripoli, hosted the 2000 AFC Asian Cup. There are two stadiums in the city, Camille Chamoun Sports City Stadium and Beirut Municipal Stadium.

Basketball is the most popular sport in Lebanon. Currently, 6 Beirut teams play in the Lebanese Basketball League: Sagesse, Al Riyadi Beirut, Homenetmen Beirut, Hoops Club, Beirut Club and Dynamo Beirut.

Other sports events in Beirut include the annual Beirut Marathon, hip ball, weekly horse racing at the Beirut Hippodrome, and golf and tennis tournaments that take place at Golf Club of Lebanon. Three out of the five teams in the Lebanese rugby league championship are based in Beirut. Lebanon men&#x27;s national ice hockey team plays out of Montreal, in Canada.

===Art and fashion===

There are hundreds of art galleries in Beirut and its suburbs. Every year, hundreds of fine art students graduate from universities and institutions. Artist workshops exist all over Lebanon. The inauguration of the Beirut Art Center, a non-profit association, space and platform dedicated to contemporary art in Lebanon, in the Mkalles suburb of Beirut added to the number of exhibition spaces available in the city, with a screening and performance room, mediatheque, book store, café and terrace. Adjacent to the latter is the Ashkal Alwan Home Workspace, a venue hosting cultural events and educational programs.

A number of international fashion designers have displayed their work in big fashion shows. Most major fashion labels have shops in Beirut&#x27;s shopping districts, and the city is home to a number of local fashion designers, some of whom like Elie Saab, Yara Farhat, Reem Acra, Zuhair Murad, Georges Chakra, Georges Hobeika, Jean Faris, Nicolas Jebran, Rabih Kayrouz and Abed Mahfouz have achieved international fame.

Beirut is also the home for a dynamic street art scene that has developed after the Lebanese Civil War, one of the most notable street artists is Yazan Halwani who is known to produce the largest murals on the walls of Beirut in areas such as Gemmayzeh, Hamra, Verdun and Achrafieh.

Beirut is also international artists&#x27; concert tour stop city. Artists like Shakira, Mariah Carey, Enrique Iglesias, Andrea Bocelli, Pitbull, Engelbert Humperdinck, Scorpions, and many more have included Beirut on their concert tours.

==In art, literature, and popular culture==

* Tawfiq Yusuf &#x27;Awwad&#x27;s 1972 novel &quot;Death In Beirut&quot; (Arabic: طواحين بيروت) takes place in Beirut in the late 1960s.
* Ghada al-Samman&#x27;s 1977 book &quot;Beirut Nightmares&quot; (Arabic: كوابيس بيروت) describes Beirut during the civil war in the mid-1970s.
* &quot;Caramel&quot;, a 2007 film by Nadine Labaki, tells the story of five women who work in a beauty salon in Beirut.
* The 2008 Israeli animated film Waltz with Bashir portrays Beirut during the Israeli invasion in 1982.
* William Henry Bartlett painted a view of the city with Mount Lebanon in the background in 1838, with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon, as 
* American rock band Beirut is named for the city.
* In the American television series &quot;Homeland&quot;, the episode &quot;Beirut Is Back&quot; (2012) was widely mocked for its portrayal of Beirut&#x27;s Hamra neighborhood, which the show depicted as being a Hezbollah stronghold. Lebanon&#x27;s government considered filing a lawsuit in response to the episode.

== Gallery ==
==Twin towns and sister cities==
Beirut is twinned with:

* Athens, Greece
* Los Angeles, United States
* Paris, France
* Yerevan, Armenia
* Lusaka, Zambia

== Notable people ==
==See also==
* Beirut International Exhibition &amp; Leisure Center
* Beirut Heritage Trail.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* .
* .
* .

==External links==
* 
*Map of Beirut, 1936., Eran Laor Cartographich Collection, The National Library of Israel, Historic Cities Research Project. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="0" end="6" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="20" end="27" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="48" end="55" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911940" start="59" end="73" title="Greater Beirut" label="Greater Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644555" start="172" end="190" title="List of largest cities in the Levant region by population" label="third-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="198" end="204" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625006" start="220" end="237" title="List of largest cities in the Arab world" label="sixteenth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="245" end="255" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="327" end="340" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862380" start="422" end="435" title="List of oldest continuously inhabited cities" label="oldest cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="476" end="494" title="seat of government" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317491" start="527" end="543" title="Economy of Lebanon" label="Lebanese economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975999" start="620" end="627" title="Port of Beirut" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="668" end="685" title="Global City" label="Beta + World City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="693" end="740" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="777" end="795" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="801" end="817" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q98073118" start="832" end="871" title="2020 Beirut explosion" label="massive explosion in the Port of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="978" end="985" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1031" end="1037" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1087" end="1093" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="1131" end="1160" title="French occupation of Lebanon" label="Lebanon&amp;#x27;s French mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="1191" end="1201" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="1257" end="1266" title="Canaanite languages" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="1327" end="1332" title="water well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="1383" end="1394" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1476" end="1484" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="1485" end="1494" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q235502" start="1510" end="1524" title="Amarna letters" label="Amarna letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747332" start="1542" end="1555" title="Ammunira" label="King Ammunira"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1587" end="1592" title="ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q651352" start="1659" end="1673" title="Rib-Hadda" label="King Rib-Hadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="1677" end="1683" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508736" start="1690" end="1696" title="Ancient Greek geography" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="1697" end="1707" title="hellenised" label="hellenised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1734" end="1740" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="1741" end="1750" title="latinization of names" label="latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="1789" end="1801" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="Roman colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1922" end="1930" title="crusades" label="crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2272" end="2279" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2284" end="2291" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2489" end="2500" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="2586" end="2591" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="2638" end="2657" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="2662" end="2679" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2692" end="2701" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2709" end="2719" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686811" start="2809" end="2825" title="Louis Burkhalter" label="Louis Burkhalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828218" start="2896" end="2915" title="Avenue des Français" label="Avenue des Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576315" start="2994" end="3011" title="Godefroy Zumoffen" label="Godefroy Zumoffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="3025" end="3030" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q645143" start="3031" end="3039" title="archaeological industry" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="3071" end="3081" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q511" start="3101" end="3128" title="Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon" label="Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="3267" end="3277" title="Copper Age" label="Copper Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="3303" end="3318" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335163" start="3484" end="3496" title="Beirut River" label="Beirut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q533380" start="3609" end="3626" title="Lorraine Copeland" label="Lorraine Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3664" end="3673" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="3674" end="3685" title="flint tools" label="flint tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q16942515" start="3757" end="3767" title="hut circle" label="hut circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821041" start="3769" end="3782" title="Auguste Bergy" label="Auguste Bergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="3802" end="3805" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="4195" end="4199" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="4217" end="4227" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069618" start="4228" end="4241" title="river terrace" label="river terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="4266" end="4272" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293738" start="4343" end="4358" title="Raoul Describes" label="Raoul Describes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149461" start="4454" end="4474" title="Paul Bovier-Lapierre" label="Paul Bovier-Lapierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="4481" end="4499" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361400" start="4550" end="4557" title="Gully" label="gullies"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="4616" end="4622" title="biface" label="biface"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="4642" end="4658" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="4672" end="4686" title="Lustre (mineralogy)" label="lustrous sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260373" start="4704" end="4733" title="Museum of Lebanese Prehistory" label="Museum of Lebanese Prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131086" start="4735" end="4748" title="Henri Fleisch" label="Henri Fleisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531661" start="4763" end="4775" title="Emireh point" label="Emireh point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335163" start="4888" end="4900" title="Beirut River" label="Beirut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="4953" end="4960" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="4964" end="4972" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233637" start="5019" end="5030" title="river mouth" label="river mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="5085" end="5092" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="5094" end="5110" title="Levallois technique" label="Levallois flints"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="5169" end="5188" title="breccia" label="brecciated deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029195" start="5433" end="5448" title="Canaanean blade" label="Canaanean blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="5449" end="5456" title="javelin" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="5519" end="5525" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575887" start="5707" end="5721" title="Peter Wescombe" label="Peter Wescombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271203" start="5764" end="5779" title="Diana Kirkbride" label="Diana Kirkbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="6025" end="6034" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6217" end="6222" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="6235" end="6241" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="6339" end="6343" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186714" start="6420" end="6445" title="Phoenician port of Beirut" label="Phoenician port of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="6523" end="6530" title="harbor" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="6735" end="6748" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280614" start="6759" end="6793" title="Directorate General of Antiquities" label="Directorate General of Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q975461" start="6797" end="6816" title="Lebanese University" label="Lebanese University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621182" start="6893" end="6912" title="Minister of Culture" label="Minister of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094185" start="6913" end="6924" title="Gaby Layoun" label="Gaby Layoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="7384" end="7391" title="University of Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q297651" start="7719" end="7735" title="Diodotus Tryphon" label="Diodotus Tryphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q294945" start="7761" end="7782" title="Antiochus VII Sidetes" label="Antiochus VII Sidetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="7805" end="7816" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="7817" end="7825" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="8029" end="8038" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q213440" start="8289" end="8294" title="Tyche" label="Tyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="8386" end="8392" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="8446" end="8460" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="8477" end="8483" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q201303" start="8556" end="8574" title="Tigranes the Great" label="Tigranes the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q208404" start="8582" end="8600" title="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)" label="Kingdom of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299845" start="8685" end="8707" title="Battle of Tigranocerta" label="Battle of Tigranocerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="8796" end="8802" title="Pompey the Great" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="8852" end="8858" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8943" end="8955" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="9057" end="9069" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Bekaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="9106" end="9120" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="9129" end="9135" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="9149" end="9153" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="9168" end="9176" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="9208" end="9220" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Bekaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="9233" end="9253" title="Baalbek" label="Heliopolis (Baalbek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="9392" end="9401" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="9439" end="9453" title="latin language" label="Latin-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11950672" start="9466" end="9490" title="Phoenice (Roman province)" label="Syria-Phoenicia province"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="9521" end="9536" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="9555" end="9561" title="colonia (Roman)" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11950672" start="9582" end="9604" title="Phoenice (Roman province)" label="Syria-Phoenicia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="9830" end="9842" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="9895" end="9903" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230666" start="9909" end="9923" title="Legio V Macedonica" label="5th Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q634719" start="9932" end="9950" title="Legio III Gallica" label="3rd Gallic Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278790" start="9968" end="9978" title="Law School of Beirut" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q315765" start="10037" end="10045" title="Papinian" label="Papinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310076" start="10050" end="10056" title="Ulpian" label="Ulpian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="10074" end="10083" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="10111" end="10118" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan"/>
<link wikidata="Q354350" start="10154" end="10161" title="Sozomen" label="Sozomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="10220" end="10229" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838526" start="10250" end="10258" title="Digest (Roman law)" label="Pandects"/>
<link wikidata="Q589853" start="10468" end="10484" title="551 Beirut earthquake" label="major earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="10710" end="10715" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948573" start="10856" end="10870" title="Roman Baths, Beirut" label="bath complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948709" start="10872" end="10889" title="Colonnaded Street" label="Colonnaded Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220436" start="10894" end="10900" title="Hippodrome of Berytus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522385" start="10954" end="10975" title="Garden of Forgiveness" label="Garden of Forgiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919220" start="10977" end="10997" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square, Beirut" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11050" end="11074" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant#Conquest of Palestine" label="conquered by the Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q984827" start="11140" end="11150" title="Sin el Fil" label="Sin el Fil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="11362" end="11375" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="11404" end="11408" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11424" end="11430" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="11443" end="11454" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11488" end="11506" title="Vassals of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Lordship of Beirut" label="Lordship of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="11523" end="11543" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="11567" end="11574" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q461045" start="11609" end="11627" title="Henry I, Duke of Brabant" label="Henry I of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q646409" start="11643" end="11665" title="Crusade of 1197" label="German Crusade of 1197"/>
<link wikidata="Q174759" start="11667" end="11681" title="John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut" label="John of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="11811" end="11819" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="11839" end="11854" title="House of Ibelin" label="House of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="11936" end="11942" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q392815" start="11958" end="11974" title="al-Ashraf Khalil" label="al-Ashraf Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12007" end="12014" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="12022" end="12029" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="12066" end="12071" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="12094" end="12101" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204558" start="12134" end="12139" title="Druze in Lebanon" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q579354" start="12190" end="12205" title="Fakhr-al-Din II" label="Fakhr-al-Din II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="12303" end="12311" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453214" start="12541" end="12553" title="Jezzar Pasha" label="Jezzar Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21182756" start="12558" end="12572" title="Abdullah Pasha ibn Ali" label="Abdullah Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="12719" end="12725" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="12734" end="12756" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674976" start="12834" end="12844" title="Tafil Buzi" label="Tafil Buzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="12950" end="12958" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646943" start="13460" end="13474" title="Sursock family" label="Sursock family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772246" start="13808" end="13829" title="1860 Lebanon conflict" label="1860 Lebanon conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191820" start="13863" end="13871" title="Maronite Christianity in Lebanon" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="13939" end="13952" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372503" start="14419" end="14432" title="Syria Vilayet" label="Syria Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038897" start="14433" end="14452" title="Mehmed Rashid Pasha" label="Mehmed Rashid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="14790" end="14797" title="Wilayah" label="vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="14836" end="14842" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="14981" end="14987" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="15038" end="15048" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q469482" start="15108" end="15137" title="American University of Beirut" label="American University of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="15362" end="15370" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="15375" end="15381" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="15440" end="15449" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="15920" end="15943" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404551" start="16099" end="16114" title="Salim Ali Salam" label="Salim Ali Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16622" end="16633" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="16735" end="16749" title="French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon" label="French Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="16954" end="16966" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q668329" start="16978" end="17006" title="Beirut International Airport" label="Beirut International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="17092" end="17110" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="17350" end="17368" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916399" start="17382" end="17392" title="Green Line (Lebanon)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q722925" start="17608" end="17618" title="Achrafieh" label="Achrafiyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120294" start="17881" end="17903" title="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="17942" end="17958" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="1982 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729631" start="17981" end="17992" title="West Beirut" label="West Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="18051" end="18071" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombing" label="barracks were bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076868" start="18233" end="18241" title="War of Liberation (1989–1990)" label="fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="18250" end="18269" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese army units"/>
<link wikidata="Q363392" start="18287" end="18291" title="Michel Aoun" label="Aoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q733686" start="18296" end="18308" title="Samir Geagea" label="Samir Geagea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191820" start="18316" end="18334" title="Lebanese Maronite Christians" label="Maronite Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="18335" end="18350" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q849180" start="18360" end="18379" title="Syrian Armed Forces" label="Syrian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q118272" start="18387" end="18398" title="Elias Hrawi" label="Elias Hrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094707" start="18403" end="18416" title="Salim Al-Huss" label="Salim Al-Huss"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="18711" end="18739" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634026" start="18963" end="18971" title="Solidere" label="Solidere"/>
<link wikidata="Q192778" start="19033" end="19045" title="Rafic Hariri" label="Rafic Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q845751" start="19158" end="19169" title="Miss Europe" label="Miss Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192778" start="19229" end="19241" title="Rafic Hariri" label="Rafic Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12231140" start="19276" end="19294" title="St. Georges Hotel, Beirut" label="Saint George Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475084" start="19361" end="19377" title="March 14 alliance" label="opposition rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q184310" start="19393" end="19409" title="Cedar Revolution" label="Cedar Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="19727" end="19733" title="Shia Islam in Lebanon" label="Shiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026122" start="19783" end="19821" title="2006 Hezbollah cross-border raid" label="&amp;quot;Operation Truthful Promise&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="19837" end="19846" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="20113" end="20119" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668329" start="20228" end="20256" title="Beirut–Rafic Hariri International Airport" label="Beirut International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573593" start="20442" end="20457" title="2008 conflict in Lebanon" label="violent clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="20575" end="20588" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="20644" end="20648" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119278" start="20854" end="20868" title="Doha Agreement (2008)" label="Doha Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919220" start="20970" end="20990" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square, Beirut" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q722925" start="21080" end="21090" title="Achrafieh" label="Achrafiyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q733452" start="21120" end="21136" title="Wissam al-Hassan" label="Wissam al-Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917370" start="21178" end="21202" title="Internal Security Forces" label="Internal Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q618331" start="21217" end="21239" title="Assassination of Wissam al-Hassan" label="78 others were wounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427214" start="21332" end="21349" title="December 2013 Beirut bombing" label="car bomb exploded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="21357" end="21373" title="Beirut Central District" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318922" start="21457" end="21471" title="Mohamad Chatah" label="Mohamad Chatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q21470354" start="21505" end="21537" title="2015 Beirut bombings" label="12 November 2015 Beirut bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="21658" end="21694" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q98073118" start="21766" end="21807" title="2020 Beirut explosion" label="a massive explosion in the Port of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="22016" end="22026" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="22186" end="22202" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679624" start="22478" end="22489" title="Hassan Diab" label="Hassan Diab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="22706" end="22723" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="22746" end="22763" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q722925" start="22868" end="22877" title="Achrafieh" label="Ashrafieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="22951" end="22968" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="23101" end="23133" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="23135" end="23141" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="23189" end="23198" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81242" start="23307" end="23327" title="sea breeze" label="moderated by the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="23394" end="23399" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="24050" end="24054" title="Hail" label="Hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859038" start="24730" end="24739" title="2015–16 Lebanese protests" label="You Stink"/>
<link wikidata="Q722925" start="25410" end="25419" title="Achrafieh" label="Achrafieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438253" start="25479" end="25485" title="Badaro" label="Badaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352478" start="25521" end="25532" title="Mar Mikhaël" label="Mar Mikhaël"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069743" start="25570" end="25585" title="Ramlet al-Baida" label="Ramlet al-Baida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975999" start="25589" end="25593" title="Port of Beirut" label="Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294643" start="25596" end="25606" title="Ras Beirut" label="Ras Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q47366026" start="25609" end="25614" title="Rmeil" label="Rmeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462387" start="25617" end="25622" title="Saifi Village" label="Saifi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414967" start="25625" end="25638" title="Zuqaq al-Blat" label="Zuqaq al-Blat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438253" start="25688" end="25694" title="Badaro" label="Badaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881380" start="25798" end="25815" title="Beirut Hippodrome" label="Beirut Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909055" start="25824" end="25842" title="Horsh Beirut" label="Beirut Pine Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457733" start="25876" end="25890" title="Pine Residence" label="Pine Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724850" start="25983" end="26008" title="Palestine refugee camps" label="Palestinian refugee camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914745" start="26089" end="26096" title="Shatila refugee camp" label="Shatila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116480" start="26149" end="26158" title="Mar Elias refugee camp" label="Mar Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230591" start="26204" end="26212" title="Ghobeiry" label="Ghobeiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="26663" end="26673" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="a massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="26944" end="26950" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911940" start="27113" end="27127" title="Greater Beirut" label="Greater Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="27173" end="27185" title="Cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845763" start="27957" end="27963" title="Millet (Ottoman Empire)" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="27989" end="28003" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124640" start="28130" end="28147" title="civil authority" label="civil authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="28673" end="28691" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="28858" end="28881" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="29632" end="29655" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="30025" end="30048" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491599" start="30122" end="30134" title="Beirut Souks" label="Beirut Souks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="30230" end="30246" title="Beirut Central District" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="30258" end="30266" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634026" start="30464" end="30472" title="Solidere" label="Solidere"/>
<link wikidata="Q814845" start="30627" end="30642" title="Beirut Marathon" label="Beirut Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129327" start="30644" end="30662" title="Fête de la Musique" label="Fête de la Musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317491" start="34568" end="34586" title="Economy of Lebanon" label="Economy of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776564" start="34626" end="34641" title="Banque du Liban" label="Banque du Liban"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="34658" end="34670" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081230" start="34677" end="34698" title="Beirut Stock Exchange" label="Beirut Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q859510" start="34747" end="34767" title="Middle East Airlines" label="Middle East Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355485" start="34773" end="34835" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia" label="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85870128" start="34841" end="34860" title="Union of Arab Banks" label="Union of Arab Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="35099" end="35102" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q20391833" start="35393" end="35402" title="BLOM Bank" label="BLOM Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="37255" end="37273" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="37315" end="37320" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="37362" end="37373" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="37480" end="37486" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="37994" end="38005" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="38096" end="38104" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="38183" end="38206" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919731" start="38410" end="38438" title="Venetian Gothic architecture" label="Venetian Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="38450" end="38459" title="Arabesque (Islamic art)" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="38464" end="38484" title="Ottoman Architecture" label="Ottoman Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="38599" end="38604" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491599" start="38724" end="38736" title="Beirut Souks" label="Beirut Souks"/>
<link wikidata="Q728168" start="38891" end="38906" title="Corniche Beirut" label="Corniche Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037919" start="38983" end="38999" title="Saint George Bay" label="Saint George Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15302283" start="39028" end="39043" title="Avenue de Paris" label="Avenue de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828194" start="39048" end="39072" title="Avenue General de Gaulle" label="Avenue General de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="39132" end="39147" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293719" start="39151" end="39158" title="Raouché" label="Raouché"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438253" start="39294" end="39300" title="Badaro" label="Badaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126585" start="40365" end="40377" title="Hamra Street" label="Hamra Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="40422" end="40445" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293719" start="40463" end="40470" title="Raouche" label="Raouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q469482" start="40679" end="40708" title="American University of Beirut" label="American University of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="40871" end="40884" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100334" start="40887" end="40896" title="Rue Gouraud" label="Gemmayzeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="40923" end="40931" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="40996" end="41006" title="French Mandate of Lebanon" label="French era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944781" start="41034" end="41057" title="Beirut Central District" label="Beirut Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462387" start="41073" end="41086" title="Saifi Village" label="Saifi Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100334" start="41210" end="41221" title="Rue Gouraud" label="Rue Gouraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="41291" end="41307" title="Travel + Leisure" label="Travel + Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="41617" end="41633" title="Travel + Leisure" label="Travel + Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="42093" end="42104" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="42109" end="42115" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159440" start="42169" end="42189" title="Condé Nast Traveller" label="Condé Nast Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="42214" end="42225" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="42235" end="42243" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="42248" end="42253" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q651688" start="44125" end="44143" title="Beirut Governorate" label="Beirut Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844713" start="44166" end="44175" title="Governorates of Lebanon" label="mohafazat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355485" start="44330" end="44392" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia" label="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623633" start="44442" end="44478" title="Arab Air Carriers&amp;#x27; Organization" label="Arab Air Carriers&amp;#x27; Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q85870128" start="44491" end="44510" title="Union of Arab Banks" label="Union of Arab Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="44618" end="44651" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="44662" end="44668" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="44786" end="44796" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115111" start="44813" end="44848" title="Education in Lebanon" label="Higher education throughout Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q469482" start="45070" end="45099" title="American University of Beirut" label="American University of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430954" start="45110" end="45133" title="Saint Joseph University" label="Université Saint-Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q975461" start="45281" end="45300" title="Lebanese University" label="Lebanese University"/>
<link wikidata="Q464361" start="45387" end="45415" title="Lebanese American University" label="Lebanese American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745321" start="45423" end="45468" title="American University of Science and Technology" label="American University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324082" start="45477" end="45499" title="University of Balamand" label="University of Balamand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078043" start="45501" end="45530" title="Ecole Supérieure des Affaires" label="École Supérieure des Affaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778441" start="45538" end="45560" title="Beirut Arab University" label="Beirut Arab University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551795" start="45595" end="45628" title="Lebanese International University" label="Lebanese International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529514" start="45636" end="45667" title="Notre Dame University – Louaize" label="Notre Dame University – Louaize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804577" start="45679" end="45700" title="Université La Sagesse" label="Université La Sagesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268548" start="45759" end="45776" title="Lycee Abdel Kader" label="Lycee Abdel Kader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594779" start="45778" end="45805" title="Grand Lycée Franco-Libanais" label="Grand Lycée Franco-Libanais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269055" start="45807" end="45835" title="Lycée Franco-Libanais Verdun" label="Lycée Franco-Libanais Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743499" start="45837" end="45862" title="American Community School at Beirut" label="American Community School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005797" start="45864" end="45885" title="International College, Beirut" label="International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147626" start="45887" end="45909" title="Collège Louise Wegmann" label="Collège Louise Wegmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45911" end="45929" title="Rawdah High School" label="Rawdah High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45931" end="45965" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Orthodox College" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Orthodox College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45967" end="45997" title="Collège Notre Dame de Nazareth" label="Collège Notre Dame de Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45999" end="46030" title="Collège du Sacré-Coeur Gemmayzé" label="Collège du Sacré-Coeur Gemmayzé"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329672" start="46032" end="46059" title="Collège Protestant Français" label="Collège Protestant Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793176" start="46061" end="46101" title="Armenian Evangelical Central High School" label="Armenian Evangelical Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266295" start="46103" end="46126" title="German School of Beirut" label="German School of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46145" end="46173" title="Hamazkayin Arslanian College" label="Hamazkayin Arslanian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q668329" start="46236" end="46270" title="Beirut–Rafic Hariri International Airport" label="Rafic Hariri International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975999" start="46309" end="46323" title="Port of Beirut" label="Port of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q829352" start="46597" end="46612" title="List of cities in Syria" label="cities in Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072361" start="46773" end="46826" title="OCFTC" label="Office des Chemins de Fer et des Transports en Commun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="47662" end="47682" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="47703" end="47715" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="47720" end="47731" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622133" start="47792" end="47811" title="Prix Albert Londres" label="Prix Albert Londres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060449" start="47900" end="47923" title="Jeux de la Francophonie" label="Jeux de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006334" start="47969" end="47987" title="World Book Capital" label="World Book Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="47991" end="47997" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449208" start="48077" end="48087" title="Rue Monnot" label="Rue Monnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100334" start="48140" end="48151" title="Rue Gouraud" label="Rue Gouraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126585" start="48296" end="48308" title="Hamra Street" label="Hamra Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915627" start="48329" end="48354" title="National Museum of Beirut" label="National Museum of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="48382" end="48393" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867373" start="48455" end="48472" title="History of ancient Lebanon" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q234541" start="48480" end="48502" title="History of Lebanon under Arab rule" label="medieval Mamluk period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785443" start="48508" end="48566" title="Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut" label="Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q287360" start="48691" end="48705" title="Sursock Museum" label="Sursock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646943" start="48735" end="48749" title="Sursock family" label="Sursock family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029826" start="48804" end="48819" title="Nicolas Sursock" label="Nicolas Sursock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="49024" end="49035" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347853" start="49135" end="49164" title="Robert Mouawad Private Museum" label="Robert Mouawad Private Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920431" start="49184" end="49196" title="Grand Serail" label="Grand Serail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605972" start="49206" end="49226" title="Henri Philippe Pharaoun" label="Henri Pharaon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260373" start="49463" end="49492" title="Museum of Lebanese Prehistory" label="Museum of Lebanese Prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888888" start="49649" end="49659" title="Mim Museum" label="Mim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="49671" end="49678" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="51040" end="51058" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="51129" end="51142" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="51226" end="51232" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="51374" end="51385" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435787" start="51405" end="51434" title="List of countries by GNI (nominal, Atlas method) per capita" label="Upper Middle Income Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594437" start="51693" end="51702" title="nightlife" label="nightlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="51708" end="51712" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="51729" end="51738" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="51874" end="51885" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="51890" end="51896" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159440" start="51950" end="51970" title="Condé Nast Traveller" label="Condé Nast Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="51995" end="52006" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577003" start="52149" end="52172" title="New7WondersCities" label="New 7 Wonders of Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="52185" end="52189" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="52191" end="52197" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="52199" end="52205" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="52207" end="52213" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="52215" end="52227" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q235004" start="52232" end="52237" title="Vigan" label="Vigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048428" start="52878" end="52888" title="Télé Liban" label="Télé Liban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810824" start="52890" end="52893" title="Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation" label="LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382753" start="52900" end="52909" title="Orange TV" label="Orange TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q45751" start="52912" end="52923" title="Murr Television" label="MTV Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463795" start="52925" end="52951" title="Télé Lumière" label="Tele Lumiere (Catholic TV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475621" start="52953" end="52962" title="Future Television" label="Future TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339017" start="52964" end="52970" title="Al Jadeed" label="New TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971139" start="52972" end="52975" title="National Broadcasting Network (Lebanon)" label="NBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174592" start="53053" end="53059" title="Rotana (television)" label="Rotana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317250" start="53151" end="53165" title="Mix FM Lebanon" label="Mix FM Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991512" start="53167" end="53187" title="Virgin Radio Lebanon" label="Virgin Radio Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q285097" start="53288" end="53296" title="An-Nahar" label="An-Nahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704165" start="53298" end="53311" title="Al Joumhouria" label="Al Joumhouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866212" start="53313" end="53321" title="As-Safir" label="As-Safir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668465" start="53323" end="53335" title="Al-Mustaqbal (newspaper)" label="Al Mustaqbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829196" start="53337" end="53346" title="Al Akhbar (Lebanon)" label="Al-Akhbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702265" start="53348" end="53356" title="Al-Balad (Newspaper)" label="Al-Balad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823847" start="53358" end="53366" title="Ad-Diyar" label="Ad-Diyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070389" start="53378" end="53386" title="Al Sharq" label="Al Sharq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788906" start="53442" end="53463" title="L&amp;#x27;Orient Le Jour" label="L&amp;#x27;Orient Le Jour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53478" end="53495" title="La Revue Du Liban" label="La Revue Du Liban"/>
<link wikidata="Q272090" start="53763" end="53782" title="Mediterranean Games" label="Mediterranean Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q218748" start="53786" end="53790" title="1959 Mediterranean Games" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446017" start="53792" end="53815" title="FIBA Asia Champions Cup" label="FIBA Asia Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594437" start="53819" end="53823" title="1999 ABC Champions Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597106" start="53825" end="53829" title="2000 ABC Champions Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244127" start="53831" end="53835" title="2012 FIBA Asia Champions Cup" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q157894" start="53841" end="53854" title="AFC Asian Cup" label="AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q744786" start="53858" end="53862" title="2000 AFC Asian Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999148" start="53872" end="53885" title="FIBA Asia Challenge" label="FIBA Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392630" start="53889" end="53893" title="2010 FIBA Asia Stanković Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112968" start="53928" end="53944" title="2009 Jeux de la Francophonie" label="6th Annual Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060449" start="53952" end="53975" title="Jeux de la Francophonie" label="Jeux de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150550" start="54008" end="54022" title="Pan Arab Games" label="Pan Arab Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186402" start="54026" end="54030" title="1957 Pan Arab Games" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135280" start="54035" end="54039" title="1997 Pan Arab Games" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197402" start="54073" end="54091" title="2017 FIBA Asia Cup" label="2017 FIBA Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q744786" start="54137" end="54155" title="2000 AFC Asian Cup" label="2000 AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q590474" start="54193" end="54228" title="Camille Chamoun Sports City Stadium" label="Camille Chamoun Sports City Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881386" start="54233" end="54257" title="Beirut Municipal Stadium" label="Beirut Municipal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160124" start="54347" end="54373" title="Lebanese Basketball League" label="Lebanese Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067476" start="54375" end="54382" title="Sagesse SC (basketball)" label="Sagesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433992" start="54384" end="54400" title="Al Riyadi Club Beirut" label="Al Riyadi Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q941779" start="54402" end="54419" title="Homenetmen Beirut B.C." label="Homenetmen Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898430" start="54421" end="54431" title="Hoops Club" label="Hoops Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q63722978" start="54433" end="54444" title="Beirut Club" label="Beirut Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160124" start="54449" end="54462" title="Lebanese Basketball League" label="Dynamo Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q814845" start="54514" end="54529" title="Beirut Marathon" label="Beirut Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881380" start="54568" end="54585" title="Beirut Hippodrome" label="Beirut Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="54591" end="54595" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975782" start="54638" end="54658" title="Golf Club of Lebanon" label="Golf Club of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378295" start="54695" end="54729" title="Rugby league in Lebanon" label="Lebanese rugby league championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q30067930" start="54751" end="54794" title="Lebanon men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Lebanon men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="54808" end="54816" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="54821" end="54827" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881376" start="55068" end="55085" title="Beirut Art Center" label="Beirut Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805181" start="55382" end="55394" title="Ashkal Alwan" label="Ashkal Alwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q456638" start="55715" end="55724" title="Elie Saab" label="Elie Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117064" start="55739" end="55748" title="Reem Acra" label="Reem Acra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088769" start="55750" end="55762" title="Zuhair Murad" label="Zuhair Murad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546771" start="55764" end="55778" title="Georges Chakra" label="Georges Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415930" start="55825" end="55838" title="Rabih Kayrouz" label="Rabih Kayrouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12224143" start="55843" end="55855" title="Abed Mahfouz" label="Abed Mahfouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="55929" end="55939" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="55975" end="55993" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621425" start="56037" end="56050" title="Yazan Halwani" label="Yazan Halwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100334" start="56134" end="56143" title="Gemmayzeh" label="Gemmayzeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126585" start="56145" end="56150" title="Hamra Street" label="Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q722925" start="56163" end="56172" title="Achrafieh" label="Achrafieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="56255" end="56262" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="56264" end="56276" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47122" start="56278" end="56294" title="Enrique Iglesias" label="Enrique Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402" start="56296" end="56310" title="Andrea Bocelli" label="Andrea Bocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q187844" start="56312" end="56319" title="Pitbull (rapper)" label="Pitbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q221289" start="56321" end="56342" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (singer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="56344" end="56353" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012037" start="56462" end="56486" title="Tawfiq Yusuf &amp;#x27;Awwad" label="Tawfiq Yusuf &amp;#x27;Awwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221930" start="56511" end="56526" title="Death In Beirut" label="Death In Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612563" start="56599" end="56614" title="Ghada al-Samman" label="Ghada al-Samman"/>
<link wikidata="Q544992" start="56749" end="56756" title="Caramel (film)" label="Caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q266539" start="56779" end="56792" title="Nadine Labaki" label="Nadine Labaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q160793" start="56895" end="56912" title="Waltz with Bashir" label="Waltz with Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="56940" end="56956" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="Israeli invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q328705" start="56968" end="56990" title="William Henry Bartlett" label="William Henry Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="57096" end="57120" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692668" start="57147" end="57153" title="Beirut (band)" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="57219" end="57227" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881382" start="57253" end="57267" title="Beirut Is Back" label="Beirut Is Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="57389" end="57398" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="57551" end="57558" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="57568" end="57574" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="57585" end="57596" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="57614" end="57619" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="57630" end="57637" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="57649" end="57655" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877074" start="57701" end="57753" title="Beirut International Exhibition &amp;amp; Leisure Center" label="Beirut International Exhibition &amp;amp; Leisure Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948351" start="57756" end="57777" title="Beirut Heritage Trail" label="Beirut Heritage Trail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37431" wikidata="Q146505" url="?curid=37431" title="Solvent">
<text>A solvent (from the Latin &quot;&quot;, &quot;loosen, untie, solve&quot;) is a substance that dissolves a solute, resulting in a solution. A solvent is usually a liquid but can also be a solid, a gas, or a supercritical fluid. Water is a solvent for polar molecules, and the most common solvent used by living things; all the ions and proteins in a cell are dissolved in water within the cell.

Major uses of solvents are in paints, paint removers, inks, and dry cleaning. Specific uses for organic solvents are in dry cleaning (e.g. tetrachloroethylene); as paint thinners (toluene, turpentine); as nail polish removers and solvents of glue (acetone, methyl acetate, ethyl acetate); in spot removers (hexane, petrol ether); in detergents (citrus terpenes); and in perfumes (ethanol). Solvents find various applications in chemical, pharmaceutical, oil, and gas industries, including in chemical syntheses and purification processes

Some petrochemical solvents are highly toxic and emit volatile organic compounds. Biobased solvents are usually more expensive, but ideally less toxic and biodegradable. Biogenic raw materials usable for solvent production are for example lignocellulose, starch and sucrose, but also waste and byproducts from other industries (such as terpenes, vegetable oils and animal fats).

==Solutions and solvation==
When one substance is dissolved into another, a solution is formed. This is opposed to the situation when the compounds are insoluble like sand in water. In a solution, all of the ingredients are uniformly distributed at a molecular level and no residue remains. A solvent-solute mixture consists of a single phase with all solute molecules occurring as &quot;solvates&quot; (solvent-solute complexes), as opposed to separate continuous phases as in suspensions, emulsions and other types of non-solution mixtures. The ability of one compound to be dissolved in another is known as solubility; if this occurs in all proportions, it is called miscible.

In addition to mixing, the substances in a solution interact with each other at the molecular level. When something is dissolved, molecules of the solvent arrange around molecules of the solute. Heat transfer is involved and entropy is increased making the solution more thermodynamically stable than the solute and solvent separately. This arrangement is mediated by the respective chemical properties of the solvent and solute, such as hydrogen bonding, dipole moment and polarizability. Solvation does not cause a chemical reaction or chemical configuration changes in the solute. However, solvation resembles a coordination complex formation reaction, often with considerable energetics (heat of solvation and entropy of solvation) and is thus far from a neutral process.

When one substance dissolves into another, a solution is formed. A solution is a homogeneous mixture consisting of a solute dissolved into a solvent. The solute is the substance that is being dissolved, while the solvent is the dissolving medium. Solutions can be formed with many different types and forms of solutes and solvents.

==Solvent classifications==
Solvents can be broadly classified into two categories: &quot;polar&quot; and &quot;non-polar&quot;. A special case is elemental mercury, whose solutions are known as amalgams; also, other metal solutions exist which are liquid at room temperature.

Generally, the dielectric constant of the solvent provides a rough measure of a solvent&#x27;s polarity. The strong polarity of water is indicated by its high dielectric constant of 88 (at 0 °C). Solvents with a dielectric constant of less than 15 are generally considered to be nonpolar.

The dielectric constant measures the solvent&#x27;s tendency to partly cancel the field strength of the electric field of a charged particle immersed in it. This reduction is then compared to the field strength of the charged particle in a vacuum. Heuristically, the dielectric constant of a solvent can be thought of as its ability to reduce the solute&#x27;s effective internal charge. Generally, the dielectric constant of a solvent is an acceptable predictor of the solvent&#x27;s ability to dissolve common ionic compounds, such as salts.

===Other polarity scales===
Dielectric constants are not the only measure of polarity. Because solvents are used by chemists to carry out chemical reactions or observe chemical and biological phenomena, more specific measures of polarity are required. Most of these measures are sensitive to chemical structure.

The &quot;Grunwald–Winstein mY scale&quot; measures polarity in terms of solvent influence on buildup of positive charge of a solute during a chemical reaction.

&quot;Kosower&#x27;s Z scale&quot; measures polarity in terms of the influence of the solvent on UV-absorption maxima of a salt, usually pyridinium iodide or the pyridinium zwitterion.

&quot;Donor number and donor acceptor scale&quot; measures polarity in terms of how a solvent interacts with specific substances, like a strong Lewis acid or a strong Lewis base.

The &quot;Hildebrand parameter&quot; is the square root of cohesive energy density. It can be used with nonpolar compounds, but cannot accommodate complex chemistry.

Reichardt&#x27;s dye, a solvatochromic dye that changes color in response to polarity, gives a scale of &quot;ET&quot;(30) values. &quot;ET&quot; is the transition energy between the ground state and the lowest excited state in kcal/mol, and (30) identifies the dye. Another, roughly correlated scale (&quot;ET&quot;(33)) can be defined with Nile red.

Gregory&#x27;s solvent ϸ parameter is a quantum chemically derived charge density parameter. This parameter seems to reproduce many of the experimental solvent parameters (especially the donor and acceptor numbers) using this charge decomposition analysis approach, with an electrostatic basis. The ϸ parameter was originally developed to quantify and explain the Hofmeister series by quantifying polyatomic ions and the monatomic ions in a united manner.

The polarity, dipole moment, polarizability and hydrogen bonding of a solvent determines what type of compounds it is able to dissolve and with what other solvents or liquid compounds it is miscible. Generally, polar solvents dissolve polar compounds best and non-polar solvents dissolve non-polar compounds best; hence &quot;like dissolves like&quot;. Strongly polar compounds like sugars (e.g. sucrose) or ionic compounds, like inorganic salts (e.g. table salt) dissolve only in very polar solvents like water, while strongly non-polar compounds like oils or waxes dissolve only in very non-polar organic solvents like hexane. Similarly, water and hexane (or vinegar and vegetable oil) are not miscible with each other and will quickly separate into two layers even after being shaken well.

Polarity can be separated to different contributions. For example, the Kamlet-Taft parameters are dipolarity/polarizability (&quot;π*&quot;), hydrogen-bonding acidity (&quot;α&quot;) and hydrogen-bonding basicity (&quot;β&quot;). These can be calculated from the wavelength shifts of 3–6 different solvatochromic dyes in the solvent, usually including Reichardt&#x27;s dye, nitroaniline and diethylnitroaniline. Another option, Hansen solubility parameters, separates the cohesive energy density into dispersion, polar, and hydrogen bonding contributions.

===Polar protic and polar aprotic===
Solvents with a dielectric constant (more accurately, relative static permittivity) greater than 15 (i.e. polar or polarizable) can be further divided into protic and aprotic. Protic solvents, such as water, solvate anions (negatively charged solutes) strongly via hydrogen bonding. Polar aprotic solvents, such as acetone or dichloromethane, tend to have large dipole moments (separation of partial positive and partial negative charges within the same molecule) and solvate positively charged species via their negative dipole. In chemical reactions the use of polar protic solvents favors the SN1 reaction mechanism, while polar aprotic solvents favor the SN2 reaction mechanism. These polar solvents are capable of forming hydrogen bonds with water to dissolve in water whereas non-polar solvents are not capable of strong hydrogen bonds.

==Physical properties==

===Properties table of common solvents===
The solvents are grouped into nonpolar, polar aprotic, and polar protic solvents, with each group ordered by increasing polarity. The properties of solvents which exceed those of water are bolded.

The ACS Green Chemistry Institute maintains a tool for the selection of solvents based on a principal component analysis of solvent properties.

===Hansen solubility parameter values===
The Hansen solubility parameter (HSP) values are based on dispersion bonds (δD), polar bonds (δP) and hydrogen bonds (δH). These contain information about the inter-molecular interactions with other solvents and also with polymers, pigments, nanoparticles, etc. This allows for rational formulations knowing, for example, that there is a good HSP match between a solvent and a polymer. Rational substitutions can also be made for &quot;good&quot; solvents (effective at dissolving the solute) that are &quot;bad&quot; (expensive or hazardous to health or the environment). The following table shows that the intuitions from &quot;non-polar&quot;, &quot;polar aprotic&quot; and &quot;polar protic&quot; are put numerically – the &quot;polar&quot; molecules have higher levels of δP and the protic solvents have higher levels of δH. Because numerical values are used, comparisons can be made rationally by comparing numbers. For example, acetonitrile is much more polar than acetone but exhibits slightly less hydrogen bonding.

If, for environmental or other reasons, a solvent or solvent blend is required to replace another of equivalent solvency, the substitution can be made on the basis of the Hansen solubility parameters of each. The values for mixtures are taken as the weighted averages of the values for the neat solvents. This can be calculated by trial-and-error, a spreadsheet of values, or HSP software. A 1:1 mixture of toluene and 1,4 dioxane has δD, δP and δH values of 17.8, 1.6 and 5.5, comparable to those of chloroform at 17.8, 3.1 and 5.7 respectively. Because of the health hazards associated with toluene itself, other mixtures of solvents may be found using a full HSP dataset.

===Boiling point===

The boiling point is an important property because it determines the speed of evaporation. Small amounts of low-boiling-point solvents like diethyl ether, dichloromethane, or acetone will evaporate in seconds at room temperature, while high-boiling-point solvents like water or dimethyl sulfoxide need higher temperatures, an air flow, or the application of vacuum for fast evaporation.
*Low boilers: boiling point below 100 °C (boiling point of water)
*Medium boilers: between 100 °C and 150 °C
*High boilers: above 150 °C

===Density===
Most organic solvents have a lower density than water, which means they are lighter than and will form a layer on top of water. Important exceptions are most of the halogenated solvents like dichloromethane or chloroform will sink to the bottom of a container, leaving water as the top layer. This is crucial to remember when partitioning compounds between solvents and water in a separatory funnel during chemical syntheses.

Often, specific gravity is cited in place of density. Specific gravity is defined as the density of the solvent divided by the density of water at the same temperature. As such, specific gravity is a unitless value. It readily communicates whether a water-insoluble solvent will float (SG &lt; 1.0) or sink (SG &gt; 1.0) when mixed with water.

== Multicomponent solvents ==

Multicomponent solvents appeared after World War II in the USSR, and continue to be used and produced in the post-Soviet states. These solvents may have one or more applications, but they are not universal preparations.

=== Solvents ===
=== Thinners ===
==Safety==

===Fire===
Most organic solvents are flammable or highly flammable, depending on their volatility. Exceptions are some chlorinated solvents like dichloromethane and chloroform. Mixtures of solvent vapors and air can explode. Solvent vapors are heavier than air; they will sink to the bottom and can travel large distances nearly undiluted. Solvent vapors can also be found in supposedly empty drums and cans, posing a flash fire hazard; hence empty containers of volatile solvents should be stored open and upside down.

Both diethyl ether and carbon disulfide have exceptionally low autoignition temperatures which increase greatly the fire risk associated with these solvents. The autoignition temperature of carbon disulfide is below 100 °C (212 °F), so objects such as steam pipes, light bulbs, hotplates, and recently extinguished bunsen burners are able to ignite its vapors.

In addition some solvents, such as methanol, can burn with a very hot flame which can be nearly invisible under some lighting conditions. This can delay or prevent the timely recognition of a dangerous fire, until flames spread to other materials.

===Explosive peroxide formation===
Ethers like diethyl ether and tetrahydrofuran (THF) can form highly explosive organic peroxides upon exposure to oxygen and light. THF is normally more likely to form such peroxides than diethyl ether. One of the most susceptible solvents is diisopropyl ether, but all ethers are considered to be potential peroxide sources.

The heteroatom (oxygen) stabilizes the formation of a free radical which is formed by the abstraction of a hydrogen atom by another free radical. The carbon-centered free radical thus formed is able to react with an oxygen molecule to form a peroxide compound. The process of peroxide formation is greatly accelerated by exposure to even low levels of light, but can proceed slowly even in dark conditions.

Unless a desiccant is used which can destroy the peroxides, they will concentrate during distillation, due to their higher boiling point. When sufficient peroxides have formed, they can form a crystalline, shock-sensitive solid precipitate at the mouth of a container or bottle. Minor mechanical disturbances, such as scraping the inside of a vessel, the dislodging of a deposit, or merely twisting the cap may provide sufficient energy for the peroxide to detonate or explode violently. 

Peroxide formation is not a significant problem when fresh solvents are used up quickly; they are more of a problem in laboratories which may take years to finish a single bottle. Low-volume users should acquire only small amounts of peroxide-prone solvents, and dispose of old solvents on a regular periodic schedule.

To avoid explosive peroxide formation, ethers should be stored in an airtight container, away from light, because both light and air can encourage peroxide formation.

A number of tests can be used to detect the presence of a peroxide in an ether; one is to use a combination of iron(II) sulfate and potassium thiocyanate. The peroxide is able to oxidize the Fe2+ ion to an Fe3+ ion, which then forms a deep-red coordination complex with the thiocyanate.

Peroxides may be removed by washing with acidic iron(II) sulfate, filtering through alumina, or distilling from sodium/benzophenone. Alumina degrades the peroxides but some could remain intact in it, therefore it must be disposed of properly. The advantage of using sodium/benzophenone is that moisture and oxygen are removed as well.

==Health effects==

General health hazards associated with solvent exposure include toxicity to the nervous system, reproductive damage, liver and kidney damage, respiratory impairment, cancer, hearing loss, and dermatitis.

===Acute exposure===
Many solvents can lead to a sudden loss of consciousness if inhaled in large amounts. Solvents like diethyl ether and chloroform have been used in medicine as anesthetics, sedatives, and hypnotics for a long time. Many solvents (e.g. from gasoline or solvent-based glues) are abused recreationally in glue sniffing, often with harmful long-term health effects such as neurotoxicity or cancer. Fraudulent substitution of 1,5-pentanediol by the psychoactive 1,4-butanediol by a subcontractor caused the Bindeez product recall.

Ethanol (grain alcohol) is a widely used and abused psychoactive drug. If ingested, the so-called &quot;toxic alcohols&quot; (other than ethanol) such as methanol, 1-propanol, and ethylene glycol metabolize into toxic aldehydes and acids, which cause potentially fatal metabolic acidosis. The commonly available alcohol solvent methanol can cause permanent blindness or death if ingested. The solvent 2-butoxyethanol, used in fracking fluids, can cause hypotension and metabolic acidosis.

===Chronic exposure===

Chronic solvent exposures are often caused by the inhalation of solvent vapors, or the ingestion of diluted solvents, repeated over the course of an extended period.

Some solvents can damage internal organs like the liver, the kidneys, the nervous system, or the brain. The cumulative brain effects of long-term or repeated exposure to some solvents is called chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy (CSE).

Chronic exposure to organic solvents in the work environment can produce a range of adverse neuropsychiatric effects. For example, occupational exposure to organic solvents has been associated with higher numbers of painters suffering from alcoholism. Ethanol has a synergistic effect when taken in combination with many solvents; for instance, a combination of toluene/benzene and ethanol causes greater nausea/vomiting than either substance alone.

Some organic solvents are known or suspected to be cataractogenic. A mixture of aromatic hydrocarbons, aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, esters, ketones, and terpenes were found to greatly increase the risk of developing cataracts in the lens of the eye.

===Environmental contamination===
A major pathway of induced health effects arises from spills or leaks of solvents, especially chlorinated solvents, that reach the underlying soil. Since solvents readily migrate substantial distances, the creation of widespread soil contamination is not uncommon; this is particularly a health risk if aquifers are affected. Vapor intrusion can occur from sites with extensive subsurface solvent contamination.

== See also ==

* ASTDR
* Construction | Refurbishment | Renovation
* Free energy of solvation
* IARC
* Solvents are often refluxed with an appropriate desiccant prior to distillation to remove water. This may be performed prior to a chemical synthesis where water may interfere with the intended reaction
* List of water-miscible solvents
* Lyoluminescence
* Occupational health
* Partition coefficient (log &quot;P&quot;) is a measure of differential solubility of a compound in two solvents
* Pollution
* Solvation
* Solvent systems exist outside the realm of ordinary organic solvents: Supercritical fluids, ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents
* Superfund
* Volatile Organic Compound
* Water model
* Water pollution
== References ==
==Bibliography==

== External links ==

*Solvent selection tool ACS Green Chemistry Institute
*&quot;European Solvents Industry Group - ESIG - ESIG European Solvents Industry Group&quot; Solvents in Europe.
*Table and text O-Chem Lecture
*Tables Properties and toxicities of organic solvents
*CDC – Organic Solvents – NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic
*EPA – Solvent Contaminated Wipes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="2" end="9" title="Solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="20" end="25" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="129" end="137" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="206" end="225" title="supercritical fluid" label="supercritical fluid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="250" end="265" title="Chemical polarity#Polarity of molecules" label="polar molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="349" end="353" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="491" end="498" title="Organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878156" start="515" end="527" title="dry cleaning" label="dry cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q410772" start="534" end="553" title="tetrachloroethylene" label="tetrachloroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q549685" start="559" end="572" title="paint thinner" label="paint thinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="575" end="582" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="584" end="594" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="643" end="650" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q414189" start="652" end="666" title="methyl acetate" label="methyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407153" start="668" end="681" title="ethyl acetate" label="ethyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="702" end="708" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q278809" start="740" end="755" title="D-limonene" label="citrus terpenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="765" end="772" title="perfume" label="perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="775" end="782" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="833" end="847" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="887" end="905" title="Chemical synthesis" label="chemical syntheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="939" end="952" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="988" end="1014" title="Volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="1089" end="1102" title="Biodegradation" label="biodegradable"/>
<link wikidata="Q508355" start="1173" end="1187" title="Lignocellulosic biomass" label="lignocellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="1189" end="1195" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="1200" end="1207" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="1270" end="1278" title="Terpene" label="terpenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="1280" end="1294" title="Vegetable oil" label="vegetable oils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423543" start="1299" end="1310" title="Animal fat" label="animal fats"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="1364" end="1373" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="1390" end="1398" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="1466" end="1475" title="insoluble" label="insoluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="1651" end="1656" title="Phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="1733" end="1742" title="Coordination complex" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="1984" end="1992" title="miscibility" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="2165" end="2173" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="2190" end="2203" title="Heat transfer" label="Heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="2220" end="2227" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q903517" start="2266" end="2290" title="thermodynamically stable" label="thermodynamically stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="2433" end="2449" title="hydrogen bonding" label="hydrogen bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="2451" end="2464" title="Bond dipole moment" label="dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q869891" start="2469" end="2483" title="polarizability" label="polarizability"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="2610" end="2630" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3262" end="3269" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="3300" end="3308" title="Amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557453" start="3322" end="3337" title="liquid metal" label="metal solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="3398" end="3417" title="dielectric constant" label="dielectric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="3797" end="3813" title="ion" label="charged particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="3869" end="3883" title="field strength" label="field strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="4044" end="4059" title="chemical polarity" label="internal charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="4185" end="4199" title="ionic compound" label="ionic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612160" start="4541" end="4558" title="Grunwald–Winstein equation" label="Grunwald–Winstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432177" start="4699" end="4706" title="Edward Kosower" label="Kosower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4790" end="4792" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518436" start="4830" end="4840" title="pyridinium" label="pyridinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="4841" end="4847" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q245115" start="4866" end="4876" title="zwitterion" label="zwitterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="5023" end="5033" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895235" start="5069" end="5089" title="Hildebrand parameter" label="Hildebrand parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q905883" start="5250" end="5264" title="solvatochromic" label="solvatochromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910572" start="5568" end="5576" title="Nile red" label="Nile red"/>
<link wikidata="Q410693" start="5943" end="5960" title="Hofmeister series" label="Hofmeister series"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="6084" end="6100" title="hydrogen bonding" label="hydrogen bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="6138" end="6147" title="Chemical compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="6226" end="6234" title="miscible" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="6419" end="6424" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="6432" end="6439" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165" start="6466" end="6475" title="Inorganic chemistry" label="inorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="6476" end="6480" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="6488" end="6498" title="table salt" label="table salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="6589" end="6592" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="6597" end="6600" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="6657" end="6663" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="6686" end="6692" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="6697" end="6704" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="6732" end="6740" title="miscible" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q23069154" start="7182" end="7202" title="Reichardt&amp;#x27;s dye" label="Reichardt&amp;#x27;s dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321630" start="7204" end="7216" title="nitroaniline" label="nitroaniline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7221" end="7240" title="diethylnitroaniline" label="diethylnitroaniline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054793" start="7258" end="7285" title="Hansen solubility parameter" label="Hansen solubility parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="7478" end="7506" title="relative static permittivity" label="relative static permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q100786927" start="7580" end="7586" title="protic" label="protic"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="7625" end="7630" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="7640" end="7645" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="7689" end="7705" title="hydrogen bonding" label="hydrogen bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949284" start="7707" end="7728" title="Polar aprotic solvent" label="Polar aprotic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="7739" end="7746" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="7750" end="7765" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="7786" end="7800" title="Molecular dipole moment" label="dipole moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="7957" end="7974" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q838130" start="8020" end="8023" title="SN1 reaction" label="SN1"/>
<link wikidata="Q373406" start="8024" end="8042" title="reaction mechanism" label="reaction mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q838084" start="8083" end="8086" title="SN2 reaction" label="SN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="8365" end="8373" title="nonpolar" label="nonpolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949284" start="8381" end="8388" title="aprotic" label="aprotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q100786927" start="8400" end="8406" title="protic" label="protic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="8469" end="8479" title="Property" label="properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="8537" end="8566" title="American Chemical Society" label="ACS Green Chemistry Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="8625" end="8653" title="principal component analysis" label="principal component analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054793" start="8723" end="8750" title="Hansen solubility parameter" label="Hansen solubility parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="8777" end="8793" title="Van der Waals forces" label="dispersion bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="8800" end="8811" title="polar bonds" label="polar bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="8821" end="8835" title="hydrogen bonds" label="hydrogen bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="8961" end="8973" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="9996" end="10012" title="weighted average" label="weighted average"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="10077" end="10092" title="trial-and-error" label="trial-and-error"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="10153" end="10160" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q161532" start="10165" end="10176" title="1,4 dioxane" label="1,4 dioxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="10247" end="10257" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="10583" end="10596" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="10598" end="10613" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407927" start="10721" end="10739" title="dimethyl sulfoxide" label="dimethyl sulfoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="10801" end="10807" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="11017" end="11024" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="11147" end="11154" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="11173" end="11188" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="11192" end="11202" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q898797" start="11308" end="11320" title="partition coefficient" label="partitioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q910239" start="11363" end="11380" title="separatory funnel" label="separatory funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="11416" end="11432" title="specific gravity" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11844" end="11848" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="12089" end="12098" title="flammable" label="flammable"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="12139" end="12149" title="volatility (chemistry)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="12197" end="12212" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="12217" end="12227" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="12268" end="12275" title="explosion" label="explode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457552" start="12470" end="12480" title="flash fire" label="flash fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="12578" end="12591" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q243354" start="12596" end="12612" title="carbon disulfide" label="carbon disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q558378" start="12636" end="12660" title="autoignition temperature" label="autoignition temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251738" start="12825" end="12830" title="steam" label="steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="12838" end="12848" title="light bulb" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q509869" start="12851" end="12859" title="hotplate" label="hotplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q221262" start="12888" end="12901" title="bunsen burner" label="bunsen burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q103230" start="13219" end="13224" title="Ether" label="Ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="13231" end="13244" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q278332" start="13249" end="13264" title="tetrahydrofuran" label="tetrahydrofuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q253817" start="13297" end="13313" title="organic peroxide" label="organic peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418989" start="13461" end="13478" title="diisopropyl ether" label="diisopropyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="13561" end="13567" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="13599" end="13611" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="13652" end="13660" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221746" start="13962" end="13971" title="desiccant" label="desiccant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="14042" end="14054" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="14076" end="14089" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="14146" end="14157" title="crystalline" label="crystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="14181" end="14192" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="14410" end="14418" title="detonation" label="detonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="15042" end="15058" title="iron(II) sulfate" label="iron(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q412113" start="15063" end="15084" title="potassium thiocyanate" label="potassium thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="15110" end="15117" title="oxidize" label="oxidize"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="15175" end="15195" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747995" start="15205" end="15216" title="thiocyanate" label="thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="15303" end="15310" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="15315" end="15325" title="distillation" label="distilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="15331" end="15337" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q409482" start="15338" end="15350" title="benzophenone" label="benzophenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="15513" end="15521" title="moisture" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="15767" end="15777" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="15861" end="15868" title="inhalation" label="inhaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="15901" end="15914" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="15919" end="15929" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="15960" end="15971" title="anesthetics" label="anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="15973" end="15982" title="sedatives" label="sedatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="15988" end="15997" title="hypnotics" label="hypnotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="16040" end="16048" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="16102" end="16115" title="Volatile substance abuse" label="glue sniffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="16169" end="16182" title="neurotoxicity" label="neurotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="16186" end="16192" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161557" start="16221" end="16236" title="1,5-pentanediol" label="1,5-pentanediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161521" start="16257" end="16271" title="1,4-butanediol" label="1,4-butanediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320034" start="16302" end="16309" title="Bindeez" label="Bindeez"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="16327" end="16334" title="Ethanol" label="Ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="16379" end="16396" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="16481" end="16489" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14985" start="16491" end="16501" title="1-propanol" label="1-propanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="16507" end="16522" title="ethylene glycol" label="ethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598200" start="16596" end="16614" title="metabolic acidosis" label="metabolic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q421557" start="16728" end="16743" title="2-Butoxyethanol" label="2-butoxyethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826784" start="16753" end="16767" title="fracking fluid" label="fracking fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="16780" end="16791" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="17058" end="17063" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="17069" end="17075" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="17082" end="17096" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="17105" end="17110" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114000" start="17202" end="17240" title="chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy" label="chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="17489" end="17499" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="17515" end="17526" title="synergy" label="synergistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="17611" end="17618" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="17619" end="17626" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="17654" end="17660" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="17661" end="17669" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="17780" end="17801" title="aromatic hydrocarbons" label="aromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="17803" end="17825" title="aliphatic hydrocarbons" label="aliphatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="17827" end="17835" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="17837" end="17843" title="Ester" label="esters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="17845" end="17852" title="Ketone" label="ketones"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="17858" end="17866" title="Terpene" label="terpenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="17921" end="17929" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="18084" end="18104" title="Organochlorine chemistry" label="chlorinated solvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q212734" start="18219" end="18237" title="soil contamination" label="soil contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="18293" end="18300" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915332" start="18316" end="18331" title="Vapor intrusion" label="Vapor intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692019" start="18421" end="18426" title="ASTDR" label="ASTDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="18429" end="18441" title="Construction" label="Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q56167695" start="18444" end="18457" title="Refurbishment (disambiguation)" label="Refurbishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144402" start="18460" end="18470" title="Renovation" label="Renovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559035" start="18473" end="18497" title="Free energy of solvation" label="Free energy of solvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="18500" end="18504" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="IARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221746" start="18555" end="18564" title="desiccant" label="desiccant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645035" start="18711" end="18742" title="List of water-miscible solvents" label="List of water-miscible solvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709603" start="18745" end="18760" title="Lyoluminescence" label="Lyoluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="18763" end="18782" title="Occupational health" label="Occupational health"/>
<link wikidata="Q898797" start="18785" end="18806" title="Partition coefficient" label="Partition coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="18899" end="18908" title="Pollution" label="Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="18911" end="18920" title="Solvation" label="Solvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="18993" end="19012" title="Supercritical fluid" label="Supercritical fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898579" start="19015" end="19027" title="ionic liquid" label="ionic liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q168033" start="19033" end="19054" title="deep eutectic solvent" label="deep eutectic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="19058" end="19067" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="19070" end="19095" title="Volatile Organic Compound" label="Volatile Organic Compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318070" start="19098" end="19109" title="Water model" label="Water model"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="19112" end="19127" title="Water pollution" label="Water pollution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37432" wikidata="Q189960" url="?curid=37432" title="Westminster">
<text>Westminster is the main settlement of the City of Westminster in Central London, England. It extends from the River Thames to Oxford Street and has many famous landmarks, including the Palace of Westminster, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, Westminster Cathedral, Trafalgar Square and much of the West End cultural centre including the entertainment precinct of West End Theatre.

The name () originated from the informal description of the abbey church and royal peculiar of St Peter&#x27;s (Westminster Abbey), west of the City of London (until the English Reformation there was also an Eastminster abbey, on the other side of the City of London, in the East End of London). The abbey&#x27;s origins date from between the 7th and 10th centuries, but it rose to national prominence when rebuilt by Edward the Confessor in the 11th century. With the development of the old palace alongside the abbey, Westminster has been the home of England&#x27;s government since about 1200, and from 1707 the Government of the United Kingdom. In 1539, it became a city.

Westminster is often used as a metonym to refer to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which sits in the Palace of Westminster.

==Geography==
===Physical geography===
The City and Liberty of Westminster and other historical Westminster administrative units (except the broader modern City of Westminster, a London Borough created in 1965) extended from the River Thames to the old Roman road from the City to western England, which is now locally called Oxford Street.
Thorney Island lay between the arms of the former River Tyburn at its confluence with the Thames, while the western boundary with Chelsea was formed by the similarly lost River Westbourne. The line of the river still forms (with very slight revisions) the boundaries of the modern borough with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
Further north, away from the river mouth, Westminster included land on both sides of the Westbourne, notably Knightsbridge (including the parts of Hyde Park west of the Serpentine lake (originally formed by damming the river) and most of Kensington Gardens).

===Localities===
Westminster includes the sub-districts of Soho, St James, Mayfair, Covent Garden, Pimlico, Victoria, Belgravia and Knightsbridge (shared with neighbouring Kensington).

The former City of Westminster merged with the neighbouring boroughs of Paddington and Marylebone in 1965 to form a larger modern borough. These neighbouring areas (except for a small area of Paddington in part of Kensington Gardens), lie north of Oxford Street and its westward continuation, Bayswater Road.

===Open spaces===
The district&#x27;s open spaces include:
* Hyde Park
* Kensington Gardens (part)
* Green Park
* Buckingham Palace Garden
* St James&#x27;s Park

==Origins and administration==
The development of the area began with the establishment of Westminster Abbey on a site then called Thorney Island. The site may have been chosen because of the natural ford which is thought to have carried Watling Street over the Thames in the vicinity. The wider district became known as Westminster in reference to the church.

===Legendary origin===
The legendary origin is that in the early 7th century, a local fisherman named Edric (or Aldrich) ferried a stranger in tattered foreign clothing over the Thames to Thorney Island. It was a miraculous appearance of St Peter, a fisherman himself, coming to the island to consecrate the newly built church, which later developed into Westminster Abbey. He rewarded Edric with a bountiful catch when he next dropped his nets. Edric was instructed to present the king and St. Mellitus, Bishop of London, with a salmon and various proofs that the consecration had already occurred. Every year on 29 June, St Peter&#x27;s Day, the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers presents the Abbey with a salmon in memory of this event.

===Recorded origin===
A charter of 785, possibly a forgery, grants land to &quot;the needy people of God in Thorney, in the dreadful spot which is called Westminster&quot;. The text suggests a pre-existing monastic community who chose to live in a very challenging location.

The recorded origins of the Abbey (rather than a less important religious site) date to the 960s or early 970s, when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site.

Between 1042 and 1052, King Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St Peter&#x27;s Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church. It was the first church in England built in the Romanesque style. The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065, only a week before Edward&#x27;s death on 5 January 1066. A week later, he was buried in the church; and, nine years later, his wife Edith was buried alongside him. His successor, Harold II, was probably crowned in the abbey, although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later the same year.
The only extant depiction of Edward&#x27;s abbey, together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster, is in the Bayeux Tapestry. Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory, an extension of the south transept, survive in the Norman Undercroft of the Great School, including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey. Increased endowments supported a community that increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan&#x27;s original foundation, up to a maximum of about eighty monks.

===Local government===
====Parish of Westminster St Margaret====

Most of the parishes of Westminster originated as daughter parishes of St Margaret&#x27;s parish, in the City and Liberty of Westminster, Middlesex. The exceptions to this were St Clement Danes, St Mary le Strand and possibly some other small areas.

The ancient parish was St Margaret; after 1727 this became the civil parish of &#x27;St Margaret and St John&#x27;, the latter a new church required for the increasing population. The area around Westminster Abbey formed the extra-parochial Close of the Collegiate Church of St Peter. Like many large parishes, Westminster was divided into smaller units called &quot;Hamlets&quot; (meaning a territorial sub-division, rather than a small village). These would later become independent daughter parishes.

Until 1900 the local authority was the combined vestry of St Margaret and St John (also known as the Westminster District Board of Works from 1855 to 1887), which was based at Westminster Town Hall in Caxton Street from 1883.

====City and Liberty of Westminster====
The Liberty of Westminster, governed by the Westminster Court of Burgesses, also included St Martin in the Fields and several other parishes and places. Westminster had its own quarter sessions, but the Middlesex sessions also had jurisdiction.

====Metropolitan Borough of Westminster====

Under local government reforms in 1889, the area fell within the newly created County of London, and the local government of Westminster was further reformed in 1900, when the court of burgesses and the parish vestries were abolished and replaced by the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster. The borough was given city status at the same time, allowing it to be known as the City of Westminster and its council as Westminster City Council.

The City and Liberty of Westminster and the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster were very similar in extent, covering the parts of the wider modern City of Westminster south of the Oxford Street, and its continuations Hyde Park Place. The exception is that part of Kensington Gardens, south of that road, are part of Paddington.

Westminster merged with St Marylebone and Paddington in 1965, but the combined area was allowed to keep the title City of Westminster.

==History==
===Royal seat===

The former Thorney Island, the site of Westminster Abbey, formed the historic core of Westminster. The abbey became the traditional venue of the coronations of the kings and queens of England from that of Harold Godwinson (1066) onwards.

From about 1200 the Palace of Westminster, near the abbey, became the principal royal residence, a transition marked by the transfer of royal treasury and financial records to Westminster from Winchester. Later the palace housed the developing Parliament and England&#x27;s law courts. Thus, London developed two focal points: the City of London (financial/economic) and Westminster (political and cultural).

The monarchs moved their principal residence to the Palace of Whitehall (1530–1698), then to St James&#x27;s Palace in 1698, and eventually to Buckingham Palace and other palaces after 1762. The main law courts moved to the Royal Courts of Justice in the late-19th century.

===Medieval and Tudor===
The settlement grew up around the palace and abbey, as a service area for them. The parish church, St Margaret&#x27;s Westminster served the wider community of the parish; the servants of the palace and abbey as well as the rural population and those associated with the high status homes developing on the road from the city. The area became larger and in the Georgian period became connected through urban ribbon development with the City along the Strand.

Henry VIII&#x27;s Reformation in the early 16th century abolished the abbey and established a cathedral – thus the parish ranked as a &quot;City&quot;, although it was only a fraction of the size of the City of London and the Borough of Southwark at that time.

Indeed, the cathedral and diocesan status of the church lasted only from 1539 to 1556, but the &quot;city&quot; status remained for a mere parish within Middlesex. As such it is first known to have had two Members of Parliament in 1545 as a new Parliamentary Borough, centuries after the City of London and Southwark were enfranchised.

The growing Elizabethan city had a High Constable, Bailiff, Town Clerk, and a keeper of the ponds.

===Victorian divide===
Charles Booth&#x27;s poverty map showing Westminster in 1889 recorded the full range of income- and capital-brackets living in adjacent streets within the area; its central western area had become (by 1850) (the) Devil&#x27;s Acre in the southern flood-channel ravine of the River Tyburn, yet Victoria Street and other small streets and squares had the highest colouring of social class in London: yellow/gold. Westminster has shed the abject poverty with the clearance of this slum and with drainage improvement, but there is a typical Central London property distinction within the area which is very acute, epitomised by grandiose 21st-century developments, architectural high-point listed buildings and nearby social housing (mostly non-council housing) buildings of the Peabody Trust founded by philanthropist George Peabody.

==Wider uses of the name ==
Given the focus on Westminster in English and British public life over centuries, the name &quot;Westminster&quot; is casually used as a metonym for the UK Parliament and for the political community of the United Kingdom generally. (The civil service is similarly referred to using the name of the northern sub-neighbourhood which it inhabits, &quot;Whitehall&quot;.) &quot;Westminster&quot; is consequently also used in reference to the Westminster system, the parliamentary model of democratic government that has evolved in the United Kingdom and for those other nations, particularly in the Commonwealth of Nations and for other parts of the former British Empire that adopted it.

The term &quot;Westminster Village&quot;, sometimes used in the context of British politics, does not refer to a geographical area at all; employed especially in the phrase &quot;Westminster Village gossip&quot;, it denotes a supposedly close social circle of members of parliament, political journalists, so-called spin-doctors and others connected to events in the Palace of Westminster and in Government ministries.

==Economy==
The area has a substantial residential population. By the 20th century Westminster saw rising numbers of residential apartments with wealthy inhabitants. Hotels, large Victorian homes and barracks exist near to Buckingham Palace.

===High Commissions===
Westminster hosts the High Commissions of many Commonwealth countries:

* Australia
* The Bahamas
* Brunei
* Canada
* Cyprus
* Eswatini
* Ghana
* India
* Lesotho
* Malaysia
* New Zealand
* Nigeria
* Pakistan
* Papua New Guinea
* Seychelles
* Singapore
* South Africa
* Trinidad and Tobago
* Uganda
===Education===
Within the area is Westminster School, a major public school which grew out of the abbey, and the University of Westminster, attended by over 20,000 students.

==Notable people==

* Finn Azaz (born 2000), footballer
*Andy Bray (born 1981), cricketer
*Arthur Barnby (1881–1937), first-class cricketer and Royal Marines/Royal Naval Air Service officer
*Richard Colley (1833–1902), first-class cricketer and British Army officer
*Geoffrey Cooke (1897–1980), first-class cricketer and British Army officer
*John Fuller (1834–1893), first-class cricketer, clergyman and theologian
*Ava Gardner (24 December 1922 – 25 January 1990), American actress and singer
*Hady Ghandour (born 2000), footballer
*Tatiana Hambro (born 1989), fashion writer and editor
*Tom Hiddleston (born 1981), Golden Globe-winning actor
*Stephanie Leonidas (born 1982), actress
*Alice Liddell (1852–1934), inspiration for Alice In Wonderland
*Edward Low (1690–1724), pirate during the latter days of the Golden Age of Piracy
*Eddie Redmayne (born 1982), Oscar-winning actor
*Quintin Twiss (1835–1900), first-class cricketer and stage actor
*Mary Woffington (1729–1811), socialite

==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===

* Manchee, W. H. (1924), &quot;The Westminster City Fathers (the Burgess Court of Westminster) 1585–1901: Being some account of their powers and domestic rule of the City prior to its incorporation in 1901&quot;; with a foreword by Walter G. Bell and 36 illustrations which relate to documents (some pull-outs) and artefacts. London: John Lane (The Bodley Head).
* Davies, E. A. (1952), &quot;An Account of the Formation and Early Years of The Westminster Fire Office&quot;; (Includes black-and-white photographic plates with a colour frontispiece of &#x27;A Waterman&#x27; and a foreword by Major K. M. Beaumont. London: Country Life Limited for the Westminster Fire Office.
* Hunting, P. (1981), &quot;Royal Westminster&quot;. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. Printed by Penshurst Press. (paper); (cased).
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Westminster Borough Council
*Westminster Walks – from Findlay Muirhead&#x27;s 1927 guidebook to &quot;London and its Environs&quot;
*Westminster, by Sir Walter Besant and Geraldine Edith Mitton and A. Murray Smith, 1902, from Project Gutenberg
*Palmer&#x27;s Village, a deserted village in Westminster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="0" end="11" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="42" end="61" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="65" end="72" title="Central London" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="73" end="79" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="110" end="122" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="126" end="139" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="185" end="206" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="208" end="225" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="227" end="244" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="246" end="267" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="269" end="285" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="302" end="310" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="367" end="383" title="West End Theatre" label="West End Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="446" end="451" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586781" start="463" end="477" title="royal peculiar" label="royal peculiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="530" end="544" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="556" end="575" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795773" start="594" end="605" title="Eastminster" label="Eastminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="638" end="652" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="661" end="679" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="804" end="824" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588630" start="939" end="964" title="Governance of England" label="England&amp;#x27;s government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1001" end="1033" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1094" end="1101" title="Metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1118" end="1150" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1170" end="1191" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123526" start="1237" end="1268" title="City and Liberty of Westminster" label="City and Liberty of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="1350" end="1369" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1423" end="1435" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19461336" start="1443" end="1457" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Highway (Roman Britain)" label="old Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1467" end="1471" title="City of London" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="1520" end="1533" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453024" start="1535" end="1549" title="Thorney Island (Westminster)" label="Thorney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096948" start="1585" end="1597" title="River Tyburn" label="River Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760573" start="1706" end="1722" title="River Westbourne" label="River Westbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188801" start="1833" end="1872" title="Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea" label="Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="1983" end="1996" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471930" start="2043" end="2053" title="Serpentine (lake)" label="Serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="2193" end="2197" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q124234" start="2199" end="2207" title="St James&amp;#x27;s" label="St James"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="2209" end="2216" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="2218" end="2231" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q123306" start="2233" end="2240" title="Pimlico" label="Pimlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q124000" start="2242" end="2250" title="Victoria, London" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123024" start="2252" end="2261" title="Belgravia" label="Belgravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="2266" end="2279" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="2306" end="2316" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="2392" end="2402" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="2407" end="2417" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="2568" end="2581" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="2691" end="2700" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q822607" start="2703" end="2721" title="Kensington Gardens" label="Kensington Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q119892" start="2731" end="2741" title="Green Park" label="Green Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q263477" start="2744" end="2768" title="Garden at Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216914" start="2771" end="2791" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="2884" end="2901" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453024" start="2924" end="2938" title="Thorney Island (Westminster)" label="Thorney Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2985" end="2997" title="Watling Street#Westminster ford" label="natural ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="3031" end="3045" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="3055" end="3061" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453024" start="3343" end="3357" title="Thorney Island (London)" label="Thorney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="3393" end="3401" title="St Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="3448" end="3458" title="consecration" label="consecrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="3510" end="3527" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q558536" start="3637" end="3641" title="Sæberht of Essex" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q366198" start="3646" end="3676" title="Mellitus" label="St. Mellitus, Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037032" start="3803" end="3836" title="Worshipful Company of Fishmongers" label="Worshipful Company of Fishmongers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332130" start="4289" end="4302" title="Saint Dunstan" label="Saint Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="4307" end="4317" title="Edgar of England" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="4343" end="4354" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="4355" end="4359" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="4403" end="4423" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="4558" end="4568" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q259564" start="4789" end="4794" title="Edith of Wessex" label="Edith"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="4836" end="4845" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="4934" end="4955" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="5054" end="5075" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q187483" start="5087" end="5102" title="Bayeux Tapestry" label="Bayeux Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="5293" end="5298" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5599" end="5624" title="Westminster St Margaret and St John#Governance" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123526" start="5633" end="5664" title="City and Liberty of Westminster" label="City and Liberty of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="5666" end="5675" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038269" start="5705" end="5721" title="St Clement Danes" label="St Clement Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q536866" start="5723" end="5740" title="St Mary le Strand" label="St Mary le Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989219" start="5802" end="5813" title="Westminster St Margaret and St John" label="St Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135251" start="6020" end="6062" title="Close of the Collegiate Church of St Peter" label="Close of the Collegiate Church of St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6146" end="6153" title="Civil Parish#sub-divisions" label="Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="6332" end="6338" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989219" start="6385" end="6420" title="Westminster District Board of Works" label="Westminster District Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055269" start="6460" end="6481" title="Caxton Hall" label="Westminster Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q64569507" start="6485" end="6498" title="Caxton Street" label="Caxton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989156" start="6595" end="6625" title="Westminster Court of Burgesses" label="Westminster Court of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594219" start="6641" end="6664" title="St Martin in the Fields (parish)" label="St Martin in the Fields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6683" end="6702" title="City and Liberty of Westminster#Constituent parishes and other areas" label="parishes and places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="6728" end="6744" title="quarter sessions" label="quarter sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137312" start="6921" end="6937" title="County of London" label="County of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669574" start="7096" end="7131" title="Metropolitan Borough of Westminster" label="Metropolitan Borough of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="7155" end="7166" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="7216" end="7235" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989145" start="7255" end="7279" title="Westminster City Council" label="Westminster City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123526" start="7286" end="7317" title="City and Liberty of Westminster" label="City and Liberty of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669574" start="7326" end="7361" title="Metropolitan Borough of Westminster" label="Metropolitan Borough of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="7430" end="7449" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="7463" end="7476" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q822607" start="7547" end="7565" title="Kensington Gardens" label="Kensington Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="7599" end="7609" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="7726" end="7745" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453024" start="7789" end="7803" title="Thorney Island (Westminster)" label="Thorney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="7817" end="7834" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="7923" end="7933" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="7942" end="7969" title="List of English monarchs" label="kings and queens of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="7983" end="7999" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="8037" end="8058" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="8210" end="8220" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="8261" end="8271" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="8276" end="8301" title="Courts of England and Wales" label="England&amp;#x27;s law courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="8348" end="8362" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="8431" end="8439" title="British monarchy" label="monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="8479" end="8498" title="Palace of Whitehall" label="Palace of Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="8520" end="8542" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="8570" end="8587" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q609835" start="8651" end="8674" title="Royal Courts of Justice" label="Royal Courts of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="8826" end="8856" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="9088" end="9096" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322262" start="9135" end="9153" title="ribbon development" label="ribbon development"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="9187" end="9197" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9205" end="9216" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="9424" end="9433" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="9694" end="9715" title="Parliamentary Borough" label="Parliamentary Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q555978" start="9909" end="9922" title="Charles Booth (philanthropist)" label="Charles Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235874" start="9930" end="9941" title="poverty map" label="poverty map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096948" start="10184" end="10196" title="River Tyburn" label="River Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="10387" end="10391" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="10446" end="10460" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="10595" end="10610" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="10623" end="10637" title="social housing" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="10650" end="10665" title="council housing" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="10684" end="10697" title="Peabody Trust" label="Peabody Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q910862" start="10724" end="10738" title="George Peabody" label="George Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="10906" end="10913" title="metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="11006" end="11019" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="11119" end="11128" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="11207" end="11225" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="11364" end="11387" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11422" end="11436" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="11771" end="11783" title="Spin (public relations)" label="spin-doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="12004" end="12014" title="apartments" label="apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="12098" end="12115" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q123695" start="12163" end="12179" title="High commissioner (Commonwealth)" label="High Commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12188" end="12200" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252353" start="12215" end="12224" title="High Commission of Australia, London" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468577" start="12227" end="12238" title="High Commission of The Bahamas, London" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984321" start="12241" end="12247" title="High Commission of Brunei, London" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13589963" start="12250" end="12256" title="High Commission of Canada, London" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755085" start="12259" end="12265" title="High Commission of Cyprus, London" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843065" start="12268" end="12276" title="High Commission of Eswatini, London" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733625" start="12279" end="12284" title="High Commission of Ghana, London" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14996965" start="12287" end="12292" title="High Commission of India to the United Kingdom" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963189" start="12295" end="12302" title="High Commission of Lesotho, London" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963189" start="12305" end="12313" title="High Commission of Malaysia, London" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755096" start="12316" end="12327" title="High Commission of New Zealand, London" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843027" start="12330" end="12337" title="High Commission of Nigeria, London" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843032" start="12340" end="12348" title="High Commission of Pakistan, London" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843037" start="12351" end="12367" title="High Commission of Papua New Guinea, London" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12370" end="12380" title="High Commission of the Seychelles, London" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843056" start="12383" end="12392" title="High Commission of Singapore, London" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060051" start="12395" end="12407" title="High Commission of South Africa, London" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843147" start="12410" end="12429" title="High Commission of Trinidad and Tobago, London" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877675" start="12432" end="12438" title="High Commission of Uganda, London" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="12474" end="12492" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="12502" end="12515" title="public school (UK)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247544" start="12553" end="12578" title="University of Westminster" label="University of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q98959095" start="12637" end="12646" title="Finn Azaz" label="Finn Azaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760466" start="12672" end="12681" title="Andy Bray" label="Andy Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q79787163" start="12706" end="12719" title="Arthur Barnby" label="Arthur Barnby"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797122" start="12806" end="12820" title="Richard Colley (cricketer)" label="Richard Colley"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241335" start="12882" end="12896" title="Geoffrey Cooke (cricketer)" label="Geoffrey Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q56754405" start="12958" end="12969" title="John Fuller (cricketer)" label="John Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="13032" end="13043" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q86932669" start="13111" end="13124" title="Hady Ghandour" label="Hady Ghandour"/>
<link wikidata="Q75311613" start="13150" end="13164" title="Tatiana Hambro" label="Tatiana Hambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q295803" start="13205" end="13219" title="Tom Hiddleston" label="Tom Hiddleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q448683" start="13261" end="13279" title="Stephanie Leonidas" label="Stephanie Leonidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q234185" start="13302" end="13315" title="Alice Liddell" label="Alice Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512932" start="13366" end="13376" title="Edward Low" label="Edward Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="13390" end="13396" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535601" start="13427" end="13447" title="Golden Age of Piracy" label="Golden Age of Piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28288" start="13449" end="13463" title="Eddie Redmayne" label="Eddie Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q66124944" start="13498" end="13511" title="Quintin Twiss" label="Quintin Twiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q75272999" start="13564" end="13579" title="Mary Woffington" label="Mary Woffington"/>
<link wikidata="Q583866" start="14186" end="14198" title="Book frontispiece" label="frontispiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="14380" end="14424" title="The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors" label="The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="14740" end="14757" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37436" wikidata="Q215772" url="?curid=37436" title="Emergence">
<text>In philosophy, systems theory, science, and art, emergence occurs when a complex entity has properties or behaviors that its parts do not have on their own, and emerge only when they interact in a wider whole.

Emergence plays a central role in theories of integrative levels and of complex systems. For instance, the phenomenon of life as studied in biology is an emergent property of chemistry and physics.

In philosophy, theories that emphasize emergent properties have been called emergentism.

==In philosophy==

Philosophers often understand emergence as a claim about the etiology of a system&#x27;s properties. An emergent property of a system, in this context, is one that is not a property of any component of that system, but is still a feature of the system as a whole. Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950), one of the first modern philosophers to write on emergence, termed this a &quot;categorial novum&quot; (new category).

===Definitions===
This concept of emergence dates from at least the time of Aristotle. Many scientists and philosophers have written on the concept, including John Stuart Mill (&quot;Composition of Causes&quot;, 1843) and Julian Huxley (1887–1975).

The philosopher G. H. Lewes coined the term &quot;emergent&quot; in 1875, distinguishing it from the merely &quot;resultant&quot;:

Every resultant is either a sum or a difference of the co-operant forces; their sum, when their directions are the same – their difference, when their directions are contrary. Further, every resultant is clearly traceable in its components, because these are homogeneous and commensurable. It is otherwise with emergents, when, instead of adding measurable motion to measurable motion, or things of one kind to other individuals of their kind, there is a co-operation of things of unlike kinds. The emergent is unlike its components insofar as these are incommensurable, and it cannot be reduced to their sum or their difference.

===Strong and weak emergence===

Usage of the notion &quot;emergence&quot; may generally be subdivided into two perspectives, that of &quot;weak emergence&quot; and &quot;strong emergence&quot;. One paper discussing this division is &quot;Weak Emergence&quot;, by philosopher Mark Bedau. In terms of physical systems, weak emergence is a type of emergence in which the emergent property is amenable to computer simulation or similar forms of after-the-fact analysis (for example, the formation of a traffic jam, the structure of a flock of starlings in flight or a school of fish, or the formation of galaxies). Crucial in these simulations is that the interacting members retain their independence. If not, a new entity is formed with new, emergent properties: this is called strong emergence, which it is argued cannot be simulated, analysed or reduced.

David Chalmers writes that emergence often causes confusion in philosophy and science due to a failure to demarcate strong and weak emergence, which are &quot;quite different concepts&quot;.

Some common points between the two notions are that emergence concerns new properties produced as the system grows, which is to say ones which are not shared with its components or prior states. Also, it is assumed that the properties are supervenient rather than metaphysically primitive.

Weak emergence describes new properties arising in systems as a result of the interactions at a fundamental level. However, Bedau stipulates that the properties can be determined only by observing or simulating the system, and not by any process of a reductionist analysis. As a consequence the emerging properties are scale dependent: they are only observable if the system is large enough to exhibit the phenomenon. Chaotic, unpredictable behaviour can be seen as an emergent phenomenon, while at a microscopic scale the behaviour of the constituent parts can be fully deterministic.

Bedau notes that weak emergence is not a universal metaphysical solvent, as the hypothesis that consciousness is weakly emergent would not resolve the traditional philosophical questions about the physicality of consciousness. However, Bedau concludes that adopting this view would provide a precise notion that emergence is involved in consciousness, and second, the notion of weak emergence is metaphysically benign.

Strong emergence describes the direct causal action of a high-level system on its components; qualities produced this way are irreducible to the system&#x27;s constituent parts. The whole is other than the sum of its parts. It is argued then that no simulation of the system can exist, for such a simulation would itself constitute a reduction of the system to its constituent parts. Physics lacks well-established examples of strong emergence, unless it is interpreted as the impossibility &quot;in practice&quot; to explain the whole in terms of the parts. Practical impossibility may be a more useful distinction than one in principle, since it is easier to determine and quantify, and does not imply the use of mysterious forces, but simply reflects the limits of our capability.

====Viability of strong emergence====
Some thinkers question the plausibility of strong emergence as contravening our usual understanding of physics. Mark A. Bedau observes:

Strong emergence can be criticized for leading to causal overdetermination. The canonical example concerns emergent mental states (M and M∗) that supervene on physical states (P and P∗) respectively. Let M and M∗ be emergent properties. Let M∗ supervene on base property P∗. What happens when M causes M∗? Jaegwon Kim says:

If M is the cause of M∗, then M∗ is overdetermined because M∗ can also be thought of as being determined by P. One escape-route that a strong emergentist could take would be to deny downward causation. However, this would remove the proposed reason that emergent mental states must supervene on physical states, which in turn would call physicalism into question, and thus be unpalatable for some philosophers and physicists.

Carroll and Parola propose a taxonomy that classifies emergent phenomena by how the macro-description relates to the underlying micro-dynamics.

; Type‑0 (Featureless) Emergence:
: A coarse-graining map Φ from a micro state space &quot;A&quot; to a macro state space &quot;B&quot; that commutes with time evolution, without requiring any further decomposition into subsystems.
; Type‑1 (Local) Emergence:
: Emergence where the macro theory is defined in terms of localized collections of micro-subsystems. This category is subdivided into:
:: Type‑1a (Direct) Emergence: When the emergence map Φ is algorithmically simple (i.e. compressible), so that the macro behavior is easily deduced from the micro-states.
:: Type‑1b (Incompressible) Emergence: When Φ is algorithmically complex (i.e. incompressible), making the macro behavior appear more novel despite being determined by the micro-dynamics.
; Type‑2 (Nonlocal) Emergence:
: Cases in which both the micro and macro theories admit subsystem decompositions, yet the macro entities are defined nonlocally with respect to the micro-structure, meaning that macro behavior depends on widely distributed micro information.
; Type‑3 (Augmented) Emergence:
: A form of strong emergence in which the macro theory introduces additional ontological variables that do not supervene on the micro-states, thereby positing genuinely novel macro-level entities.
===Objective or subjective quality===
Crutchfield regards the properties of complexity and organization of any system as subjective qualities determined by the observer.

Defining structure and detecting the emergence of complexity in nature are inherently subjective, though essential, scientific activities. Despite the difficulties, these problems can be analysed in terms of how model-building observers infer from measurements the computational capabilities embedded in non-linear processes. An observer&#x27;s notion of what is ordered, what is random, and what is complex in its environment depends directly on its computational resources: the amount of raw measurement data, of memory, and of time available for estimation and inference. The discovery of structure in an environment depends more critically and subtly, though, on how those resources are organized. The descriptive power of the observer&#x27;s chosen (or implicit) computational model class, for example, can be an overwhelming determinant in finding regularity in data.
The low entropy of an ordered system can be viewed as an example of subjective emergence: the observer sees an ordered system by ignoring the underlying microstructure (i.e. movement of molecules or elementary particles) and concludes that the system has a low entropy.
On the other hand, chaotic, unpredictable behaviour can also be seen as subjective emergent, while at a microscopic scale the movement of the constituent parts can be fully deterministic.

==In science==
In physics, emergence is used to describe a property, law, or phenomenon which occurs at macroscopic scales (in space or time) but not at microscopic scales, despite the fact that a macroscopic system can be viewed as a very large ensemble of microscopic systems.
An emergent behavior of a physical system is a qualitative property that can only occur in the limit that the number of microscopic constituents tends to infinity.
According to Robert Laughlin, for many-particle systems, nothing can be calculated exactly from the microscopic equations, and macroscopic systems are characterised by broken symmetry: the symmetry present in the microscopic equations is not present in the macroscopic system, due to phase transitions. As a result, these macroscopic systems are described in their own terminology, and have properties that do not depend on many microscopic details.

Novelist Arthur Koestler used the metaphor of Janus (a symbol of the unity underlying complements like open/shut, peace/war) to illustrate how the two perspectives (strong vs. weak or holistic vs. reductionistic) should be treated as non-exclusive, and should work together to address the issues of emergence. Theoretical physicist Philip W. Anderson states it this way:

Meanwhile, others have worked towards developing analytical evidence of strong emergence. Renormalization methods in theoretical physics enable physicists to study critical phenomena that are not tractable as the combination of their parts. In 2009, Gu &quot;et al.&quot; presented a class of infinite physical systems that exhibits non-computable macroscopic properties. More precisely, if one could compute certain macroscopic properties of these systems from the microscopic description of these systems, then one would be able to solve computational problems known to be undecidable in computer science. These results concern infinite systems, finite systems being considered computable. However, macroscopic concepts which only apply in the limit of infinite systems, such as phase transitions and the renormalization group, are important for understanding and modeling real, finite physical systems. Gu &quot;et al.&quot; concluded that

==In humanity==

Human beings are the basic elements of social systems, which perpetually interact and create, maintain, or untangle mutual social bonds. Social bonds in social systems are perpetually changing in the sense of the ongoing reconfiguration of their structure. An early argument (1904–05) for the emergence of social formations can be found in Max Weber&#x27;s most famous work, &quot;The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism&quot;. Recently, the emergence of a new social system is linked with the emergence of order from nonlinear relationships among multiple interacting units, where multiple interacting units are individual thoughts, consciousness, and actions. In the case of the global economic system, under capitalism, growth, accumulation and innovation can be considered emergent processes where not only does technological processes sustain growth, but growth becomes the source of further innovations in a recursive, self-expanding spiral. In this sense, the exponential trend of the growth curve reveals the presence of a long-term positive feedback among growth, accumulation, and innovation; and the emergence of new structures and institutions connected to the multi-scale process of growth. This is reflected in the work of Karl Polanyi, who traces the process by which labor and nature are converted into commodities in the passage from an economic system based on agriculture to one based on industry. This shift, along with the idea of the self-regulating market, set the stage not only for another economy but also for another society. The principle of emergence is also brought forth when thinking about alternatives to the current economic system based on growth facing social and ecological limits. Both degrowth and social ecological economics have argued in favor of a co-evolutionary perspective for theorizing about transformations that overcome the dependence of human wellbeing on economic growth.

Economic trends and patterns which emerge are studied intensively by economists. Within the field of group facilitation and organization development, there have been a number of new group processes that are designed to maximize emergence and self-organization, by offering a minimal set of effective initial conditions. Examples of these processes include SEED-SCALE, appreciative inquiry, Future Search, the world cafe or knowledge cafe, Open Space Technology, and others (Holman, 2010). In international development, concepts of emergence have been used within a theory of social change termed SEED-SCALE to show how standard principles interact to bring forward socio-economic development fitted to cultural values, community economics, and natural environment (local solutions emerging from the larger socio-econo-biosphere). These principles can be implemented utilizing a sequence of standardized tasks that self-assemble in individually specific ways utilizing recursive evaluative criteria.

Looking at emergence in the context of social and systems change, invites us to reframe our thinking on parts and wholes and their interrelation. Unlike machines, living systems at all levels of recursion - be it a sentient body, a tree, a family, an organisation, the education system, the economy, the health system, the political system etc - are continuously creating themselves. They are continually growing and changing along with their surrounding elements, and therefore are more than the sum of their parts. As Peter Senge and co-authors put forward in the book &quot;Presence: Exploring profound change in People, Organizations and Society&quot;, &quot;as long as our thinking is governed by habit - notably industrial, &quot;machine age&quot; concepts such as control, predictability, standardization, and &quot;faster is better&quot; - we will continue to recreate institutions as they have been, despite their disharmony with the larger world, and the need for all living systems to evolve.&quot; While change is predictably constant, it is unpredictable in direction and often occurs at second and nth orders of systemic relationality. Understanding emergence and what creates the conditions for different forms of emergence to occur, either insidious or nourishing vitality, is essential in the search for deep transformations.

The works of Nora Bateson and her colleagues at the International Bateson Institute delve into this. Since 2012, they have been researching questions such as &quot;what makes a living system ready to change? Can unforeseen ready-ness for change be nourished?&quot; Here being ready is not thought of as being prepared, but rather as nourishing the flexibility we do not yet know will be needed. These inquiries challenge the common view that a theory of change is produced from an identified preferred goal or outcome. As explained in their paper &quot;An essay on ready-ing: Tending the prelude to change&quot;: &quot;While linear managing or controlling of the direction of change may appear desirable, tending to how the system becomes ready allows for pathways of possibility previously unimagined.&quot; This brings a new lens to the field of emergence in social and systems change as it looks to tending the pre-emergent process. Warm Data Labs are the fruit of their praxis, they are spaces for transcontextual mutual learning in which aphanipoetic phenomena unfold. (Read about Aphanipoesis ). Having hosted hundreds of Warm Data processes with 1000s of participants, they have found that these spaces of shared poly-learning across contexts lead to a realm of potential change, a necessarily obscured zone of wild interaction of unseen, unsaid, unknown flexibility. It is such flexibility that nourishes the ready-ing living systems require to respond to complex situations in new ways and change. In other words, this readying process preludes what will emerge. When exploring questions of social change, it is important to ask ourselves, what is submerging in the current social imaginary and perhaps, rather than focus all our resources and energy on driving direct order responses, to nourish flexibility with ourselves, and the systems we are a part of.

Another approach that engages with the concept of emergence for social change is Theory U, where &quot;deep emergence&quot; is the result of self-transcending knowledge after a successful journey along the U through layers of awareness. This practice nourishes transformation at the inner-being level, which enables new ways of being, seeing and relating to emerge. The concept of emergence has also been employed in the field of facilitation. In &quot;Emergent Strategy&quot;, adrienne maree brown defines emergent strategies as &quot;ways for humans to practice complexity and grow the future through relatively simple interactions&quot;.

In linguistics, the concept of emergence has been applied in the domain of stylometry to explain the interrelation between the syntactical structures of the text and the author style (Slautina, Marusenko, 2014). It has also been argued that the structure and regularity of language grammar, or at least language change, is an emergent phenomenon. While each speaker merely tries to reach their own communicative goals, they use language in a particular way. If enough speakers behave in that way, language is changed. In a wider sense, the norms of a language, i.e. the linguistic conventions of its speech society, can be seen as a system emerging from long-time participation in communicative problem-solving in various social circumstances.

==In technology==
The bulk conductive response of binary (RC) electrical networks with random arrangements, known as the Universal Dielectric Response (UDR), can be seen as emergent properties of such physical systems. Such arrangements can be used as simple physical prototypes for deriving mathematical formulae for the emergent responses of complex systems. Internet traffic can also exhibit some seemingly emergent properties. In the congestion control mechanism, TCP flows can become globally synchronized at bottlenecks, simultaneously increasing and then decreasing throughput in coordination. Congestion, widely regarded as a nuisance, is possibly an emergent property of the spreading of bottlenecks across a network in high traffic flows which can be considered as a phase transition. Some artificially intelligent (AI) computer applications simulate emergent behavior. One example is Boids, which mimics the swarming behavior of birds.

==In religion and art==
In religion, emergence grounds expressions of religious naturalism and syntheism in which a sense of the sacred is perceived in the workings of entirely naturalistic processes by which more complex forms arise or evolve from simpler forms. Examples are detailed in &quot;The Sacred Emergence of Nature&quot; by Ursula Goodenough &amp; Terrence Deacon and &quot;Beyond Reductionism: Reinventing the Sacred&quot; by Stuart Kauffman, both from 2006, as well as &quot;Syntheism – Creating God in The Internet Age&quot; by Alexander Bard &amp; Jan Söderqvist from 2014 and &quot;Emergentism: A Religion of Complexity for the Metamodern World&quot; by Brendan Graham Dempsey (2022).

Michael J. Pearce has used emergence to describe the experience of works of art in relation to contemporary neuroscience. Practicing artist Leonel Moura, in turn, attributes to his &quot;artbots&quot; a real, if nonetheless rudimentary, creativity based on emergent principles.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
===Bibliography===

* 
* 
* Bejan, Adrian; Zane, J. P. (2012). &quot;Design in Nature: How the Constructal Law Governs Evolution in Biology, Physics, Technology, and Social Organizations&quot;. Doubleday. 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==

* Alexander, V. N. (2011). &quot;The Biologist&#x27;s Mistress: Rethinking Self-Organization in Art, Literature and Nature&quot;. Litchfield Park AZ: Emergent Publications.
* 
* Chalmers, David J. (2002). &quot;Strong and Weak Emergence&quot; Republished in P. Clayton and P. Davies, eds. (2006) &quot;The Re-Emergence of Emergence&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Philip Clayton &amp; Paul Davies (eds.) (2006). &quot;The Re-Emergence of Emergence: The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Felipe Cucker and Stephen Smale (2007), The Japanese Journal of Mathematics, &quot;The Mathematics of Emergence&quot;
* 
* Hoffmann, Peter M. &quot;Life&#x27;s Ratchet: How Molecular Machines Extract Order from Chaos&quot; (2012), Basic Books.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Ignazio Licata &amp; Ammar Sakaji (eds) (2008). &quot;Physics of Emergence and Organization&quot;, , World Scientific and Imperial College Press.
* 
* 
* 
* Solé, Ricard and Goodwin, Brian (2000) Signs of life: how complexity pervades biology, Basic Books, New York
* Jakub Tkac &amp; Jiri Kroc (2017), Cellular Automaton Simulation of Dynamic Recrystallization: Introduction into Self-Organization and Emergence (Software) (PDF) Cellular Automaton Simulation of Dynamic Recrystallization: Introduction into Self-Organization and Emergence &quot;Video - Simulation of DRX&quot;
* 
* architectureofemergence.com
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* The Emergent Universe: An interactive introduction to emergent phenomena, from ant colonies to Alzheimer&#x27;s.
* Exploring Emergence: An introduction to emergence using CA and Conway&#x27;s Game of Life from the MIT Media Lab
* ISCE group: Institute for the Study of Coherence and Emergence.
* Towards modeling of emergence: lecture slides from Helsinki University of Technology
* Biomimetic Architecture – Emergence applied to building and construction
* Studies in Emergent Order: Studies in Emergent Order (SIEO) is an open-access journal
* Emergence
* DIEP: Dutch Institute for Emergent Phenomena</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3" end="13" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="15" end="29" title="systems theory" label="systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="31" end="38" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="44" end="47" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="49" end="58" title="Emergence" label="emergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723685" start="257" end="274" title="integrative level" label="integrative level"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="283" end="297" title="complex system" label="complex system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="332" end="336" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="351" end="358" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="386" end="395" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="400" end="407" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724133" start="486" end="497" title="emergentism" label="emergentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="580" end="588" title="etiology" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="594" end="600" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q76501" start="783" end="799" title="Nicolai Hartmann" label="Nicolai Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1009" end="1018" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="1092" end="1108" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156793" start="1116" end="1137" title="Composition of Causes" label="Composition of Causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="1155" end="1168" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275943" start="1199" end="1210" title="George Henry Lewes" label="G. H. Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="1574" end="1585" title="homogeneous" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q408285" start="1590" end="1603" title="Commensurability (philosophy of science)" label="commensurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766688" start="2222" end="2232" title="Mark Bedau" label="Mark Bedau"/>
<link wikidata="Q366123" start="2803" end="2817" title="David Chalmers" label="David Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202834" start="3234" end="3246" title="supervenient" label="supervenient"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="3537" end="3549" title="Reductionism" label="reductionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q622381" start="3857" end="3870" title="Deterministic system" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766688" start="3873" end="3878" title="Mark Bedau" label="Bedau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="3969" end="3982" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="4036" end="4059" title="Philosophy of mind" label="philosophical questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="4419" end="4430" title="irreducible (philosophy)" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q331449" start="5310" end="5327" title="overdetermination" label="overdetermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q180893" start="5559" end="5570" title="Jaegwon Kim" label="Jaegwon Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q336369" start="5760" end="5778" title="downward causation" label="downward causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="5915" end="5926" title="physicalism" label="physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="7528" end="7538" title="Subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="7539" end="7548" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="qualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="8460" end="8467" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="8929" end="8936" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189997" start="9367" end="9382" title="Robert Laughlin" label="Robert Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="9814" end="9829" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q167685" start="9851" end="9856" title="Janus" label="Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="9989" end="9997" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="10002" end="10016" title="reductionistic" label="reductionistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="10137" end="10155" title="Philip W. Anderson" label="Philip W. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="10267" end="10282" title="Renormalization group" label="Renormalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="10958" end="10974" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="10984" end="11005" title="renormalization group" label="renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="11478" end="11487" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="11519" end="11568" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="11859" end="11869" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="12198" end="12206" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q318029" start="12385" end="12397" title="Karl Polanyi" label="Karl Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q961310" start="12848" end="12858" title="planetary boundaries" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q611217" start="12872" end="12880" title="degrowth" label="degrowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049066" start="12892" end="12912" title="ecological economics" label="ecological economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="13055" end="13070" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389647" start="13429" end="13439" title="SEED-SCALE" label="SEED-SCALE"/>
<link wikidata="Q621699" start="13441" end="13461" title="appreciative inquiry" label="appreciative inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733014" start="13496" end="13510" title="knowledge cafe" label="knowledge cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q921550" start="13512" end="13533" title="Open Space Technology" label="Open Space Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389647" start="13669" end="13679" title="SEED-SCALE" label="SEED-SCALE"/>
<link wikidata="Q910150" start="13987" end="14000" title="self-assemble" label="self-assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="14123" end="14130" title="Systems theory" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506039" start="14236" end="14250" title="living systems" label="living systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458955" start="15765" end="15776" title="Flexibility (personality)" label="flexibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247560" start="16391" end="16397" title="Praxis (process)" label="praxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150166" start="17716" end="17728" title="facilitator" label="facilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56380732" start="17764" end="17784" title="Adrienne Maree Brown" label="adrienne maree brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="17931" end="17942" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032038" start="18003" end="18013" title="stylometry" label="stylometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="18201" end="18209" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="18210" end="18217" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q524648" start="18231" end="18246" title="language change" label="language change"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291885" start="18794" end="18829" title="Universal dielectric response" label="Universal Dielectric Response (UDR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="19141" end="19144" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="19450" end="19466" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q833640" start="19568" end="19573" title="Boids" label="Boids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915018" start="19592" end="19609" title="swarming behavior" label="swarming behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873351" start="19691" end="19711" title="religious naturalism" label="religious naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364384" start="19716" end="19725" title="syntheism" label="syntheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="19750" end="19756" title="sacred" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q723897" start="19835" end="19842" title="Complexity" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552485" start="19956" end="19973" title="Ursula Goodenough" label="Ursula Goodenough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703450" start="19980" end="19995" title="Terrence Deacon" label="Terrence Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q516009" start="20059" end="20074" title="Stuart Kauffman" label="Stuart Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q615625" start="20163" end="20177" title="Alexander Bard" label="Alexander Bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150030" start="20184" end="20198" title="Jan Söderqvist" label="Jan Söderqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196208" start="20323" end="20340" title="Michael Pearce (artist)" label="Michael J. Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526244" start="20463" end="20475" title="Leonel Moura" label="Leonel Moura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183362" start="21283" end="21297" title="Philip Clayton (philosopher)" label="Philip Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q535733" start="21304" end="21315" title="Paul Davies" label="Paul Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q315394" start="21479" end="21492" title="Stephen Smale" label="Stephen Smale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992885" start="21719" end="21733" title="Ignazio Licata" label="Ignazio Licata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357666" start="21820" end="21836" title="World Scientific" label="World Scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878937" start="21841" end="21863" title="Imperial College Press" label="Imperial College Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q189156" start="22532" end="22534" title="Cellular automaton" label="CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q244615" start="22539" end="22565" title="Conway&amp;#x27;s Game of Life" label="Conway&amp;#x27;s Game of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="22575" end="22588" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37438" wikidata="Q854457" url="?curid=37438" title="Complex system">
<text>A complex system is a system composed of many components which may interact with each other. Examples of complex systems are Earth&#x27;s global climate, organisms, the human brain, infrastructure such as power grid, transportation or communication systems, complex software and electronic systems, social and economic organizations (like cities), an ecosystem, a living cell, and, ultimately, for some authors, the entire universe.

The behavior of a complex system is intrinsically difficult to model due to the dependencies, competitions, relationships, and other types of interactions between their parts or between a given system and its environment. Systems that are &quot;complex&quot; have distinct properties that arise from these relationships, such as nonlinearity, emergence, spontaneous order, adaptation, and feedback loops, among others. Because such systems appear in a wide variety of fields, the commonalities among them have become the topic of their independent area of research. In many cases, it is useful to represent such a system as a network where the nodes represent the components and links represent their interactions.

The term &quot;complex systems&quot; often refers to the study of complex systems, which is an approach to science that investigates how relationships between a system&#x27;s parts give rise to its collective behaviors and how the system interacts and forms relationships with its environment. The study of complex systems regards collective, or system-wide, behaviors as the fundamental object of study; for this reason, complex systems can be understood as an alternative paradigm to reductionism, which attempts to explain systems in terms of their constituent parts and the individual interactions between them.

As an interdisciplinary domain, complex systems draw contributions from many different fields, such as the study of self-organization and critical phenomena from physics, of spontaneous order from the social sciences, chaos from mathematics, adaptation from biology, and many others. &quot;Complex systems&quot; is therefore often used as a broad term encompassing a research approach to problems in many diverse disciplines, including statistical physics, information theory, nonlinear dynamics, anthropology, computer science, meteorology, sociology, economics, psychology, and biology.

== Key concepts ==

=== Adaptation ===
Complex adaptive systems are special cases of complex systems that are adaptive in that they have the capacity to change and learn from experience. Examples of complex adaptive systems include the international trade markets, social insect and ant colonies, the biosphere and the ecosystem, the brain and the immune system, the cell and the developing embryo, cities, manufacturing businesses and any human social group-based endeavor in a cultural and social system such as political parties or communities.

==Features==
Complex systems may have the following features:

;Complex systems may be open
: Complex systems are usually open systems – that is, they exist in a thermodynamic gradient and dissipate energy. In other words, complex systems are frequently far from energetic equilibrium: but despite this flux, there may be pattern stability, see synergetics.

;Complex systems may exhibit critical transitions

:Critical transitions are abrupt shifts in the state of ecosystems, the climate, financial and economic systems or other complex systems that may occur when changing conditions pass a critical or bifurcation point. The &#x27;direction of critical slowing down&#x27; in a system&#x27;s state space may be indicative of a system&#x27;s future state after such transitions when delayed negative feedbacks leading to oscillatory or other complex dynamics are weak.

;Complex systems may be nested
:The components of a complex system may themselves be complex systems. For example, an economy is made up of organisations, which are made up of people, which are made up of cells – all of which are complex systems. The arrangement of interactions within complex bipartite networks may be nested as well. More specifically, bipartite ecological and organisational networks of mutually beneficial interactions were found to have a nested structure. This structure promotes indirect facilitation and a system&#x27;s capacity to persist under increasingly harsh circumstances as well as the potential for large-scale systemic regime shifts.

;Dynamic network of multiplicity
:As well as coupling rules, the dynamic network of a complex system is important. Small-world or scale-free networks which have many local interactions and a smaller number of inter-area connections are often employed. Natural complex systems often exhibit such topologies. In the human cortex for example, we see dense local connectivity and a few very long axon projections between regions inside the cortex and to other brain regions.
; May produce emergent phenomena
:Complex systems may exhibit behaviors that are emergent, which is to say that while the results may be sufficiently determined by the activity of the systems&#x27; basic constituents, they may have properties that can only be studied at a higher level. For example, empirical food webs display regular, scale-invariant features across aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems when studied at the level of clustered &#x27;trophic&#x27; species. Another example is offered by the termites in a mound which have physiology, biochemistry and biological development at one level of analysis, whereas their social behavior and mound building is a property that emerges from the collection of termites and needs to be analyzed at a different level.

; Relationships are non-linear
: In practical terms, this means a small perturbation may cause a large effect (see butterfly effect), a proportional effect, or even no effect at all. In linear systems, the effect is &quot;always&quot; directly proportional to cause. See nonlinearity.

; Relationships contain feedback loops
:Both negative (damping) and positive (amplifying) feedback are always found in complex systems. The effects of an element&#x27;s behavior are fed back in such a way that the element itself is altered.

== History ==
In 1948, Dr. Warren Weaver published an essay on &quot;Science and Complexity&quot;, exploring the diversity of problem types by contrasting problems of simplicity, disorganized complexity, and organized complexity. Weaver described these as &quot;problems which involve dealing simultaneously with a sizable number of factors which are interrelated into an organic whole.&quot;

While the explicit study of complex systems dates at least to the 1970s, the first research institute focused on complex systems, the Santa Fe Institute, was founded in 1984. Early Santa Fe Institute participants included physics Nobel laureates Murray Gell-Mann and Philip Anderson, economics Nobel laureate Kenneth Arrow, and Manhattan Project scientists George Cowan and Herb Anderson. Today, there are over 50 institutes and research centers focusing on complex systems.

Since the late 1990s, the interest of mathematical physicists in researching economic phenomena has been on the rise. The proliferation of cross-disciplinary research with the application of solutions originated from the physics epistemology has entailed a gradual paradigm shift in the theoretical articulations and methodological approaches in economics, primarily in financial economics. The development has resulted in the emergence of a new branch of discipline, namely &quot;econophysics&quot;, which is broadly defined as a cross-discipline that applies statistical physics methodologies which are mostly based on the complex systems theory and the chaos theory for economics analysis.

The 2021 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Syukuro Manabe, Klaus Hasselmann, and Giorgio Parisi for their work to understand complex systems. Their work was used to create more accurate computer models of the effect of global warming on the Earth&#x27;s climate.

== Applications ==

===Complexity in practice===
The traditional approach to dealing with complexity is to reduce or constrain it. Typically, this involves compartmentalization: dividing a large system into separate parts. Organizations, for instance, divide their work into departments that each deal with separate issues. Engineering systems are often designed using modular components. However, modular designs become susceptible to failure when issues arise that bridge the divisions.

===Complexity of cities===
Jane Jacobs described cities as being a problem in organized complexity in 1961, citing Dr. Weaver&#x27;s 1948 essay. As an example, she explains how an abundance of factors interplay into how various urban spaces lead to a diversity of interactions, and how changing those factors can change how the space is used, and how well the space supports the functions of the city. She further illustrates how cities have been severely damaged when approached as a problem in simplicity by replacing organized complexity with simple and predictable spaces, such as Le Corbusier&#x27;s &quot;Radiant City&quot; and Ebenezer Howard&#x27;s &quot;Garden City&quot;. Since then, others have written at length on the complexity of cities.

===Complexity economics===
Over the last decades, within the emerging field of complexity economics, new predictive tools have been developed to explain economic growth. Such is the case with the models built by the Santa Fe Institute in 1989 and the more recent economic complexity index (ECI), introduced by the MIT physicist Cesar A. Hidalgo and the Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann.

Recurrence quantification analysis has been employed to detect the characteristic of business cycles and economic development. To this end, Orlando et al. developed the so-called recurrence quantification correlation index (RQCI) to test correlations of RQA on a sample signal and then investigated the application to business time series. The said index has been proven to detect hidden changes in time series. Further, Orlando et al., over an extensive dataset, shown that recurrence quantification analysis may help in anticipating transitions from laminar (i.e. regular) to turbulent (i.e. chaotic) phases such as USA GDP in 1949, 1953, etc. Last but not least, it has been demonstrated that recurrence quantification analysis can detect differences between macroeconomic variables and highlight hidden features of economic dynamics.

=== Complexity and education ===
Focusing on issues of student persistence with their studies, Forsman, Moll and Linder explore the &quot;viability of using complexity science as a frame to extend methodological applications for physics education research&quot;, finding that &quot;framing a social network analysis within a complexity science perspective offers a new and powerful applicability across a broad range of PER topics&quot;.

=== Complexity in healthcare research and practice ===

Healthcare systems are prime examples of complex systems, characterized by interactions among diverse stakeholders, such as patients, providers, policymakers, and researchers, across various sectors like health, government, community, and education. These systems demonstrate properties like non-linearity, emergence, adaptation, and feedback loops. Complexity science in healthcare frames knowledge translation as a dynamic and interconnected network of processes—problem identification, knowledge creation, synthesis, implementation, and evaluation—rather than a linear or cyclical sequence. Such approaches emphasize the importance of understanding and leveraging the interactions within and between these processes and stakeholders to optimize the creation and movement of knowledge. By acknowledging the complex, adaptive nature of healthcare systems, complexity science advocates for continuous stakeholder engagement, transdisciplinary collaboration, and flexible strategies to effectively translate research into practice.

=== Complexity and biology ===
Complexity science has been applied to living organisms, and in particular to biological systems. Within the emerging field of fractal physiology, bodily signals, such as heart rate or brain activity, are characterized using entropy or fractal indices. The goal is often to assess the state and the health of the underlying system, and diagnose potential disorders and illnesses.

===Complexity and chaos theory===
Complex systems theory is related to chaos theory, which in turn has its origins more than a century ago in the work of the French mathematician Henri Poincaré. Chaos is sometimes viewed as extremely complicated information, rather than as an absence of order. Chaotic systems remain deterministic, though their long-term behavior can be difficult to predict with any accuracy. With perfect knowledge of the initial conditions and the relevant equations describing the chaotic system&#x27;s behavior, one can theoretically make perfectly accurate predictions of the system, though in practice this is impossible to do with arbitrary accuracy.

The emergence of complex systems theory shows a domain between deterministic order and randomness which is complex. This is referred to as the &quot;edge of chaos&quot;.

When one analyzes complex systems, sensitivity to initial conditions, for example, is not an issue as important as it is within chaos theory, in which it prevails. As stated by Colander, the study of complexity is the opposite of the study of chaos. Complexity is about how a huge number of extremely complicated and dynamic sets of relationships can generate some simple behavioral patterns, whereas chaotic behavior, in the sense of deterministic chaos, is the result of a relatively small number of non-linear interactions. For recent examples in economics and business see Stoop et al. who discussed Android&#x27;s market position, Orlando who explained the corporate dynamics in terms of mutual synchronization and chaos regularization of bursts in a group of chaotically bursting cells and Orlando et al. who modelled financial data (Financial Stress Index, swap and equity, emerging and developed, corporate and government, short and long maturity) with a low-dimensional deterministic model.

Therefore, the main difference between chaotic systems and complex systems is their history. Chaotic systems do not rely on their history as complex ones do. Chaotic behavior pushes a system in equilibrium into chaotic order, which means, in other words, out of what we traditionally define as &#x27;order&#x27;. On the other hand, complex systems evolve far from equilibrium at the edge of chaos. They evolve at a critical state built up by a history of irreversible and unexpected events, which physicist Murray Gell-Mann called &quot;an accumulation of frozen accidents&quot;. In a sense chaotic systems can be regarded as a subset of complex systems distinguished precisely by this absence of historical dependence. Many real complex systems are, in practice and over long but finite periods, robust. However, they do possess the potential for radical qualitative change of kind whilst retaining systemic integrity. Metamorphosis serves as perhaps more than a metaphor for such transformations.

===Complexity and network science===
A complex system is usually composed of many components and their interactions. Such a system can be represented by a network where nodes represent the components and links represent their interactions. For example, the Internet can be represented as a network composed of nodes (computers) and links (direct connections between computers). Other examples of complex networks include social networks, financial institution interdependencies, airline networks, and biological networks.

== Notable scholars ==

== See also ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Complexity Explained.
* L.A.N. Amaral and J.M. Ottino, &quot;Complex networks – augmenting the framework for the study of complex system&quot;, 2004.
* Walter Clemens, Jr., &quot;Complexity Science and World Affairs&quot;, SUNY Press, 2013.
* A. Gogolin, A. Nersesyan and A. Tsvelik, &quot;Theory of strongly correlated systems &quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
* Nigel Goldenfeld and Leo P. Kadanoff, &quot;Simple Lessons from Complexity&quot; , 1999
* Kelly, K. (1995). &quot;Out of Control&quot;, Perseus Books Group.
* Syed M. Mehmud (2011), &quot;A Healthcare Exchange Complexity Model&quot;
* Preiser-Kapeller, Johannes, &quot;Calculating Byzantium. Social Network Analysis and Complexity Sciences as tools for the exploration of medieval social dynamics&quot;. August 2010
* Stefan Thurner, Peter Klimek, Rudolf Hanel: &quot;Introduction to the Theory of Complex Systems&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2018, 
* SFI @30, Foundations &amp; Frontiers (2014).

== External links ==
* 
* 
* (Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems)
* 
* Complex systems in scholarpedia.
* Complex Systems Society
* (Australian) Complex systems research network.
* Complex Systems Modeling based on Luis M. Rocha, 1999.
* CRM Complex systems research group
* The Center for Complex Systems Research, Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Physics and Complex Systems (IFISC)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="2" end="16" title="Complex system" label="complex system"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="22" end="28" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="145" end="152" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="154" end="163" title="organisms" label="organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="169" end="180" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="266" end="274" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="339" end="345" title="cities" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="351" end="360" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="371" end="375" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="423" end="431" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q723897" start="679" end="686" title="Complexity" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="763" end="775" title="Nonlinear system" label="nonlinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="777" end="786" title="emergence" label="emergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q631781" start="788" end="805" title="spontaneous order" label="spontaneous order"/>
<link wikidata="Q581233" start="807" end="817" title="Complex adaptive system" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="823" end="837" title="Feedback" label="feedback loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="1636" end="1648" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q609408" start="1883" end="1900" title="self-organization" label="self-organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q631781" start="1941" end="1958" title="spontaneous order" label="spontaneous order"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="1985" end="1990" title="Chaos theory" label="chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q581233" start="2009" end="2019" title="Complex adaptive system" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="2203" end="2222" title="statistical physics" label="statistical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="2224" end="2242" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="2244" end="2262" title="Nonlinear system" label="nonlinear dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="2264" end="2276" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="2278" end="2294" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="2296" end="2307" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2309" end="2318" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="2320" end="2329" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2331" end="2341" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2347" end="2354" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q581233" start="2396" end="2419" title="Complex adaptive system" label="Complex adaptive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497134" start="2467" end="2475" title="Adaptive system" label="adaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="2607" end="2612" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="2640" end="2643" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="2658" end="2667" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="2676" end="2685" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="2691" end="2696" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="2705" end="2718" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2724" end="2728" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="2748" end="2754" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2764" end="2788" title="Manufacturing" label="manufacturing businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639378" start="2849" end="2862" title="social system" label="social system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="2871" end="2888" title="Political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="2892" end="2903" title="Community" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q898312" start="3028" end="3040" title="Open system (systems theory)" label="open systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="3068" end="3081" title="thermodynamic" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="3179" end="3190" title="thermodynamic equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3228" end="3245" title="pattern stability" label="pattern stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506712" start="3251" end="3262" title="synergetics (Haken)" label="synergetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375676" start="3317" end="3336" title="Critical transition" label="Critical transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="3372" end="3381" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="3388" end="3395" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154357" start="3512" end="3529" title="bifurcation theory" label="bifurcation point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3802" end="3808" title="Hierarchy#Nested hierarchy" label="nested"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3896" end="3903" title="Economics" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="3918" end="3930" title="organisation" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215627" start="3954" end="3960" title="person" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="3983" end="3988" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q944517" start="4493" end="4501" title="coupling" label="coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915005" start="4521" end="4528" title="Biological network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q840026" start="4563" end="4574" title="Small-world network" label="Small-world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071058" start="4578" end="4588" title="Scale-free network" label="scale-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="4768" end="4774" title="Cerebral cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="4840" end="4844" title="axonal" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="5000" end="5008" title="emergence" label="emergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="5425" end="5433" title="termites" label="termites"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="5548" end="5563" title="social behavior" label="social behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q187536" start="5805" end="5821" title="butterfly effect" label="butterfly effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="5961" end="5973" title="nonlinearity" label="nonlinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127660" start="6031" end="6038" title="Damping ratio" label="damping"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="6066" end="6074" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196057" start="6746" end="6764" title="Santa Fe Institute" label="Santa Fe Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="6858" end="6874" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="6879" end="6894" title="Philip Warren Anderson" label="Philip Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="6921" end="6934" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q448993" start="6969" end="6981" title="George Cowan" label="George Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608700" start="6986" end="6999" title="Herbert L. Anderson" label="Herb Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="7791" end="7813" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675789" start="7829" end="7843" title="Syukuro Manabe" label="Syukuro Manabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q109370" start="7845" end="7861" title="Klaus Hasselmann" label="Klaus Hasselmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235614" start="7867" end="7881" title="Giorgio Parisi" label="Giorgio Parisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156626" start="9373" end="9393" title="complexity economics" label="complexity economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196057" start="9510" end="9528" title="Santa Fe Institute" label="Santa Fe Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="9557" end="9582" title="economic complexity index" label="economic complexity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="9608" end="9611" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004920" start="9622" end="9638" title="Cesar A. Hidalgo" label="Cesar A. Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="9647" end="9654" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148674" start="9665" end="9681" title="Ricardo Hausmann" label="Ricardo Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303254" start="9684" end="9718" title="Recurrence quantification analysis" label="Recurrence quantification analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="9769" end="9784" title="business cycles" label="business cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="9789" end="9809" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q66104672" start="11408" end="11429" title="knowledge translation" label="knowledge translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q581233" start="11875" end="11893" title="Complexity Science" label="complexity science"/>
<link wikidata="Q249542" start="11943" end="11960" title="transdisciplinary" label="transdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q111942751" start="12208" end="12226" title="fractal physiology" label="fractal physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="12306" end="12313" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="12533" end="12545" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="12641" end="12655" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q93158" start="13289" end="13302" title="edge of chaos" label="edge of chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="13915" end="13922" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="14819" end="14835" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="15569" end="15577" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002758" start="15940" end="15953" title="Luis Amaral" label="L.A.N. Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157300" start="16068" end="16087" title="Walter Clemens, Jr." label="Walter Clemens, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q47482582" start="16288" end="16304" title="Nigel Goldenfeld" label="Nigel Goldenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q47110660" start="16706" end="16720" title="Stefan Thurner" label="Stefan Thurner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19843176" start="17118" end="17131" title="Luis M. Rocha" label="Luis M. Rocha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37439" wikidata="Q286170" url="?curid=37439" title="AAI RQ-7 Shadow">
<text>The AAI RQ-7 Shadow is an American unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) used by the United States Army, Australian Army, Swedish Army, Turkish Air Force and Italian Army for reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition and battle damage assessment. Launched from a trailer-mounted pneumatic catapult, it is recovered with the aid of arresting gear similar to jets on an aircraft carrier. Its gimbal-mounted, digitally stabilized, liquid nitrogen-cooled electro-optical/infrared (EO/IR) camera relays video in real time via a C-band line-of-sight data link to the ground control station (GCS).

The US Army&#x27;s 2nd Battalion, 13th Aviation Regiment at Fort Huachuca, Arizona, trains soldiers, Marines, and civilians in the operation and maintenance of the Shadow UAS. The Shadow is operated in the U.S. Army at brigade-level.

==Development==
The RQ-7 Shadow is the result of a continued US Army search for an effective battlefield UAS after the cancellation of the Alliant RQ-6 Outrider aircraft. AAI Corporation followed up their RQ-2 Pioneer with the Shadow 200, a similar, more refined UAS. In late 1999, the army selected the Shadow 200 to fill the tactical UAS requirement, redesignating it the RQ-7. Army requirements specified a UAS that used an aviation gasoline engine, could carry an electro-optic/infrared imaging sensor turret, and had a maximum range of 31 miles (50 kilometers) with four-hour, on-station endurance. The Shadow 200 offered at least twice that range. The specifications also dictated that UAS would be able to land in an athletic field.

==Design==

The RQ-7 Shadow 200 unmanned aircraft system is of a high-wing, constant chord pusher configuration with a twin-tailboom empennage and an inverted v-tail. The aircraft is powered by a AR741-1101 Wankel engine designed and manufactured by UAV Engines Ltd in the United Kingdom. Onboard electrical systems are powered by a GEC/Plessey 28 volt, direct current, 2 kW generator.

Currently, the primary load of the aircraft is the Israeli Aircraft Industries POP300 Plug-in Optical Payload which consists of a forward-looking infrared camera, a daytime TV camera with a selectable near-infrared filter and a laser pointer. The aircraft has fixed tricycle landing gear. Takeoffs are assisted by a trailer-mounted pneumatic launcher which can accelerate the 170 kg (375 pound) aircraft to in .

Landings are guided by a Tactical Automatic Landing System, developed by the Sierra Nevada Corporation, which consists of a ground-based micro-millimeter wavelength radar and a transponder carried on the aircraft. Once on the ground, a tailhook mounted on the aircraft catches an arresting wire connected to two disk brake drums which can stop the aircraft in less than .

The aircraft is part of a larger system which currently uses the M1152-series of Humvees for ground transport of all ground and air equipment. A Shadow 200 system consists of four aircraft, three of which are transported in the Air Vehicle Transporter (AVT). The fourth is transported in a specially designed storage container to be used as a spare. The AVT also tows the launcher.

The AVT Support Vehicle and trailer contain extra equipment to launch and recover the aircraft, such as the Tactical Automatic Landing System. Maintenance equipment for the aircraft is stored in the Maintenance Section Multifunctional (MSM) vehicle and trailer as well as the M1165 MSM Support Vehicle and its associated trailer.

Two Humvee-mounted Ground Control Stations (GCS), also part of the Shadow 200 system, control the aircraft in flight. Each station has an associated Ground Data Terminal (GDT), which takes commands generated by the GCS and modulates them into radio waves received by the aircraft in flight. The GDT receives video imagery from the payload, as well as telemetry from the aircraft, and sends this information to the GCS.

A trailer, towed by the M1165 GCS support vehicle, carries the GDT and houses a 10 kW Tactical Quiet Generator to provide power for its associated GCS. The Shadow 200 system also includes a Portable Ground Control Station (PGCS) and Portable Ground Data Terminal (PGDT), which are stripped-down versions of the GCS and GDT designed as a backup to the two GCSs.

A fielded Shadow 200 system requires 22 soldiers to operate it. Army modelling indicates that crew workload is highest at takeoff, and second-highest at landing.

The Shadow is restricted from operating in bad weather conditions, not being meant to fly through rain and with sensors that cannot see through clouds.

==Operational history==
===Service with the United States===
By July 2007, the Shadow platform accumulated 200,000 flight hours, doubling its previous record of 100,000 hours in 13 months. The system then surpassed 300,000 flight hours in April 2008, and by May 2010, the Shadow system had accumulated over 500,000 flight hours. As of 2011, the Shadow had logged over 709,000 hours. The Shadow platform has flown over 37,000 sorties in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan by US Army and Army National Guard units.

On 6 August 2012, AAI announced that the Shadow had achieved 750,000 flight hours during more than 173,000 missions. More than 900,000 flight hours had been logged by Shadow UAVs by the end of June 2014.

The Shadow did not see service in the Afghanistan campaign of 2001–2002, but it did fly operational missions in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. The operating conditions in Iraq proved hard on the UAVs, with heat and sand leading to engine failures, resulting in a high-priority effort to find fixes with changes in system technology and operating procedures. Shadow UAS have since flown more than 600,000 combat hours in support of the Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

In 2007, the United States Marine Corps began to transition from the RQ-2 Pioneer to the RQ-7 Shadow. VMU-1, VMU-2 completed their transition from the RQ-2 to the RQ-7 and ScanEagle while VMU-3 and VMU-4 were activated as Shadow and ScanEagle elements. VMU-3 was activated on 12 September 2008 and VMU-4 conducted its inaugural flight on 28 September 2010 in Yuma, Arizona. In October 2007, VMU-1 became the first Marine Corps squadron to see combat in Iraq. VMU-2 deployed a Shadow detachment to Afghanistan in 2009, with VMU-3 following in January 2010.

The Navy provided personnel for four Shadow platoons in support of army brigades deployed in Iraq. The first two platoons returned from 6-month tours in Iraq in January and February 2008. The Navy personnel went through the Army&#x27;s training program at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.

The U.S. Army is implementing a plan to reform its aerial scout capabilities by scrapping its fleet of OH-58 Kiowa helicopters from 2015 to 2019 and replacing them with AH-64 Apache attack helicopters teamed with Shadow and MQ-1C Gray Eagle UAVs. Using unmanned assets to scout ahead would put the pilots of manned aircraft out of reach of potential harm. Reformed combat aviation brigades (CAB) would consist of a battalion of 24 Apaches for attack missions and an armed reconnaissance squadron of another 24 Apaches teamed with three Shadow platoons totaling 12 RQ-7s overall; it would also include a Gray Eagle company. The manned-unmanned teaming of Apaches and Unmanned Aircraft (UA) can meet 80 percent of aerial scout requirements.

On 16 March 2015, the 1st Battalion, 501st Aviation Regiment was reflagged the 3rd Squadron, 6th Cavalry Regiment, making it the first of 10 Apache battalions to be converted to a heavy attack reconnaissance squadron by eliminating the Kiowa scout helicopter and having three RQ-7 Shadow platoons organically assigned; the attack battalions will also be aligned with an MQ-1C Gray Eagle company assigned to each division. Moving Shadows from brigade combat team level to the battalions themselves reduces lines of communication, distance issues, and allows operators and pilots to better train and work together.

In early July 2014, the U.S. Army sent RQ-7 Shadows to Baghdad as part of efforts to protect embassy personnel against Islamic State militant attacks, along with Apache attack helicopters which could use them through manned and unmanned teaming to share information and designate targets.

On 29 July 2018, the U.S. Marine conducted its final launch of the RQ-7B during RIMPAC exercises before retiring it. Since first deploying with Marines to Iraq in October 2007, the aircraft eventually equipped four tactical UAS squadrons, flying some 39,000 hours during 11 operational deployments. The Shadow was replaced by the RQ-21 Blackjack, which was first deployed in 2014.

In March 2019, the U.S. Army selected Martin UAV and AAI Corporation to &quot;provide unmanned aircraft systems for platoons to try out as candidates to replace the Shadow tactical UAS.&quot; The Army seeks better acoustics and runway independence as compared to the old Shadow, as well as lower equipment requirements. Shortly after the selection of the first teams, L3Harris Technologies and Arcturus-UAV (later under AeroVironment) were also picked to submit candidates. The four aircraft were used to evaluate requirements and assess new capabilities, and in August 2021 the Army decided to proceed with a competition for the Future Tactical Unmanned Aircraft System (FTUAS); a fielding decision is planned for 2025. The Army chose the AeroVironment Jump 20 in August 2022. The procurement will inform requirements for a second program increment, which will rely on a separate competitive acquisition. Although the Army already planned to replace the Shadow in brigade combat teams, it was initially planned to continue to be used by combat aviation brigades and special forces units into the mid-2030s, but the Army revealed in February 2024 that it had decided to replace the entire Shadow fleet as part of an overhaul of its aviation assets.

===Service with Romania===
The first Shadow 600 UAVs entered service with the Romanian Air Force in 1998, and by 2007, nine drones were in service. The drones were used during the Romanian deployment to Iraq starting from 2003. These drones flew on IMINT missions as part of the General Directorate for Defense Intelligence in support of Multinational Division Central-South. Three drones crashed during this deployment.

==Variants==

===RQ-7A Shadow===
The RQ-7A was the initial version of the Shadow 200 UAS developed by AAI. The first low-rate initial-production systems were delivered to the US Army in 2002 with the first full-scale production systems being delivered in September 2003. The RQ-7A was long and had a wingspan of with a max takeoff weight. The aircraft&#x27;s endurance ranged between 4 and 5.5 hours depending on mission. The &quot;A&quot; model aircraft also had the AR741-1100 engine which could use either 87 octane automotive gasoline or 100LL aviation fuel. The &quot;A&quot; model also featured IAI&#x27;s POP200 payload.

===RQ-7B Shadow===

Production of Shadow aircraft shifted to a generally improved RQ-7B variant in the summer of 2004. The RQ-7B features new wings increased in length to . The new wings are not only more aerodynamically efficient, they are &quot;wet&quot; to increase fuel storage up to 44 liters for an endurance of up to 6 hours. The payload capability has been increased to .

After reports from Iraq that engines were failing, in 2005, the Army&#x27;s UAV project manager called for the use of 100LL, an aviation fuel, rather than the conventional 87 octane mogas. Avionics systems have been generally improved, and the new wing is designed to accommodate a communications relay package, which allows the aircraft to act as a relay station. This allows commanders or even the aircraft operators themselves to communicate via radio to the troops on ground in locations that would otherwise be &quot;dead&quot; to radio traffic.

The Shadow can operate up to from its brigade tactical operations center, and recognize tactical vehicles up to above the ground at more than slant range.

Other incremental improvements to the system include replacing the AR741-1100 engine with the AR741-1101 which increases reliability through the use of dual spark plugs as well as limiting the fuel to 100LL. Also, the older POP200 payload was replaced with the newer POP300 system. In February 2010, AAI began a fleet update program to improve the Shadow system. The improvements include installing the wiring harnesses and software updates for IAI&#x27;s POP300D payload which includes a designator for guiding laser-guided bombs.

Other improvements in the program will include an electronic fuel injection engine and fuel system to replace the AR741-1101&#x27;s carburetted engine. The most visible improvement to the system will be a wider wing of in span which is designed to increase fuel capacity and allow for mission endurance of almost 9 hours. The new wings will also include hardpoints for external munitions.

A joint Army-Marine program is testing IED jamming on a Shadow at MCAS Yuma. Another joint effort is to view a ground area from 3,650 m (12,000 feet).

The Army is now proposing the upgraded Shadow 152A, which includes Soldier Radio Waveform software, which allows both the command post and their troops to see the images that the UAV is projecting, as long as they are on the same frequency. It also increases the distance and area of communication.

Preliminary TCDL testing conducted at Dugway Proving Ground was a success. This led to an estimated fielding date of May 2010 for TCDL. In March 2015, the first Shadow unit was equipped with the upgraded RQ-7BV2 Shadow version. New capabilities for the BV2 include the TCDL, encryption of video and control data-links, software that allows interoperability between other UAS platforms, integration of a common control station and control terminal for all Army UAS platforms, an electronic fuel-injection engine, and increased endurance to nine hours through a lengthened wingspan of , with weight increased to . Shadow systems are being upgraded at a rate of 2-3 per month, with all Army Shadows planned to become BV2s by 2019.

In 2020, the Army introduced the Shadow Block III. The configuration allows the Shadow to fly in rainy conditions of up to two inches per hour, a four-fold increase over previous versions, carries the L3 Wescam MX-10 EO/IR camera with enhanced image collection, has a Joint Tactical Radio System to enable communications relay, and uses a more reliable and powerful engine configuration with reduced noise.

====Armed Shadow====
On 19 April 2010 the Army issued a &quot;solicitation for sources sought&quot; from defense contractors for a munition for the Shadow system with a deadline for proposals due no later than 10 May 2010. Although no specific munition has been chosen yet, some possible munitions include the Raytheon Pyros bomb, the General Dynamics 81 mm 4.5 kg (10-pound) air-dropped guided mortar, as well as the QuickMEDS system for delivering medical supplies to remote and stranded troops.

The Army subsequently slowed work, and the Marine Corps then took the lead on arming the RQ-7 Shadow. Raytheon has conducted successful flight tests with the Small Tactical Munition, and Lockheed Martin has tested the Shadow Hawk glide weapon from an RQ-7. On 1 November 2012, General Dynamics successfully demonstrated their guided 81 mm Air Dropped Mortar, with three launches at hitting within seven meters of the target grid.

As of August 2011, the Marine Corps has received official clearance to experiment with armed RQ-7s, and requires AAI to select a precision munition ready for deployment. AAI was awarded $10 million for this in December 2011, and claims a weapon has already been fielded by the Shadow. In 2014, Textron launched the Fury precision weapon from a Shadow 200.

By May 2015, the Marine Corps had run out of funding for weaponizing the RQ-7, and the Army had shown little interest in continuing the effort. The Army&#x27;s stance is that the Shadow&#x27;s primary capability is persistent surveillance, while there are many other ways to drop bombs on targets and adding that to the Shadow would add weight and decrease endurance.

===Nightwarden===
A test version called STTB flew in summer 2011. AAI is developing a bigger version called M2 with a blended wing to include a 3-cylinder Lycoming heavy fuel engine, and began flight testing in August 2012. The Shadow M2 has a conformal blended body that reduces drag, wingspan increased to , and is heavier. It can fly for 16 hours at altitudes up to . Its endurance and service ceiling are comparable to Group 4 UASs like the MQ-1 Predator, so the company is pitching the M2 as a budget-conscious alternative to larger unmanned aircraft.

It has a greater payload to carry synthetic aperture radar (SAR), wide-area surveillance, navigation, signals intelligence, and electronic warfare packages. It also has the ability to be controlled beyond line-of-sight through a SATCOM link. Although the M2 uses the same internal components as the RQ-7B Shadow 200 and is compatible with existing support equipment and ground infrastructure, its greater weight necessitates changes to the existing launcher. The Shadow M2 uses 80-85 percent of the components of the Shadow V2, while allowing for an additional of capability with total airframe weight increased to .

In June 2017, Textron introduced the Nightwarden TUAS as a production-ready model of the developmental Shadow M2, the change in name due to significant improvements and enhancements to the system such as greater flexibility and combat capability, SATCOM features, and enhanced command-and-control. The aircraft has a range of , maximum speed of , endurance of 15 hours, can fly at an altitude of , and has a maximum takeoff weight of with a dual-payload bay with a capacity of .

===Shadow 600===

AAI has also built a scaled-up Pioneer derivative known as the &quot;Shadow 600&quot;. It also resembles a Pioneer, except that the outer panels of the wings are distinctively swept back, and it has a stronger Wankel engine, the UAV EL 801, with . A number of Shadow 600s are in service in several nations, including Romania.

===SR/C Shadow===
AAI, in conjunction with Textron sister company Bell Helicopter, intends to modify two Shadows with a Carter rotor on top for vertical take-off and landing, eliminating the need for the recovery and pneumatic launcher systems, while increasing payload and endurance. , it is expected to fly in 2012. AAI also expected to use the SR/C technology for the Shadow Knight, a powered-rotor two-propeller surveillance aircraft for the US Navy MRMUAS program; however, the MRMUAS program was cancelled in 2012.

==Operators==
===Current operators===
*Australian Army: The Australian Government has bought 18 aircraft and has replaced ScanEagle, and began using them in Afghanistan in May 2012.
* Italian Army: In July 2010, the Italian army ordered four Shadow 200 systems.
* Kosovo Security Force: The Kosovar Minister of Defense Armend Mehaj signed a contract to buy US-made drone, type MQ DRONE, for the Kosovar Security Force.
* Swedish Army: 8 aircraft (2 systems) were delivered early in 2011. These systems were then modified by SAAB to be more suited for Swedish use, named UAV03 Örnen. Set to be replaced.
* Turkish Air Force: Turkish Air Force; The Turkish Air Force also operates 9 RQ-7 Shadow 600s.
* United States Army: 450 RQ-7Bs, 20 more on order plus additional 68 ordered as of 2012.

===Former operators===
*United States Marine Corps
* Romanian Air Force: The Romanian Air Force has purchased 11 Shadow 600s, The first six drones were acquired in 1998. One crashed in the country and three in Iraq.

==Incidents and accidents==
On 15 August 2011, a U.S. Air Force C-130 cargo plane collided with a RQ-7 while on approach to Forward Operating Base Sharana in Paktika Province, Afghanistan. The C-130 made an emergency landing with damage to two engines and one wing, while the RQ-7 was destroyed completely. The collision caused the cargo aircraft to be grounded for several months while being fixed, while the RQ-7 wreckage was never recovered.

On 3 April 2014, a Pennsylvanian Army National Guard RQ-7 participating in training exercises at Fort Indiantown Gap crashed near an elementary school in Pennsylvania and was then hit by a civilian vehicle destroying the drone. No injuries were reported.

On 10 July 2019, a U.S. Army RQ-7 operated by the 25th Infantry Division crashed in the Waianae mountains near the Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.

On 17 July 2019, a Wisconsin National Guard RQ-7 lost its link to its operator at Volk Field during a training exercise. The drone went down into trees south of Interstate 90/94 between Oakdale and Camp Douglas. No injuries or damage were reported. The drone suffered &quot;significant&quot; damage.
==Specifications (200 Family)==


Note: When outfitted with IE (Increased Endurance) Wings, the CRP (Communications Relay Package) and the 1102 engine, endurance time is increased to 9 hours, wing span is increased to approx. , and the service ceiling is 5,500 m (18,000 ft) (only with authorization).

==See also==
==References==
* &quot;This article contains material that originally came from the web article by Greg Goebel, which exists in the Public Domain.&quot;

==External links==
* RQ-7 Shadow 200 Tactical UAV
* Shadow TUAV update
* UAV payloads
* Iran Protests U.S. Aerial Drones (RQ-7 crashes in Iran), &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, 8 November 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q286170" start="4" end="19" title="AAI RQ-7 Shadow" label="AAI RQ-7 Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="35" end="58" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="77" end="95" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="97" end="112" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="114" end="126" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983085" start="128" end="145" title="Turkish Air Force" label="Turkish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="150" end="162" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302749" start="167" end="219" title="reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition" label="reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940428" start="224" end="248" title="battle damage assessment" label="battle damage assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364312" start="334" end="348" title="arresting gear" label="arresting gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="371" end="387" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146104" start="393" end="399" title="gimbal" label="gimbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="431" end="446" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642727" start="454" end="469" title="Electro-optics" label="electro-optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="470" end="478" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344775" start="526" end="532" title="C band (IEEE)" label="C-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="533" end="546" title="Line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118990" start="564" end="586" title="UAV ground control station" label="ground control station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549408" start="614" end="651" title="2nd Battalion, 13th Aviation (United States)" label="2nd Battalion, 13th Aviation Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327004" start="655" end="668" title="Fort Huachuca" label="Fort Huachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="670" end="677" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="814" end="821" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377202" start="969" end="990" title="Alliant RQ-6 Outrider" label="Alliant RQ-6 Outrider"/>
<link wikidata="Q286133" start="1001" end="1016" title="AAI Corporation" label="AAI Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q286164" start="1035" end="1047" title="RQ-2 Pioneer" label="RQ-2 Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1636" end="1645" title="Wing configuration#Number and position of main-planes" label="high-wing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1647" end="1661" title="Wing configuration#Chord variation along span" label="constant chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700567" start="1662" end="1682" title="pusher configuration" label="pusher configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506785" start="1704" end="1713" title="empennage" label="empennage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182883" start="1778" end="1791" title="Wankel engine" label="Wankel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="1904" end="1907" title="General Electric Company plc" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204713" start="1908" end="1915" title="Plessey" label="Plessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="1919" end="1923" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163647" start="1925" end="1939" title="constant current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="2009" end="2036" title="Israeli Aircraft Industries" label="Israeli Aircraft Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q682023" start="2088" end="2112" title="forward-looking infrared" label="forward-looking infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874353" start="2224" end="2245" title="tricycle gear" label="tricycle landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483455" start="2448" end="2473" title="Sierra Nevada Corporation" label="Sierra Nevada Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217046" start="2825" end="2831" title="Humvee" label="Humvee"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="5017" end="5021" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="5026" end="5037" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="5770" end="5796" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907314" start="5859" end="5864" title="VMU-1" label="VMU-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907315" start="5866" end="5871" title="VMU-2" label="VMU-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q595631" start="5929" end="5938" title="Boeing ScanEagle" label="ScanEagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907316" start="5945" end="5950" title="VMU-3" label="VMU-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907318" start="5955" end="5960" title="VMU-4" label="VMU-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q694356" start="6698" end="6709" title="OH-58 Kiowa" label="OH-58 Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171468" start="6764" end="6776" title="AH-64 Apache" label="AH-64 Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q387188" start="6819" end="6835" title="MQ-1C Gray Eagle" label="MQ-1C Gray Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="8068" end="8081" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q633954" start="8319" end="8325" title="RIMPAC" label="RIMPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937136" start="8569" end="8584" title="RQ-21 Blackjack" label="RQ-21 Blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053147" start="8989" end="9010" title="L3Harris Technologies" label="L3Harris Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q919300" start="9041" end="9054" title="AeroVironment" label="AeroVironment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787723" start="9361" end="9382" title="Arcturus T-20" label="AeroVironment Jump 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q507817" start="9949" end="9967" title="Romanian Air Force" label="Romanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654126" start="10120" end="10125" title="IMINT" label="IMINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280730" start="10150" end="10194" title="General Directorate for Defense Intelligence" label="General Directorate for Defense Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934811" start="10209" end="10245" title="Multinational Division Central-South" label="Multinational Division Central-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693044" start="10410" end="10437" title="Low rate initial production" label="low-rate initial-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q150681" start="10805" end="10811" title="octane" label="octane"/>
<link wikidata="Q340142" start="10835" end="10840" title="100LL" label="100LL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="11367" end="11371" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q340142" start="11485" end="11490" title="Avgas" label="mogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="12973" end="12976" title="Improvised explosive device" label="IED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030442" start="13000" end="13009" title="MCAS Yuma" label="MCAS Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153326" start="13398" end="13402" title="Tactical Common Data Link" label="TCDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567370" start="14316" end="14325" title="Wescam" label="L3 Wescam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596292" start="14383" end="14410" title="Joint Tactical Radio System" label="Joint Tactical Radio System"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="14833" end="14841" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705743" start="14842" end="14852" title="Pyros (bomb)" label="Pyros bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="14858" end="14874" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705743" start="15180" end="15203" title="Small Tactical Munition" label="Small Tactical Munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="15209" end="15224" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15768" end="15772" title="Lightweight Multirole Missile#FFLMM/Fury" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878585" start="16334" end="16342" title="Lycoming Engines" label="Lycoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q198024" start="16624" end="16637" title="MQ-1 Predator" label="MQ-1 Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="16771" end="16795" title="synthetic aperture radar" label="synthetic aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="16839" end="16859" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="16865" end="16883" title="electronic warfare" label="electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140315" start="18223" end="18230" title="Textron" label="Textron"/>
<link wikidata="Q815723" start="18246" end="18261" title="Bell Helicopter" label="Bell Helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18300" end="18312" title="CarterCopter#Concept" label="Carter rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="18324" end="18353" title="vertical take-off and landing" label="vertical take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="18741" end="18756" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="18886" end="18898" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q967459" start="18966" end="18987" title="Kosovo Security Force" label="Kosovo Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="19123" end="19135" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983085" start="19307" end="19324" title="Turkish Air Force" label="Turkish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="19403" end="19421" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="19516" end="19542" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q507817" start="19545" end="19563" title="Romanian Air Force" label="Romanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="19773" end="19778" title="C-130" label="C-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473241" start="19833" end="19863" title="Forward Operating Base Sharana" label="Forward Operating Base Sharana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132721" start="20252" end="20271" title="Fort Indiantown Gap" label="Fort Indiantown Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q217777" start="20461" end="20483" title="25th Infantry Division (United States)" label="25th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21465" end="21469" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="21478" end="21497" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37441" wikidata="Q905750" url="?curid=37441" title="Nitrous oxide">
<text>Nitrous oxide (dinitrogen oxide or dinitrogen monoxide), commonly known as laughing gas, nitrous, or factitious air, among others, is a chemical compound, an oxide of nitrogen with the formula . At room temperature, it is a colourless non-flammable gas, and has a slightly sweet scent and taste. At elevated temperatures, nitrous oxide is a powerful oxidiser similar to molecular oxygen.

Nitrous oxide has significant medical uses, especially in surgery and dentistry, for its anaesthetic and pain-reducing effects, and it is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. Its colloquial name, &quot;laughing gas&quot;, coined by Humphry Davy, describes the euphoric effects upon inhaling it, which cause it to be used as a recreational drug inducing a brief &quot;high&quot;. When abused chronically, it may cause neurological damage through inactivation of vitamin B12. It is also used as an oxidiser in rocket propellants and motor racing fuels, and as a frothing gas for whipped cream.

Nitrous oxide is also an atmospheric pollutant, with a concentration of 333 parts per billion (ppb) in 2020, increasing at 1 ppb annually. It is a major scavenger of stratospheric ozone, with an impact comparable to that of CFCs. About 40% of human-caused emissions are from agriculture, as nitrogen fertilisers are digested into nitrous oxide by soil micro-organisms. As the third most important greenhouse gas, nitrous oxide substantially contributes to global warming. Reduction of emissions is an important goal in the politics of climate change.

== Discovery and early use ==

The gas was first synthesised in 1772 by English natural philosopher and chemist Joseph Priestley who called it &quot;dephlogisticated nitrous air&quot; (see phlogiston theory) or &quot;inflammable nitrous air&quot;. Priestley published his discovery in the book &quot;Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)&quot;, where he described how to produce the preparation of &quot;nitrous air diminished&quot;, by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid.

The first important use of nitrous oxide was made possible by Thomas Beddoes and James Watt, who worked together to publish the book &quot;Considerations on the Medical Use and on the Production of Factitious Airs (1794)&quot;. This book was important for two reasons. First, James Watt had invented a novel machine to produce &quot;factitious airs&quot; (including nitrous oxide) and a novel &quot;breathing apparatus&quot; to inhale the gas. Second, the book also presented the new medical theories by Thomas Beddoes, that tuberculosis and other lung diseases could be treated by inhalation of &quot;Factitious Airs&quot;.

The machine to produce &quot;Factitious Airs&quot; had three parts: a furnace to burn the needed material, a vessel with water where the produced gas passed through in a spiral pipe (for impurities to be &quot;washed off&quot;), and finally the gas cylinder with a gasometer where the gas produced, &quot;air&quot;, could be tapped into portable air bags (made of airtight oily silk). The breathing apparatus consisted of one of the portable air bags connected with a tube to a mouthpiece. With this new equipment being engineered and produced by 1794, the way was paved for clinical trials, which began in 1798 when Thomas Beddoes established the &quot;Pneumatic Institution for Relieving Diseases by Medical Airs&quot; in Hotwells (Bristol). In the basement of the building, a large-scale machine was producing the gases under the supervision of a young Humphry Davy, who was encouraged to experiment with new gases for patients to inhale. The first important work of Davy was examination of the nitrous oxide, and the publication of his results in the book: &quot;Researches, Chemical and Philosophical (1800)&quot;. In that publication, Davy notes the analgesic effect of nitrous oxide at page 465 and its potential to be used for surgical operations at page 556. Davy coined the name &quot;laughing gas&quot; for nitrous oxide.

Despite Davy&#x27;s discovery that inhalation of nitrous oxide could relieve a conscious person from pain, another 44 years elapsed before doctors attempted to use it for anaesthesia. The use of nitrous oxide as a recreational drug at &quot;laughing gas parties&quot;, primarily arranged for the British upper class, became an immediate success beginning in 1799. While the effects of the gas generally make the user appear stuporous, dreamy and sedated, some people also &quot;get the giggles&quot; in a state of euphoria, and frequently erupt in laughter.

One of the earliest commercial producers in the U.S. was George Poe, cousin of the poet Edgar Allan Poe, who also was the first to liquefy the gas.

The first time nitrous oxide was used as an anaesthetic drug in the treatment of a patient was when dentist Horace Wells, with assistance by Gardner Quincy Colton and John Mankey Riggs, demonstrated insensitivity to pain from a dental extraction on 11 December 1844. In the following weeks, Wells treated the first 12 to 15 patients with nitrous oxide in Hartford, Connecticut, and, according to his own record, only failed in two cases. In spite of these convincing results having been reported by Wells to the medical society in Boston in December 1844, this new method was not immediately adopted by other dentists. The reason for this was most likely that Wells, in January 1845 at his first public demonstration to the medical faculty in Boston, had been partly unsuccessful, leaving his colleagues doubtful regarding its efficacy and safety. The method did not come into general use until 1863, when Gardner Quincy Colton successfully started to use it in all his &quot;Colton Dental Association&quot; clinics, that he had just established in New Haven and New York City. Over the following three years, Colton and his associates successfully administered nitrous oxide to more than 25,000 patients. Today, nitrous oxide is used in dentistry as an anxiolytic, as an adjunct to local anaesthetic.

Nitrous oxide was not found to be a strong enough anaesthetic for use in major surgery in hospital settings, however. Instead, diethyl ether, being a stronger and more potent anaesthetic, was demonstrated and accepted for use in October 1846, along with chloroform in 1847. When Joseph Thomas Clover invented the &quot;gas-ether inhaler&quot; in 1876, however, it became a common practice at hospitals to initiate all anaesthetic treatments with a mild flow of nitrous oxide, and then gradually increase the anaesthesia with the stronger ether or chloroform. Clover&#x27;s gas-ether inhaler was designed to supply the patient with nitrous oxide and ether at the same time, with the exact mixture being controlled by the operator of the device. It remained in use by many hospitals until the 1930s. Although hospitals today use a more advanced anaesthetic machine, these machines still use the same principle launched with Clover&#x27;s gas-ether inhaler, to initiate the anaesthesia with nitrous oxide, before the administration of a more powerful anaesthetic.

Colton&#x27;s popularisation of nitrous oxide led to its adoption by a number of less than reputable quacksalvers, who touted it as a cure for consumption, scrofula, catarrh and other diseases of the blood, throat and lungs. Nitrous oxide treatment was administered and licensed as a patent medicine by the likes of C. L. Blood and Jerome Harris in Boston and Charles E. Barney of Chicago.

==Chemical properties and reactions==
Nitrous oxide is a colourless gas with a faint, sweet odour.

Nitrous oxide supports combustion by releasing the dipolar bonded oxygen radical, and can thus relight a glowing splint.

 is inert at room temperature and has few reactions. At elevated temperatures, its reactivity increases. For example, nitrous oxide reacts with at to give :

This reaction is the route adopted by the commercial chemical industry to produce azide salts, which are used as detonators.

==Mechanism of action==
The pharmacological mechanism of action of inhaled is not fully known. However, it has been shown to directly modulate a broad range of ligand-gated ion channels, which likely plays a major role. It moderately blocks NMDAR and β-subunit-containing nACh channels, weakly inhibits AMPA, kainate, GABA and 5-HT receptors, and slightly potentiates GABA and glycine receptors. It also has been shown to activate two-pore-domain channels. While affects several ion channels, its anaesthetic, hallucinogenic and euphoriant effects are likely caused mainly via inhibition of NMDA receptor-mediated currents. In addition to its effects on ion channels, may act similarly to nitric oxide (NO) in the central nervous system. Nitrous oxide is 30 to 40 times more soluble than nitrogen.

The effects of inhaling sub-anaesthetic doses of nitrous oxide may vary unpredictably with settings and individual differences; however, Jay (2008) suggests that it reliably induces the following states and sensations:
* Intoxication
* Euphoria/dysphoria
* Spatial disorientation
* Temporal disorientation
* Reduced pain sensitivity
A minority of users also experience uncontrolled vocalisations and muscular spasms. These effects generally disappear minutes after removal of the nitrous oxide source.

===Anxiolytic effect===
In behavioural tests of anxiety, a low dose of is an effective anxiolytic. This anti-anxiety effect is associated with enhanced activity of GABA receptors, as it is partially reversed by benzodiazepine receptor antagonists. Mirroring this, animals that have developed tolerance to the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines are partially tolerant to . Indeed, in humans given 30% , benzodiazepine receptor antagonists reduced the subjective reports of feeling &quot;high&quot;, but did not alter psychomotor performance.

===Analgesic effect===
The analgesic effects of are linked to the interaction between the endogenous opioid system and the descending noradrenergic system. When animals are given morphine chronically, they develop tolerance to its pain-killing effects, and this also renders the animals tolerant to the analgesic effects of . Administration of antibodies that bind and block the activity of some endogenous opioids (not β-endorphin) also block the antinociceptive effects of . Drugs that inhibit the breakdown of endogenous opioids also potentiate the antinociceptive effects of . Several experiments have shown that opioid receptor antagonists applied directly to the brain block the antinociceptive effects of , but these drugs have no effect when injected into the spinal cord.

Apart from an indirect action, nitrous oxide, like morphine also interacts directly with the endogenous opioid system by binding at opioid receptor binding sites.

Conversely, α-adrenoceptor antagonists block the pain-reducing effects of when given directly to the spinal cord, but not when applied directly to the brain. Indeed, α-adrenoceptor knockout mice or animals depleted in norepinephrine are nearly completely resistant to the antinociceptive effects of . Apparently -induced release of endogenous opioids causes disinhibition of brainstem noradrenergic neurons, which release norepinephrine into the spinal cord and inhibit pain signalling. Exactly how causes the release of endogenous opioid peptides remains uncertain.

==Production==
Various methods of producing nitrous oxide are used.

===Industrial methods===

Nitrous oxide is prepared on an industrial scale by carefully heating ammonium nitrate at about 250 °C, which decomposes into nitrous oxide and water vapour.

The addition of various phosphate salts favours formation of a purer gas at slightly lower temperatures. This reaction may be difficult to control, resulting in detonation.

===Laboratory methods===
The decomposition of ammonium nitrate is also a common laboratory method for preparing the gas. Equivalently, it can be obtained by heating a mixture of sodium nitrate and ammonium sulfate:

Another method involves the reaction of urea, nitric acid and sulfuric acid:

Direct oxidation of ammonia with a manganese dioxide-bismuth oxide catalyst has been reported: cf. Ostwald process.

Hydroxylammonium chloride reacts with sodium nitrite to give nitrous oxide. If the nitrite is added to the hydroxylamine solution, the only remaining by-product is salt water. If the hydroxylamine solution is added to the nitrite solution (nitrite is in excess), however, then toxic higher oxides of nitrogen also are formed:

Treating with and HCl also has been demonstrated:

Hyponitrous acid decomposes to NO and water with a half-life of 16 days at 25 °C at pH 1–3.

==Atmospheric occurrence==


Nitrous oxide is a minor component of Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and is an active part of the planetary nitrogen cycle. Based on analysis of air samples gathered from sites around the world, its concentration surpassed 330 ppb in 2017. The growth rate of about 1 ppb per year has also accelerated during recent decades. Nitrous oxide&#x27;s atmospheric abundance has grown more than 20% from a base level of about 270 ppb in 1750.
Important atmospheric properties of are summarized in the following table:
In 2022 the IPCC reported that: &quot;The human perturbation of the natural nitrogen cycle through the use of synthetic fertilizers and manure, as well as nitrogen deposition resulting from land-based agriculture and fossil fuel burning has been the largest driver of the increase in atmospheric N2O of 31.0 ± 0.5 ppb (10%) between 1980 and 2019.&quot;

===Emissions by source===
17.0 (12.2 to 23.5) million tonnes total annual average nitrogen in was emitted in 2007–2016. About 40% of emissions are from humans and the rest are part of the natural nitrogen cycle. The emitted each year by humans has a greenhouse effect equivalent to about 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide: for comparison humans emitted 37 billion tonnes of actual carbon dioxide in 2019, and methane equivalent to 9 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide.

Most of the emitted into the atmosphere, from natural and anthropogenic sources, is produced by microorganisms such as denitrifying bacteria and fungi in soils and oceans. Soils under natural vegetation are an important source of nitrous oxide, accounting for 60% of all naturally produced emissions. Other natural sources include the oceans (35%) and atmospheric chemical reactions (5%). Wetlands can also be emitters of nitrous oxide. Emissions from thawing permafrost may be significant, but as of 2022 this is not certain.

The main components of anthropogenic emissions are fertilised agricultural soils and livestock manure (42%), runoff and leaching of fertilisers (25%), biomass burning (10%), fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes (10%), biological degradation of other nitrogen-containing atmospheric emissions (9%) and human sewage (5%). Agriculture enhances nitrous oxide production through soil cultivation, the use of nitrogen fertilisers and animal waste handling. These activities stimulate naturally occurring bacteria to produce more nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide emissions from soil can be challenging to measure as they vary markedly over time and space, and the majority of a year&#x27;s emissions may occur when conditions are favorable during &quot;hot moments&quot; and/or at favorable locations known as &quot;hotspots&quot;.

Among industrial emissions, the production of nitric acid and adipic acid are the largest sources of nitrous oxide emissions. The adipic acid emissions specifically arise from the degradation of the nitrolic acid intermediate derived from the nitration of cyclohexanone.

===Biological processes===
Microbial processes that generate nitrous oxide may be classified as nitrification and denitrification. Specifically, they include:

* aerobic autotrophic nitrification, the stepwise oxidation of ammonia () to nitrite () and to nitrate ()
* anaerobic heterotrophic denitrification, the stepwise reduction of to , nitric oxide (NO), and ultimately , where facultative anaerobe bacteria use as an electron acceptor in the respiration of organic material in the condition of insufficient oxygen ()
* nitrifier denitrification, which is carried out by autotrophic -oxidising bacteria and the pathway whereby ammonia () is oxidised to nitrite (), followed by the reduction of to nitric oxide (NO), and molecular nitrogen ()
* heterotrophic nitrification
* aerobic denitrification by the same heterotrophic nitrifiers
* fungal denitrification
* non-biological chemodenitrification

These processes are affected by soil chemical and physical properties such as the availability of mineral nitrogen and organic matter, acidity and soil type, as well as climate-related factors such as soil temperature and water content. 

The emission of the gas to the atmosphere is limited greatly by its consumption inside the cells, by a process catalysed by the enzyme nitrous oxide reductase.

==Uses==

===Rocket motors===
Nitrous oxide may be used as an oxidiser in a rocket motor. Compared to other oxidisers, it is much less toxic and more stable at room temperature, making it easier to store and safer to carry on a flight. Its high density and low storage pressure (when maintained at low temperatures) make it highly competitive with stored high-pressure gas systems.

In a 1914 patent, American rocket pioneer Robert Goddard suggested nitrous oxide and gasoline as possible propellants for a liquid-fuelled rocket. Nitrous oxide has been the oxidiser of choice in several hybrid rocket designs (using solid fuel with a liquid or gaseous oxidiser). The combination of nitrous oxide with hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene fuel has been used by SpaceShipOne and others. It also is notably used in amateur and high power rocketry with various plastics as the fuel.

Nitrous oxide may also be used as a monopropellant. In the presence of a heated catalyst at a temperature of , decomposes exothermically into nitrogen and oxygen. Because of the large heat release, the catalytic action rapidly becomes secondary, as thermal autodecomposition becomes dominant. In a vacuum thruster, this may provide a monopropellant specific impulse (&quot;I&quot;) up to 180 s. While noticeably less than the &quot;I&quot; available from hydrazine thrusters (monopropellant, or bipropellant with dinitrogen tetroxide), the decreased toxicity makes nitrous oxide a worthwhile option.

The ignition of nitrous oxide depends critically on pressure. It deflagrates at approximately at a pressure of 309 psi (21 atmospheres). At 600 , the required ignition energy is only 6 joules, whereas at 130 psi a 2,500-joule ignition energy input is insufficient.

===Internal combustion engine===
In vehicle racing, nitrous oxide (often called &quot;nitrous&quot;) increases engine power by providing more oxygen during combustion, thus allowing the engine to burn more fuel. It is an oxidising agent roughly equivalent to hydrogen peroxide, and much stronger than molecular oxygen. Nitrous oxide is not flammable at low pressure/temperature, but at about , its breakdown delivers more oxygen than atmospheric air. It often is mixed with another fuel that is easier to deflagrate. 

Nitrous oxide is stored as a compressed liquid. In an engine intake manifold, the evaporation and expansion of the liquid causes a large drop in intake charge temperature, resulting in a denser charge and allowing more air/fuel mixture to enter the cylinder. Sometimes nitrous oxide is injected into (or prior to) the intake manifold, whereas other systems directly inject it just before the cylinder (direct port injection).

The technique was used during World War II by Luftwaffe aircraft with the GM-1 system to boost the power output of aircraft engines. Originally meant to provide the Luftwaffe standard aircraft with superior high-altitude performance, technological considerations limited its use to extremely high altitudes. Accordingly, it was only used by specialised planes such as high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, high-speed bombers and high-altitude interceptor aircraft. It sometimes could be found on Luftwaffe aircraft also fitted with another engine-boost system, MW 50, a form of water injection for aviation engines that used methanol for its boost capabilities.

One of the major problems of nitrous oxide oxidant in a reciprocating engine is excessive power: if the mechanical structure of the engine is not properly reinforced, it may be severely damaged or destroyed. It is important with nitrous oxide augmentation of petrol engines to maintain proper and evenly spread operating temperatures and fuel levels to prevent pre-ignition (also called detonation or spark knock). However, most problems associated with nitrous oxide come not from excessive power but from excessive pressure, since the gas builds up a much denser charge in the cylinder. The increased pressure and temperature can melt, crack, or warp the piston, valve, and cylinder head.

Automotive-grade liquid nitrous oxide differs slightly from medical-grade. A small amount of sulfur dioxide () is added to prevent substance abuse.

===Aerosol propellant for food===

The gas is approved for use as a food additive (E number: E942), specifically as an aerosol spray propellant. It is commonly used in aerosol whipped cream canisters and cooking sprays.

The gas is extremely soluble in fatty compounds. In pressurised aerosol whipped cream, it is dissolved in the fatty cream until it leaves the can, when it becomes gaseous and thus creates foam. This produces whipped cream four times the volume of the liquid, whereas whipping air into cream only produces twice the volume. Unlike air, nitrous oxide inhibits rancidification of the butterfat. Carbon dioxide cannot be used for whipped cream because it is acidic in water, which would curdle the cream and give it a seltzer-like &quot;sparkle&quot;.

Extra-frothed whipped cream produced with nitrous oxide is unstable, and will return to liquid within half an hour to one hour. Thus, it is not suitable for decorating food that will not be served immediately.

In December 2016, there was a shortage of aerosol whipped cream in the United States, with canned whipped cream use at its peak during the Christmas and holiday season, due to an explosion at the Air Liquide nitrous oxide facility in Florida in late August. The company prioritized the remaining supply of nitrous oxide to medical customers rather than to food manufacturing.

Also, cooking spray, made from various oils with lecithin emulsifier, may use nitrous oxide propellant, or alternatively food-grade alcohol or propane.

===Medical===

Nitrous oxide has been used in dentistry and surgery, as an anaesthetic and analgesic, since 1844. In the early days, the gas was administered through simple inhalers consisting of a breathing bag made of rubber cloth. Today, the gas is administered in hospitals by means of an automated relative analgesia machine, with an anaesthetic vaporiser and a medical ventilator, that delivers a precisely dosed and breath-actuated flow of nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen in a 2:1 ratio.

Nitrous oxide is a weak general anaesthetic, and so is generally not used alone in general anaesthesia, but used as a carrier gas (mixed with oxygen) for more powerful general anaesthetic drugs such as sevoflurane or desflurane. It has a minimum alveolar concentration of 105% and a blood/gas partition coefficient of 0.46. The use of nitrous oxide in anaesthesia can increase the risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting.

Dentists use a simpler machine which only delivers an / mixture for the patient to inhale while conscious but must still be a recognised purpose designed dedicated relative analgesic flowmeter with a minimum 30% of oxygen at all times and a maximum upper limit of 70% nitrous oxide. The patient is kept conscious throughout the procedure, and retains adequate mental faculties to respond to questions and instructions from the dentist.

Inhalation of nitrous oxide is used frequently to relieve pain associated with childbirth, trauma, oral surgery and acute coronary syndrome (including heart attacks). Its use during labour has been shown to be a safe and effective aid for birthing women. Its use for acute coronary syndrome is of unknown benefit.

In Canada and the UK, Entonox and Nitronox are used commonly by ambulance crews (including unregistered practitioners) as rapid and highly effective analgesic gas.

Fifty percent nitrous oxide can be considered for use by trained non-professional first aid responders in prehospital settings, given the relative ease and safety of administering 50% nitrous oxide as an analgesic. The rapid reversibility of its effect would also prevent it from precluding diagnosis.

===Recreational===

Recreational inhalation of nitrous oxide, to induce euphoria and slight hallucinations, began with the British upper class in 1799 in gatherings known as &quot;laughing gas parties&quot;.

From the 19th century, the widespread availability of the gas for medical and culinary purposes allowed for recreational use to greatly expand globally. In the UK as of 2014, nitrous oxide was estimated to be used by almost half a million young people at nightspots, festivals and parties.

Widespread recreational use of the drug throughout the UK was featured in the 2017 Vice documentary &quot;Inside The Laughing Gas Black Market&quot;, in which journalist Matt Shea met with dealers of the drug who stole it from hospitals.

A significant issue cited in London&#x27;s press is the effect of nitrous oxide canister littering, which is highly visible and causes significant complaints from communities.

Prior to 8 November 2023 in the UK, nitrous oxide was subject to the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016, making it illegal to produce, supply, import or export nitrous oxide for recreational use. The updated law prohibited possession of nitrous oxide, classifying it as a Class C drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.

While nitrous oxide is understood by most recreational users to give a &quot;safe high&quot;, many are unaware that excessive consumption may cause neurological harm which, if left untreated, can cause permanent neurological damage. In Australia, recreation use became a public health concern following a rise in reports of neurotoxicity and emergency room admissions. In the state of South Australia, legislation was passed in 2020 to restrict canister sales.

In 2024, under the street name &quot;Galaxy Gas&quot;, nitrous oxide has exploded in popularity among young people for recreational use. Most of the popularity has been fostered through TikTok.

== Safety ==

Nitrous oxide is a significant occupational hazard for surgeons, dentists and nurses. Because the gas is minimally metabolised in humans (with a rate of 0.004%), it retains its potency when exhaled into the room by the patient, and can intoxicate the clinic staff if the room is poorly ventilated, with potential chronic exposure. A continuous-flow fresh-air ventilation system or scavenger system may be needed to prevent waste-gas buildup. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends that workers&#x27; exposure to nitrous oxide should be controlled during the administration of anaesthetic gas in medical, dental and veterinary operators. It set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 25 ppm (46 mg/m3) to escaped anaesthetic.

Exposure to nitrous oxide causes short-term impairment of cognition, audiovisual acuity, and manual dexterity, as well as spatial and temporal disorientation, putting the user at risk of accidental injury.

Nitrous oxide is neurotoxic, and medium or long-term habitual consumption of significant quantities can cause neurological harm with the potential for permanent damage if left untreated. It is believed that, like other NMDA receptor antagonists, produces Olney&#x27;s lesions in rodents upon prolonged (several hour) exposure.
However, because it is normally expelled from the body rapidly, it is less likely to be neurotoxic than other NMDAR antagonists. In rodents, short-term exposure results in only mild injury that is rapidly reversible, and neuronal death occurs only after constant and sustained exposure. Nitrous oxide may also cause neurotoxicity after extended exposure because of hypoxia. This is especially true of non-medical formulations such as whipped-cream chargers (&quot;whippits&quot; or &quot;nangs&quot;), which contain no oxygen gas.

In reports to poison control centers, heavy users (≥400 g or ≥200 L of gas in one session) or frequent users (regular, i.e., daily or weekly) have developed signs of peripheral neuropathy: ataxia (gait abnormalities) or paresthesia (perception of sensations such as tingling, numbness, or prickling, mostly in the extremities). Such early signs of neurological damage indicate chronic toxicity.

Nitrous oxide might have therapeutic use in treating stroke. In a rodent model, nitrous oxide at 75% by volume reduced ischemia-induced neuronal death induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, and decreased NMDA-induced Ca2+ influx in neuronal cell cultures, a cause of excitotoxicity.

Occupational exposure to ambient nitrous oxide has been associated with DNA damage, due to interruptions in DNA synthesis. This correlation is dose-dependent and does not appear to extend to casual recreational use; however, further research is needed to confirm the level of exposure needed to cause damage.

Inhalation of pure nitrous oxide causes oxygen deprivation, resulting in low blood pressure, fainting, and even heart attacks. This can occur if the user inhales large quantities continuously, as with a strap-on mask connected to a gas canister or other inhalation system, or prolonged breath-holding.

Long-term exposure to nitrous oxide may cause vitamin B deficiency. This can cause serious neurotoxicity if the user has preexisting vitamin B deficiency. It inactivates the cobalamin form of vitamin B by oxidation. Symptoms of vitamin B deficiency, including sensory neuropathy, myelopathy and encephalopathy, may occur within days or weeks of exposure to nitrous oxide anaesthesia in people with subclinical vitamin B deficiency. Symptoms are treated with high doses of vitamin B, but recovery can be slow and incomplete. People with normal vitamin B levels have stores to make the effects of nitrous oxide insignificant, unless exposure is repeated and prolonged (nitrous oxide abuse). Vitamin B levels should be checked in people with risk factors for vitamin B deficiency prior to using nitrous oxide anaesthesia.

Several experimental studies in rats indicate that chronic exposure of pregnant females to nitrous oxide may have adverse effects on the developing fetus.

At room temperature () the saturated vapour pressure is 50.525 bar, rising up to 72.45 bar at —the critical temperature. The pressure curve is thus unusually sensitive to temperature. As with many strong oxidisers, contamination of parts with fuels have been implicated in rocketry accidents, where small quantities of nitrous/fuel mixtures explode due to &quot;water hammer&quot;-like effects (sometimes called &quot;dieseling&quot;—heating due to adiabatic compression of gases can reach decomposition temperatures). Some common building materials such as stainless steel and aluminium can act as fuels with strong oxidisers such as nitrous oxide, as can contaminants that may ignite due to adiabatic compression. There also have been incidents where nitrous oxide decomposition in plumbing has led to the explosion of large tanks.

==Environmental impact==
Global accounting of sources and sinks over the decade ending 2016 indicates that about 40% of the average 17 TgN/yr (teragrams, or million metric tons, of nitrogen per year) of emissions originated from human activity, and shows that emissions growth chiefly came from expanding agriculture. 

Nitrous oxide has significant global warming potential as a greenhouse gas. On a per-molecule basis, considered over a 100-year period, nitrous oxide has 265 times the atmospheric heat-trapping ability of carbon dioxide (). However, because of its low concentration (less than 1/1,000 of that of ), its contribution to the greenhouse effect is less than one third that of carbon dioxide, and also less than methane. On the other hand, since about 40% of the entering the atmosphere is the result of human activity, control of nitrous oxide is part of efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions.

Most human caused nitrous oxide released into the atmosphere is a greenhouse gas emission from agriculture, when farmers add nitrogen-based fertilizers onto the fields, and through the breakdown of animal manure. Reduction of emissions can be a hot topic in the politics of climate change.

Nitrous oxide is also released as a by-product of burning fossil fuel, though the amount released depends on which fuel was used. It is also emitted through the manufacture of nitric acid, which is used in the synthesis of nitrogen fertilizers. The production of adipic acid, a precursor to nylon and other synthetic clothing fibres, also releases nitrous oxide.

A rise in atmospheric nitrous oxide concentrations has been implicated as a possible contributor to the extremely intense global warming during the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event.

Nitrous oxide has also been implicated in thinning the ozone layer. A 2009 study suggested that emission was the single most important ozone-depleting emission and it was expected to remain the largest throughout the 21st century.

== Legality ==
In India transfer of nitrous oxide from bulk cylinders to smaller, more transportable E-type, 1,590-litre-capacity tanks is legal when intended for medical anaesthesia.

The Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine whose sale or possession without a prescription is an offense under the Medicines Act. This would seemingly prohibit all non-medicinal uses of nitrous oxide, although it is implied that only recreational use will be targeted.

In August 2015, the Council of the London Borough of Lambeth (UK) banned the use of the drug for recreational purposes, making offenders liable to an on-the-spot fine of up to £1,000. In September 2023, the UK Government announced that nitrous oxide would be made illegal by the end of the year, with possession potentially carrying up to a two-year prison sentence or an unlimited fine.

Possession of nitrous oxide is legal under United States federal law and is not subject to DEA purview. It is, however, regulated by the Food and Drug Administration under the Food Drug and Cosmetics Act; prosecution is possible under its &quot;misbranding&quot; clauses, prohibiting the sale or distribution of nitrous oxide for the purpose of human consumption without a proper medical license. Many states have laws regulating the possession, sale and distribution of nitrous oxide. Such laws usually ban distribution to minors or limit the amount that may be sold without special license. For example, in California, possession for recreational use is prohibited and qualifies as a misdemeanor.

==See also==

* DayCent
* Fink effect
* Nitrous oxide fuel blend

==References==
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==

* Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for Nitrous Oxide
* Paul Crutzen Interview Freeview video of Paul Crutzen Nobel Laureate for his work on decomposition of ozone talking to Harry Kroto Nobel Laureate by the Vega Science Trust.
* National Pollutant Inventory – Oxide of nitrogen fact sheet
* National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health – Nitrous Oxide
* CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards – Nitrous Oxide
* Nitrous Oxide FAQ
* Erowid article on Nitrous Oxide
* Nitrous oxide fingered as monster ozone slayer , Science News
* Dental Fear Central article on the use of nitrous oxide in dentistry
* Altered States Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="0" end="13" title="Nitrous oxide" label="Nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="75" end="87" title="Nitrous oxide" label="laughing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="89" end="96" title="Nitrous oxide" label="nitrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="101" end="115" title="Nitrous oxide" label="factitious air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="136" end="153" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="158" end="175" title="Nitrogen oxide" label="oxide of nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="185" end="192" title="Chemical formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="193" end="193" title="Nitrous oxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="None" start="235" end="248" title="Flammability#Definitions" label="non-flammable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="249" end="252" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="350" end="358" title="Oxidising agent" label="oxidiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881347" start="419" end="431" title="Nitrous oxide (medication)" label="medical uses"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="447" end="454" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="459" end="468" title="dentistry" label="dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="478" end="489" title="Anesthesia" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="494" end="507" title="Analgesic" label="pain-reducing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="534" end="594" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="653" end="665" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="681" end="689" title="Euphoria" label="euphoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="747" end="764" title="recreational drug" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q900394" start="788" end="792" title="Dissociative" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="882" end="893" title="Vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q287464" start="929" end="946" title="rocket propellant" label="rocket propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="952" end="964" title="auto racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="981" end="993" title="Aerosol spray#Aerosol propellants" label="frothing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1039" end="1060" title="Air pollution" label="atmospheric pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="1090" end="1107" title="Parts-per notation" label="parts per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="1180" end="1199" title="ozone layer" label="stratospheric ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="1238" end="1242" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="CFCs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1284" end="1300" title="Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture#Nitrous oxide emissions" label="from agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="1411" end="1425" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1470" end="1484" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774427" start="1537" end="1563" title="politics of climate change" label="politics of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="1646" end="1665" title="Natural philosophy" label="natural philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="1678" end="1694" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="1755" end="1772" title="phlogiston theory" label="phlogiston theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028862" start="1860" end="1933" title="Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air" label="&amp;quot;Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="2062" end="2073" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422365" start="2138" end="2152" title="Thomas Beddoes" label="Thomas Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="2157" end="2167" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106200166" start="2409" end="2424" title="factitious airs" label="factitious airs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2601" end="2613" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="3277" end="3291" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205959" start="3356" end="3377" title="Pneumatic Institution" label="Pneumatic Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912582" start="3426" end="3434" title="Hotwells" label="Hotwells"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="3436" end="3443" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="4207" end="4218" title="Anesthesia" label="anaesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="4250" end="4267" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4332" end="4351" title="Social class in the United Kingdom#Upper class" label="British upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543471" start="4652" end="4662" title="George Poe" label="George Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="4683" end="4698" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="4788" end="4799" title="anaesthetic" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q733410" start="4852" end="4864" title="Horace Wells" label="Horace Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758287" start="4885" end="4906" title="Gardner Quincy Colton" label="Gardner Quincy Colton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433991" start="4911" end="4928" title="John Mankey Riggs" label="John Mankey Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q849893" start="4972" end="4989" title="dental extraction" label="dental extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="5099" end="5120" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5275" end="5281" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="5793" end="5802" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5807" end="5820" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="6027" end="6044" title="Local anesthetic" label="local anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="6174" end="6187" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="6301" end="6311" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287397" start="6326" end="6346" title="Joseph Thomas Clover" label="Joseph Thomas Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="6890" end="6909" title="anaesthetic machine" label="anaesthetic machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="7210" end="7222" title="Quackery" label="quacksalvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="7252" end="7263" title="tuberculosis" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678337" start="7265" end="7273" title="Mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitis" label="scrofula"/>
<link wikidata="Q762583" start="7275" end="7282" title="catarrh" label="catarrh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480271" start="7393" end="7408" title="patent medicine" label="patent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21405713" start="7425" end="7436" title="C. L. Blood" label="C. L. Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q499548" start="7651" end="7665" title="Coordinate covalent bond" label="dipolar bonded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572256" start="7713" end="7719" title="Splint (laboratory equipment)" label="splint"/>
<link wikidata="Q407627" start="7962" end="7967" title="azide" label="azide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="8050" end="8069" title="mechanism of action" label="mechanism of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q418536" start="8166" end="8190" title="ligand-gated ion channel" label="ligand-gated ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q414896" start="8247" end="8252" title="NMDA receptor" label="NMDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861982" start="8257" end="8266" title="CHRNB2" label="β-subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="8278" end="8291" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nACh channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q295251" start="8309" end="8313" title="AMPA receptor" label="AMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454536" start="8315" end="8322" title="kainate receptor" label="kainate"/>
<link wikidata="Q798179" start="8324" end="8328" title="GABAA-rho receptor" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454515" start="8333" end="8347" title="5-HT3 receptor" label="5-HT receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60147" start="8374" end="8378" title="GABAA receptor" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q426887" start="8383" end="8399" title="glycine receptor" label="glycine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682440" start="8437" end="8461" title="Two-pore-domain potassium channel" label="two-pore-domain channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="8516" end="8530" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="8535" end="8545" title="euphoriant" label="euphoriant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="8695" end="8707" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="9356" end="9363" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="9395" end="9405" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60147" start="9519" end="9542" title="GABAA receptor" label="benzodiazepine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="9543" end="9554" title="receptor antagonist" label="antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="9639" end="9653" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256440" start="9827" end="9838" title="psychomotor learning" label="psychomotor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9943" end="9960" title="Opioid#Endogenous opioids" label="endogenous opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="9987" end="10000" title="Norepinephrine" label="noradrenergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="10197" end="10207" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993328" start="10273" end="10284" title="Beta-Endorphin" label="β-endorphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="10621" end="10632" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q288084" start="10811" end="10825" title="alpha-2 adrenergic receptor" label="α-adrenoceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17710538" start="10965" end="10979" title="alpha-2B adrenergic receptor" label="α-adrenoceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="11017" end="11031" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="11174" end="11183" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="11532" end="11548" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="11645" end="11654" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="11782" end="11792" title="detonation" label="detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="11973" end="11987" title="sodium nitrate" label="sodium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191831" start="11992" end="12008" title="ammonium sulfate" label="ammonium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407674" start="12124" end="12141" title="manganese dioxide" label="manganese dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q252536" start="12142" end="12155" title="Bismuth(III) oxide" label="bismuth oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q591214" start="12188" end="12203" title="Ostwald process" label="Ostwald process"/>
<link wikidata="Q421356" start="12206" end="12231" title="Hydroxylammonium chloride" label="Hydroxylammonium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q339975" start="12244" end="12258" title="sodium nitrite" label="sodium nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774" start="12584" end="12600" title="Hyponitrous acid" label="Hyponitrous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="12635" end="12644" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12725" end="12767" title="Atmospheric chemistry#Atmospheric composition" label="minor component of Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q82551" start="12807" end="12821" title="nitrogen cycle" label="nitrogen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="12898" end="12911" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="12926" end="12929" title="Parts-per notation" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q82551" start="13759" end="13773" title="nitrogen cycle" label="nitrogen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="14128" end="14141" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158073" start="14151" end="14172" title="denitrifying bacteria" label="denitrifying bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="14177" end="14182" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="14421" end="14428" title="Wetland" label="Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990121" start="14442" end="14467" title="Greenhouse gas emissions from wetlands" label="emitters of nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="14492" end="14502" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="14878" end="14884" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="14983" end="14994" title="Fertilizer" label="fertilisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q357415" start="15455" end="15466" title="adipic acid" label="adipic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046687" start="15592" end="15605" title="nitrolic acid" label="nitrolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q668677" start="15761" end="15774" title="nitrification" label="nitrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q742637" start="15779" end="15794" title="denitrification" label="denitrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="15888" end="15895" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q72157355" start="15902" end="15909" title="nitrite" label="nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="15920" end="15927" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="16005" end="16017" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="16687" end="16701" title="organic matter" label="organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575565" start="16942" end="16965" title="nitrous-oxide reductase" label="nitrous oxide reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="17030" end="17038" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="17044" end="17050" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q182546" start="17393" end="17407" title="Robert Goddard" label="Robert Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639965" start="17555" end="17568" title="hybrid rocket" label="hybrid rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408429" start="17584" end="17594" title="solid fuel" label="solid fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115617" start="17669" end="17702" title="hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene" label="hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q38935" start="17725" end="17737" title="SpaceShipOne" label="SpaceShipOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q605409" start="17777" end="17784" title="amateur rocketry" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232577" start="17789" end="17806" title="high power rocket" label="high power rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q15818248" start="17881" end="17895" title="monopropellant rocket" label="monopropellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="17925" end="17933" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160121" start="18102" end="18119" title="Chain reaction" label="autodecomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="18194" end="18210" title="specific impulse" label="specific impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="18300" end="18309" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="18340" end="18352" title="Bipropellant rocket" label="bipropellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="18358" end="18378" title="dinitrogen tetroxide" label="dinitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182714" start="18511" end="18522" title="deflagration" label="deflagrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q878123" start="18756" end="18762" title="racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q108737" start="18798" end="18805" title="Nitrous oxide engine" label="nitrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206829" start="18823" end="18835" title="engine power" label="engine power"/>
<link wikidata="Q568968" start="19292" end="19307" title="Inlet manifold" label="intake manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q483538" start="19313" end="19324" title="heat of vaporization" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19688" end="19700" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="19704" end="19713" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q630158" start="19732" end="19736" title="GM-1" label="GM-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="19773" end="19788" title="aircraft engine" label="aircraft engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="20040" end="20063" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649498" start="20065" end="20083" title="schnellbomber" label="high-speed bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="20102" end="20122" title="interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q466689" start="20220" end="20225" title="MW 50" label="MW 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936109" start="20237" end="20252" title="Water injection (engine)" label="water injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="20284" end="20292" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q502048" start="20581" end="20594" title="petrol engine" label="petrol engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656685" start="20633" end="20654" title="operating temperature" label="operating temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872456" start="20683" end="20695" title="pre-ignition" label="pre-ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="21107" end="21121" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="21231" end="21244" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="21246" end="21254" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21282" end="21306" title="Aerosol spray#Aerosol propellants" label="aerosol spray propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q625957" start="21339" end="21352" title="whipped cream" label="whipped cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167151" start="21367" end="21380" title="cooking spray" label="cooking spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q859029" start="21742" end="21757" title="rancidification" label="rancidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517772" start="22283" end="22311" title="Christmas and holiday season" label="Christmas and holiday season"/>
<link wikidata="Q407448" start="22340" end="22351" title="Air Liquide" label="Air Liquide"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="22378" end="22385" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q241595" start="22570" end="22578" title="lecithin" label="lecithin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187634" start="22579" end="22589" title="emulsifier" label="emulsifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="22613" end="22623" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="22653" end="22660" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="22664" end="22671" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310782" start="22977" end="23003" title="relative analgesia machine" label="relative analgesia machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="23013" end="23034" title="anaesthetic vaporiser" label="anaesthetic vaporiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q813243" start="23041" end="23059" title="medical ventilator" label="medical ventilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881347" start="23121" end="23152" title="nitrous oxide and oxygen" label="nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755101" start="23194" end="23213" title="general anaesthetic" label="general anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q419394" start="23372" end="23383" title="sevoflurane" label="sevoflurane"/>
<link wikidata="Q419383" start="23387" end="23397" title="desflurane" label="desflurane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936963" start="23408" end="23438" title="minimum alveolar concentration" label="minimum alveolar concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927528" start="23453" end="23484" title="blood/gas partition coefficient" label="blood/gas partition coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="24111" end="24121" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="24123" end="24129" title="Physical trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="24131" end="24143" title="dentistry" label="oral surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q266018" start="24148" end="24171" title="acute coronary syndrome" label="acute coronary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881347" start="24369" end="24376" title="Nitrous oxide (medication)" label="Entonox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808207" start="24835" end="24875" title="recreational use of nitrous oxide" label="Recreational inhalation of nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="24887" end="24895" title="euphoria (emotion)" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="24907" end="24920" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395343" start="25398" end="25402" title="Vice Media" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029312" start="25485" end="25494" title="Matt Shea (documentary filmmaker)" label="Matt Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="26393" end="26407" title="emergency room" label="emergency room"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="26699" end="26705" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433185" start="26753" end="26772" title="occupational hazard" label="occupational hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="27081" end="27099" title="ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430642" start="27103" end="27119" title="scavenger system" label="scavenger system"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="27168" end="27221" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="27398" end="27424" title="recommended exposure limit" label="recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="27437" end="27440" title="Parts-per notation" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="27701" end="27711" title="neurotoxic" label="neurotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044974" start="27903" end="27927" title="NMDA receptor antagonist" label="NMDA receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657006" start="27939" end="27959" title="Olney&amp;#x27;s lesions" label="Olney&amp;#x27;s lesions"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="28376" end="28383" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993720" start="28445" end="28466" title="whipped-cream charger" label="whipped-cream charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="28709" end="28730" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="28732" end="28738" title="ataxia" label="ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q769220" start="28763" end="28774" title="paresthesia" label="paresthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114007" start="28920" end="28936" title="chronic toxicity" label="chronic toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="28992" end="28998" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q901117" start="29219" end="29233" title="excitotoxicity" label="excitotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234995" start="29895" end="29915" title="Vitamin B12 deficiency" label="vitamin B deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="30109" end="30127" title="Peripheral neuropathy" label="sensory neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303951" start="30129" end="30139" title="myelopathy" label="myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q576349" start="30144" end="30158" title="encephalopathy" label="encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="30924" end="30944" title="Critical point (thermodynamics)" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q826849" start="31187" end="31199" title="water hammer" label="water hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="31274" end="31283" title="adiabatic" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="31803" end="31811" title="Megatonne" label="teragram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="31965" end="31976" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="32010" end="32034" title="global warming potential" label="global warming potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="32040" end="32054" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="32185" end="32199" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="32303" end="32320" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="32387" end="32394" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q111461869" start="32640" end="32680" title="Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture" label="greenhouse gas emission from agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774427" start="32836" end="32862" title="politics of climate change" label="politics of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="33041" end="33052" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="33156" end="33161" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058878" start="33377" end="33411" title="Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event" label="Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="33456" end="33480" title="ozone depletion" label="thinning the ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="33664" end="33669" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933991" start="33835" end="33853" title="New Zealand Ministry of Health" label="Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481450" start="34158" end="34165" title="Lambeth London Borough Council" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="34173" end="34198" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="London Borough of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="34200" end="34202" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="34570" end="34583" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="34618" end="34621" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="DEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="34664" end="34692" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="34872" end="34889" title="recreational drug use" label="human consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242779" start="35243" end="35250" title="DayCent" label="DayCent"/>
<link wikidata="Q460869" start="35253" end="35264" title="Fink effect" label="Fink effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453694" start="35267" end="35291" title="Nitrous oxide fuel blend" label="Nitrous oxide fuel blend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37442" wikidata="Q1377202" url="?curid=37442" title="Alliant RQ-6 Outrider">
<text>The Alliant RQ-6 Outrider unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was designed to provide near-real-time reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition information to United States Marine Corps air/ground task forces, United States Army brigades, and deployed United States Navy units that was small enough for an entire system to be contained on two Humvees and trailer and transported on a single C-130 Hercules cargo aircraft.

The project began in 1996 and was canceled in 1999.

The &quot;R&quot; is the Department of Defense designation for reconnaissance; &quot;Q&quot; means unmanned aircraft system. The &quot;6&quot; refers to its being the sixth of a series of purpose-built unmanned aircraft systems.

==Specifications==

==See also==
==References==
==External links==

*RQ-6 listing in Directory of U.S. Military Rockets and Missiles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1377202" start="4" end="25" title="Alliant RQ-6 Outrider" label="Alliant RQ-6 Outrider"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="26" end="49" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974529" start="95" end="147" title="Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition, and Reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="163" end="189" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="214" end="232" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="256" end="274" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217046" start="347" end="353" title="Humvee" label="Humvee"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="395" end="409" title="C-130 Hercules" label="C-130 Hercules"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37445" wikidata="Q33673" url="?curid=37445" title="Kannada">
<text>Kannada (; , ), historically known as Canarese, is a classical Dravidian language spoken predominantly in the state of Karnataka in southwestern India, and spoken by a minority of the population in all neighbouring states. It has 44 million native speakers, and is additionally a second or third language for 15 million speakers in Karnataka. It is the official and administrative language of Karnataka. It also has scheduled status in India and has been included among the country&#x27;s designated classical languages.

Kannada was the court language of a number of dynasties and empires of South India, Central India and the Deccan Plateau, namely the Kadamba dynasty, Western Ganga dynasty, Nolamba dynasty, Chalukya dynasty, Rashtrakutas, Western Chalukya Empire, Seuna dynasty, Kingdom of Mysore, Nayakas of Keladi, Hoysala dynasty and the Vijayanagara Empire.

The Kannada language is written using the Kannada script, which evolved from the 5th-century Kadamba script. Kannada is attested epigraphically for about one and a half millennia and literary Old Kannada flourished during the 9th-century Rashtrakuta Empire. Kannada has an unbroken literary history of around 1200 years. Kannada literature has been presented with eight Jnanapith awards, the most for any Dravidian language and the second highest for any Indian language. In July 2011, a center for the study of classical Kannada was established as part of the Central Institute of Indian Languages in Mysore to facilitate research related to the language.

== Geographic distribution ==
Kannada had 43.7 million native speakers in India at the time of the 2011 census. It is the main language of the state of Karnataka, where it is spoken natively by million people, or about two thirds of the state&#x27;s population. There are native Kannada speakers in the neighbouring states of Tamil Nadu ( speakers), Maharashtra (), Andhra Pradesh and Telangana (), Kerala () and Goa (). It is also spoken as a second and third language by over 12.9 million non-native speakers in Karnataka.

Kannadigas form Tamil Nadu&#x27;s third biggest linguistic group; their population is roughly 1.23 million, which is 2.2% of Tamil Nadu&#x27;s total population.

The Malayalam spoken by people of Lakshadweep has many Kannada words.

In the United States, there were 35,900 speakers in 2006–2008, a number that had risen to 48,600 by the time of the 2015 census. There are speakers in Canada (according to the 2016 census), 9,700 in Australia (2016 census), 22,000 in Singapore (2018 estimate), and 59,000 in Malaysia (2021 estimate).

== Development ==

Kannada, like Malayalam and Tamil, is a South Dravidian language and a descendant of Tamil-Kannada, from which it derives its grammar and core vocabulary. Its history can be divided into three stages: Old Kannada, or &quot;Haḷegannaḍa&quot; from 450 to 1200 AD, Middle Kannada (&quot;Naḍugannaḍa&quot;) from 1200 to 1700 and Modern Kannada (&quot;Hosagannaḍa&quot;) from 1700 to the present.

Kannada has been considerably influenced by Sanskrit and Prakrit—in morphology, phonetics, vocabulary, grammar, and syntax. The three principle sources of influence on literary Kannada grammar appear to be Pāṇini&#x27;s grammar, non-Pāṇinian schools of Sanskrit grammar, particularly &quot;Katantra&quot; and &quot;Sakatayana&quot; schools, and Prakrit grammar. Literary Prakrit seems to have prevailed in Karnataka since ancient times. Speakers of vernacular Prakrit may have come into contact with Kannada speakers, thus influencing their language, even before Kannada was used for administrative or liturgical purposes. The scholar K. V. Narayana claims that many tribal languages now designated as Kannada dialects could be nearer to the earlier form of the language, with lesser influence from other languages.

The work of the scholar Iravatham Mahadevan indicates that Kannada was already a language of rich spoken tradition by the 3rd century BC. Based on native Kannada words in Prakrit inscriptions of that period, Kannada must have been spoken by a broad and stable population.

Kannada includes many loan words from Sanskrit. Some unaltered loan words () include , , , , and . Some examples of naturalised Sanskrit words () in Kannada are , , and from . Some naturalised words of Prakrit origin in Kannada are derived from , from .

==History==

===Early traces===




The earliest Kannada inscriptions are from the middle of the 5th century AD, but there are a number of earlier texts that may have been influenced by the ancestor language of Old Kannada.

Iravatam Mahadevan, author of a work on early Tamil epigraphy, argued that oral traditions in Kannada and Telugu existed much before written documents were produced. Although the rock inscriptions of Ashoka were written in Prakrit, the spoken language in those regions was Kannada as the case may be. He can be quoted as follows:
The Ashoka rock edict found at Brahmagiri (dated to 250 BC) has been suggested to contain words (&quot;Isila&quot;, meaning to throw, viz. an arrow, etc.) in identifiable Kannada.

In some 3rd–1st century BC Tamil inscriptions, words of Kannada influence such as &quot;Naliyura&quot;, &quot;kavuDi&quot; and &quot;posil&quot; were found. In a 3rd-century AD Tamil inscription there is usage of &quot;oppanappa vIran&quot;. Here the honorific &quot;appa&quot; to a person&#x27;s name is an influence from Kannada. Another word of Kannada origin is &quot;taayviru&quot; and is found in a 4th-century AD Tamil inscription. S. Settar studied the &quot;sittanavAsal&quot; inscription of first century AD as also the inscriptions at &quot;tirupparamkunram&quot;, &quot;adakala&quot; and &quot;neDanUpatti&quot;. The later inscriptions were studied in detail by Iravatham Mahadevan also. Mahadevan argues that the words &quot;erumi&quot;, &quot;kavuDi&quot;, and &quot;tAyiyar&quot; have their origin in Kannada because Tamil cognates are not available. Settar adds the words &quot;nADu&quot; and &quot;iLayar&quot; to this list. Mahadevan feels that some grammatical categories found in these inscriptions are also unique to Kannada rather than Tamil. Both these scholars attribute these influences to the movements and spread of Jainas in these regions. These inscriptions belong to the period between the first century BC and fourth century AD. These are some examples that are proof of the early usage of a few Kannada origin words in early Tamil inscriptions before the common era and in the early centuries of the common era.

Pliny the Elder, a Roman historian, wrote about pirates between Muziris and Nitrias (Netravati River), called Nitran by Ptolemy. He also mentions Barace (Barcelore), referring to the modern port city of Mangaluru, upon its mouth. Many of these are Kannada origin names of places and rivers of the Karnataka coast of 1st century AD.

The Greek geographer Ptolemy (150 AD) mentions places such as Badiamaioi (Badami), Inde (Indi), Kalligeris (Kalkeri), Modogoulla (Mudagal), Petrigala (Pattadakal), Hippokoura (Huvina Hipparagi), Nagarouris (Nagur), Tabaso (Tavasi), Tiripangalida (Gadahinglai), Soubouttou or Sabatha (Savadi), Banaouase (Banavasi), Thogorum (Tagara), Biathana (Paithan), Sirimalaga (Malkhed), Aloe (Ellapur) and Pasage (Palasige). He mentions a Satavahana king Sire Polemaios, who is identified with Sri Pulumayi (or Pulumavi), whose name is derived from the Kannada word for &quot;Puli&quot;, meaning tiger. Some scholars indicate that the name Pulumayi is actually Kannada&#x27;s &quot;&#x27;Puli Maiyi&quot;&#x27; or &#x27;&quot;One with the body of a tiger&quot;&#x27; indicating native Kannada origin for the Satavahanas. Pai identifies all the 10 cities mentioned by Ptolemy (100–170 AD) as lying between the river Benda (or Binda) or Bhima river in the north and Banaouasei (Banavasi) in the south, viz. Nagarouris (Nagur), Tabaso (Tavasi), Inde (Indi), Tiripangalida (Gadhinglaj), Hippokoura (Huvina Hipparagi), Soubouttou (Savadi), Sirimalaga (Malkhed), Kalligeris (Kalkeri), Modogoulla (Mudgal), and Petirgala (Pattadakal)—as being located in Northern Karnataka, which explain the existence of Kannada place names (and the language and culture) in the southern Kuntala region during the reign of Vasishtiputra Pulumayi (–125 AD, i.e., late 1st century – early 2nd century AD) who was ruling from Paithan in the north and his son, prince Vilivaya-kura or Pulumayi Kumara was ruling from Huvina Hipparagi in present Karnataka in the south.

An early ancestor of Kannada (or a related language) may have been spoken by Indian traders in Roman-era Egypt and it may account for the Indian-language passages in the ancient Greek play known as the Charition mime.

===Epigraphy===
The earliest examples of a full-length Kannada language stone inscription (&quot;śilāśāsana&quot;) containing Brahmi characters with characteristics attributed to those of proto-Kannada in &quot;Haḷe Kannaḍa&quot; (&quot;lit&quot; Old Kannada) script can be found in the Halmidi inscription, usually dated , indicating that Kannada had become an administrative language at that time. The Halmidi inscription provides invaluable information about the history and culture of Karnataka. A set of five copper plate inscriptions discovered in Mudiyanur, though in the Sanskrit language, is in the Pre-Old Kannada script older than the Halmidi edict date of 450 AD, as per palaeographers.

Followed by B. L. Rice, leading epigrapher and historian, K. R. Narasimhan following a detailed study and comparison, declared that the plates belong to the 4th century, i.e., 338 AD. The Kannada Lion balustrade inscription excavated at the Pranaveshwara temple complex at Talagunda near Shiralakoppa of Shivamogga district, dated to 370 AD is now considered the earliest Kannada inscriptions replacing the Halmidi inscription of 450 AD. The 5th century poetic Tamatekallu inscription of Chitradurga and the Siragunda inscription from Chikkamagaluru Taluk of 500 AD are further examples. Recent reports indicate that the Old Kannada &quot;Gunabhushitana&quot; &quot;Nishadi&quot; inscription discovered on the Chandragiri hill, Shravanabelagola, is older than Halmidi inscription by about fifty to hundred years and may belong to the period AD 350–400.

The noted archaeologist and art historian S. Shettar is of the opinion that an inscription of the Western Ganga King Kongunivarma Madhava (–370) found at Tagarthi (Tyagarthi) in Shikaripura taluk of Shimoga district is of 350 AD and is also older than the Halmidi inscription.

Current estimates of the total number of existing epigraphs written in Kannada range from 25,000 by the scholar Sheldon Pollock to over 30,000 by Amaresh Datta of the Sahitya Akademi. Prior to the Halmidi inscription, there is an abundance of inscriptions containing Kannada words, phrases and sentences, proving its antiquity. The 543 AD Badami cliff inscription of Pulakesi I is an example of a Sanskrit inscription in old Kannada script.

Kannada inscriptions are discovered in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat in addition to Karnataka. This indicates the spread of the influence of the language over the ages, especially during the rule of large Kannada empires.

The earliest copper plates inscribed in Old Kannada script and language, dated to the early 8th century AD, are associated with Alupa King Aluvarasa II from Belmannu (the Dakshina Kannada district), and display the double crested fish, his royal emblem. The oldest well-preserved palm leaf manuscript in &quot;Old Kannada&quot; is that of &quot;Dhavala&quot;. It dates to around the 9th century and is preserved in the Jain Bhandar, Mudbidri, Dakshina Kannada district. The manuscript contains 1478 leaves written using ink.

=== Coins ===
Some early Kadamba Dynasty coins bearing the Kannada inscription &quot;Vira&quot; and &quot;Skandha&quot; were found in Satara collectorate. A gold coin bearing three inscriptions of &quot;Sri&quot; and an abbreviated inscription of king Bhagiratha&#x27;s name called &quot;bhagi&quot; (c. 390–420 AD) in old Kannada exists. A Kadamba copper coin dated to the 5th century AD with the inscription &quot;Srimanaragi&quot; in Kannada script was discovered in Banavasi, Uttara Kannada district. Coins with Kannada legends have been discovered spanning the rule of the Western Ganga Dynasty, the Badami Chalukyas, the Alupas, the Western Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas, the Hoysalas, the Vijayanagar Empire, the Kadamba Dynasty of Banavasi, the Keladi Nayakas and the Mysore Kingdom, the Badami Chalukya coins being a recent discovery. The coins of the Kadambas of Goa are unique in that they have alternate inscription of the king&#x27;s name in Kannada and Devanagari in triplicate, a few coins of the Kadambas of Hangal are also available.

==Literature==
===Old Kannada===
The oldest known existing record of Kannada poetry in &quot;Tripadi&quot; metre is the Kappe Arabhatta record of 7th century AD. &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot; by King Nripatunga Amoghavarsha I (850 AD) is the earliest existing literary work in Kannada. It is a writing on literary criticism and poetics meant to standardise various written Kannada dialects used in literature in previous centuries. The book makes reference to Kannada works by early writers such as King Durvinita of the 6th century and Ravikirti, the author of the Aihole record of 636 AD. Since the earliest available Kannada work is one on grammar and a guide of sorts to unify existing variants of Kannada grammar and literary styles, it can be safely assumed that literature in Kannada must have started several centuries earlier. An early extant prose work, the &quot;Vaḍḍārādhane&quot; (ವಡ್ಡಾರಾಧನೆ) by Shivakotiacharya of 900 AD provides an elaborate description of the life of Bhadrabahu of Shravanabelagola.

Some early writers of prose and verse mentioned in the &quot;Kavirajamarga,&quot; numbering 8–10, stating these are but a few of many, but whose works are lost, are Vimala or Vimalachandra (c. 777), Udaya, Nagarjuna, Jayabandhu, Durvinita (6th century), and poets including Kaviswara, Srivijaya, Pandita, Chandra, Ravi Kirti (c. 634) and Lokapala. For fragmentary information on these writers, we can refer the work &quot;Karnataka Kavi Charite&quot;. Ancient indigenous Kannada literary compositions of (folk) poetry like the &quot;Chattana&quot; and &quot;Bedande&quot;, which preferred to use the &quot;Desi&quot; metre, are said to have survived at least until the date of the Kavirajamarga in 850 AD and had their roots in the early Kannada folk literature. These Kannada verse-compositions might have been representative of folk songs containing influence of Sanskrit and Prakrit metrical patterns to some extent. &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot; also discusses earlier composition forms peculiar to Kannada, the &quot;gadyakatha&quot;, a mixture of prose and poetry, the &quot;&quot;chattana&quot; and the &quot;bedande&quot;&quot;, poems of several stanzas that were meant to be sung with the optional use of a musical instrument. Amoghavarsha Nripatunga compares the &quot;puratana-kavigal&quot; (old Kannada poets) who wrote the great &quot;Chattana&quot; poems in Kannada to the likes of the great Sanskrit poets like Gunasuri, Narayana, Bharavi, Kalidasa, Magha, etc. This Old Kannada work, &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot;, itself in turn refers to a &quot;Palagannada&quot; (Old Kannada) of much ancient times, which is nothing but the Pre-Old Kannada and also warns aspiring Kannada writers to avoid its archaisms, as per R. S. Hukkerikar. Regarding earlier poems in Kannada, the author of &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot; states that old Kannada is appropriate in ancient poems but insipid in contemporaneous works as per R. Narasimhacharya. Gunanandi (900 AD), quoted by the grammarian Bhattakalanka and always addressed as &quot;Bhagawan&quot; (the adorable), was the author of a logic, grammar and &quot;sahitya&quot;. Durvinita (529–579 AD), the Ganga king, was the pupil of the author of Sabdavatara, i.e., Devanandi Pujyapada. Durvinita is said to have written a commentary on the difficult 15th &quot;sarga&quot; of Bharavi&#x27;s &quot;Kiratarjuniya&quot; in Kannada. Early Kannada writers regularly mention three poets as of especial eminence among their predecessors – Samanta-bhadra, Kavi Parameshthi and Pujyapada. Since later Kannada poets so uniformly name these three as eminent poets, it is probable that they wrote in Kannada also. Samantabhadra is placed in 2nd century AD by Jain tradition. Old Kannada commentaries on some of his works exist. He was said to have been born in Utkalikagrama and while performing penance in Manuvakahalli, he was attacked by a disease called &quot;Bhasmaka&quot;. Pujyapada also called Devanandi, was the preceptor of Ganga king Durvinita and belonged to the late 5th to early 6th century AD. Kaviparameshthi probably lived in the 4th century AD. He may possibly be the same as the &quot;Kaviswara&quot; referred to in the Kavirajamarga, and the &quot;Kaviparameswara&quot; praised by Chavunda Raya (978 AD) and his spiritual teacher, Nemichandra (10th century AD), all the names possibly being only epithets.

Kannada works from earlier centuries mentioned in the Kavirajamarga are not yet traced. Some ancient Kannada texts now considered extinct but referenced in later centuries are &quot;Prabhrita&quot; (650 AD) by Syamakundacharya, &quot;Chudamani&quot; (Crest Jewel—650 AD or earlier) by Srivaradhadeva, also known as Tumbuluracharya, which is a work of 96,000 verse-measures and a commentary on logic (&quot;Tatwartha-mahashastra&quot;). Other sources date &quot;Chudamani&quot; to the 6th century or earlier. An inscription of 1128 AD quotes a couplet by the famous Sanskrit poet Dandin (active 680–720 AD), highly praising Srivaradhadeva, for his Kannada work Chudamani, as having &quot;produced Saraswati (i.e., learning and eloquence) from the tip of his tongue, as Siva produced the Ganges from the tip of his top-knot.&quot; Bhattakalanka (1604 CE), the great Kannada grammarian, refers to Srivaradhadeva&#x27;s Chudamani as the greatest work in Kannada, and as incontestable proof of the scholarly character and value of Kannada literature. This makes Srivaradhadeva&#x27;s time earlier than the 6th–7th century AD. Other writers, whose works are not extant now but titles of which are known from independent references such as Indranandi&#x27;s &quot;Srutavatara&quot;, Devachandra&#x27;s &quot;Rajavalikathe&quot;, Bhattakalanka&#x27;s &quot;Sabdanusasana&quot; of 1604, writings of Jayakirthi are Syamakundacharya (650), who authored the &quot;Prabhrita&quot;, and Srivaradhadeva (also called Tumubuluracharya, 650 or earlier), who wrote the &quot;Chudamani&quot; (&quot;Crest Jewel&quot;), a 96,000-verse commentary on logic. The &quot;Karnateshwara Katha&quot;, a eulogy for King Pulakesi II, is said to have belonged to the 7th century; the &quot;Gajastaka&quot;, a lost &quot;ashtaka&quot; (eight line verse) composition and a work on elephant management by King Shivamara II, belonged to the 8th century, this served as the basis for 2 popular folk songs &quot;Ovanige&quot; and &quot;Onakevadu,&quot; which were sung either while pounding corn or to entice wild elephants into a pit (&quot;Ovam&quot;). The &quot;Chandraprabha-purana&quot; by Sri Vijaya, a court poet of emperor Amoghavarsha I, is ascribed to the early 9th century. His writing has been mentioned by Vijayanagara poets Mangarasa III and Doddiah (also spelt Doddayya, c. 1550 AD) and praised by Durgasimha (c. 1025 AD). During the 9th century period, the Digambara Jain poet Asaga (or Asoka) authored, among other writings, &quot;Karnata Kumarasambhava Kavya&quot; and &quot;Varadamana Charitra&quot;. His works have been praised by later poets, although none of his works are available today. &quot;Gunagankiyam&quot;, the earliest known prosody in Kannada, was referenced in a Tamil work dated to 10th century or earlier (&quot;Yapparungalakkarigai&quot; by Amritasagara). Gunanandi, an expert in logic, Kannada grammar and prose, flourished in the 9th century AD. Around 900 AD, Gunavarma I wrote &quot;Sudraka&quot; and &quot;Harivamsa&quot; (also known as &quot;Neminatha Purana&quot;). In &quot;Sudraka&quot; he compared his patron, Ganga king Ereganga Neetimarga II (c. 907–921 AD), to a noted king called Sudraka. Jinachandra, who is referred to by Sri Ponna (c. 950 AD) as the author of &quot;Pujyapada Charita&quot;, had earned the honorific &quot;modern Samantha Bhadra&quot;. Tamil Buddhist commentators of the 10th century AD (in the commentary on &quot;Neminatham&quot;, a Tamil grammatical work) make references that show that Kannada literature must have flourished as early as the BC 4th century.

Around the beginning of the 9th century, Old Kannada was spoken from Kaveri to Godavari. The Kannada spoken between the rivers Varada and Malaprabha was the pure well of Kannada undefiled.

The late classical period gave birth to several genres of Kannada literature, with new forms of composition coming into use, including &quot;Ragale&quot; (a form of blank verse) and meters like &quot;Sangatya&quot; and &quot;Shatpadi&quot;. The works of this period are based on Jain and Hindu principles. Two of the early writers of this period are Harihara and Raghavanka, trailblazers in their own right. Harihara established the &quot;Ragale&quot; form of composition while Raghavanka popularised the &quot;Shatpadi&quot; (six-lined stanza) meter. A famous Jaina writer of the same period is Janna, who expressed Jain religious teachings through his works.

The Vachana Sahitya tradition of the 12th century is purely native and unique in world literature, and the sum of contributions by all sections of society. Vachanas were pithy poems on that period&#x27;s social, religious and economic conditions. More importantly, they held a mirror to the seed of social revolution, which caused a radical re-examination of the ideas of caste, creed and religion. Some of the important writers of Vachana literature include Basavanna, Allama Prabhu and Akka Mahadevi.

Emperor Nripatunga Amoghavarsha I of 850 AD recognised that the Sanskrit style of Kannada literature was &quot;Margi&quot; (formal or written form of language) and &quot;Desi&quot; (folk or spoken form of language) style was popular and made his people aware of the strength and beauty of their native language Kannada. In 1112 AD, Jain poet Nayasena of Mulugunda, Dharwad district, in his Champu work &quot;Dharmamrita&quot; (ಧರ್ಮಾಮೃತ), a book on morals, warns writers from mixing Kannada with Sanskrit by comparing it with mixing of clarified butter and oil. He has written it using very limited Sanskrit words that fit with idiomatic Kannada. In 1235 AD, Jain poet Andayya, wrote &quot;Kabbigara Kava&quot;- ಕಬ್ಬಿಗರ ಕಾವ (Poet&#x27;s Defender), also called &quot;Sobagina Suggi&quot; (Harvest of Beauty) or &quot;Madana-Vijaya and&quot; &quot;Kavana-Gella&quot; (Cupid&#x27;s Conquest)&quot;,&quot; a &quot;Champu&quot; work in pure Kannada using only indigenous (&quot;desya&quot;) Kannada words and the derived form of Sanskrit words – &quot;tadbhavas&quot;, without the admixture of Sanskrit words. He succeeded in his challenge and proved wrong those who had advocated that it was impossible to write a work in Kannada without using Sanskrit words. Andayya may be considered as a protector of Kannada poets who were ridiculed by Sanskrit advocates. Thus Kannada is the only Dravidian language that is not only capable of using only native Kannada words and grammar in its literature (like Tamil), but also use Sanskrit grammar and vocabulary (like Telugu, Malayalam, Tulu, etc.) The Champu style of literature of mixing poetry with prose owes its origins to the Kannada language and was later incorporated by poets into Sanskrit and other Indian languages.

===Middle Kannada===

During the period between the 15th and 18th centuries, Hinduism had a great influence on Middle Kannada (&quot;Naḍugannaḍa&quot;- ನಡುಗನ್ನಡ) language and literature. Kumara Vyasa, who wrote the &quot;Karṇāṭa Bhārata Kathāman̄jari&quot; (ಕರ್ಣಾಟ ಭಾರತ ಕಥಾಮಂಜರಿ), was arguably the most influential Kannada writer of this period. His work, entirely composed in the native &quot;Bhamini Shatpadi&quot; (hexa-meter), is a sublime adaptation of the first ten books of the Mahabharata.
During this period, the Sanskritic influence is present in most abstract, religious, scientific and rhetorical terms. During this period, several Hindi and Marathi words came into Kannada, chiefly relating to feudalism and militia.

Hindu saints of the Vaishnava sect such as Kanakadasa, Purandaradasa, Naraharitirtha, Vyasatirtha, Sripadaraya, Vadirajatirtha, Vijaya Dasa, Gopala Dasa, Jagannatha Dasa, Prasanna Venkatadasa produced devotional poems in this period. Kanakadasa&#x27;s &quot;Rāmadhānya Charite&quot; (ರಾಮಧಾನ್ಯ ಚರಿತೆ) is a rare work, concerning with the issue of class struggle. This period saw the advent of &quot;Haridasa Sahitya&quot; (&quot;lit&quot; Dasa literature), which made rich contributions to &quot;Bhakti&quot; literature and sowed the seeds of Carnatic music. Purandara Dasa is widely considered the &quot;Father of Carnatic music&quot;.

===Modern Kannada===

The Kannada works produced from the 19th century make a gradual transition and are classified as &quot;Hosagannaḍa&quot; or Modern Kannada. Most notable among the modernists was the poet Nandalike Muddana whose writing may be described as the &quot;Dawn of Modern Kannada&quot;, though generally, linguists treat &quot;Indira Bai&quot; or &quot;Saddharma Vijayavu&quot; by Gulvadi Venkata Raya as the first literary works in Modern Kannada. The first modern movable type printing of &quot;Canarese&quot; appears to be the &quot;Canarese Grammar&quot; of Carey printed at Serampore in 1817, and the &quot;Bible in Canarese&quot; of John Hands in 1820. The first novel printed was John Bunyan&#x27;s &quot;Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;, along with other texts including &quot;Canarese Proverbs&quot;, &quot;The History of Little Henry and his Bearer&quot; by Mary Martha Sherwood, Christian Gottlob Barth&#x27;s &quot;Bible Stories&quot; and &quot;a Canarese hymn book.&quot;

Modern Kannada in the 20th century has been influenced by many movements, notably &quot;Navodaya&quot;, &quot;Navya&quot;, &quot;Navyottara&quot;, &quot;Dalita&quot; and &quot;Bandaya&quot;. Contemporary Kannada literature has been highly successful in reaching people of all classes in society. Further, Kannada has produced a number of prolific and renowned poets and writers such as Kuvempu, Bendre, and V K Gokak. Works of Kannada literature have received eight Jnanpith awards, the highest number awarded to any Indian language.

=== Dictionaries ===
Kannada–Kannada dictionary has existed in Kannada along with ancient works of Kannada grammar. The oldest available Kannada dictionary was composed by the poet &#x27;Ranna&#x27; called &#x27;Ranna Kanda&#x27; (ರನ್ನ ಕಂದ) in 996 AD. Other dictionaries are &#x27;Abhidhana Vastukosha&#x27; (ಅಭಿದಾನ ವಾಸ್ತುಕೋಶ) by Nagavarma (1045 AD), &#x27;Amarakoshada Teeku&#x27; (ಅಮರಕೋಶದ ತೀಕು) by Vittala (1300), &#x27;Abhinavaabhidaana&#x27; (ಅಭಿನವಾಭಿದಾನ) by Abhinava Mangaraja (1398 AD) and many more. A Kannada–English dictionary consisting of more than 70,000 words was composed by Ferdinand Kittel.

G. Venkatasubbaiah edited the first modern Kannada–Kannada dictionary, a 9,000-page, 8-volume series published by the Kannada Sahitya Parishat. He also wrote a Kannada–English dictionary and a &quot;kliṣtapadakōśa&quot; (ಕ್ಲಿಷ್ಟಪಾದಕೋಶ), a dictionary of difficult words.

==Dialects==

There is also a considerable difference between the spoken and written forms of the language. Spoken Kannada tends to vary from region to region. The written form is more or less consistent throughout Karnataka. The Ethnologue reports &quot;about 20 dialects&quot; of Kannada. Among them are Kundagannada (spoken exclusively in Kundapura, Brahmavara, Bynduru and Hebri), Nador-Kannada (spoken by Nadavaru), Havigannada (spoken mainly by Havyaka Brahmins), Are Bhashe (spoken by Gowda community mainly in Madikeri and Sullia region of Dakshina Kannada), Malenadu Kannada (Sakaleshpur, Coorg, Shimoga, Chikmagalur), Sholaga, Gulbarga Kannada, Dharawad Kannada etc. All of these dialects are influenced by their regional and cultural background. The one million Komarpants in and around Goa speak their own dialect of Kannada, known as Halegannada. They are settled throughout Goa state, throughout Uttara Kannada district and Khanapur taluk of Belagavi district, Karnataka. The Halakki Vokkaligas of Uttara Kannada and Shimoga districts of Karnataka speak in their own dialect of Kannada called Halakki Kannada or Achchagannada. Their population estimate is about 75,000.

Ethnologue also classifies a group of four languages related to Kannada, which are, besides Kannada proper, Badaga, Holiya, Kurumba and Urali. The Golars or Golkars are a nomadic herdsmen tribe present in Nagpur, Chanda, Bhandara, Seoni and Balaghat districts of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh speak the Golari dialect of Kannada, which is identical to the Holiya dialect spoken by their tribal offshoot Holiyas present in Seoni, Nagpur and Bhandara of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. There were around 3,600 speakers of this dialect as per the 1901 census. Matthew A. Sherring describes the Golars and Holars as a pastoral tribe from the Godavari banks established in the districts around Nagpur, in the stony tracts of Ambagarh, forests around Ramplee and Sahangadhee. Along the banks of the Wainganga, they dwell in the Chakurhaitee and Keenee subdivisions. The Kurumvars of Chanda district of Maharashtra, a wild pastoral tribe, 2,200 in number as per the 1901 census, spoke a Kannada dialect called Kurumvari. The Kurumbas or Kurubas, a nomadic shepherd tribe were spread across the Nilgiris, Coimbatore, Salem, North and South Arcots, Trichinopoly, Tanjore and Pudukottai of Tamil Nadu, Cuddapah and Anantapur of Andhra Pradesh, Malabar and Cochin of Kerala and South Canara and Coorg of Karnataka and spoke the Kurumba Kannada dialect. The Kurumba and Kurumvari dialect (both closely related with each other) speakers were estimated to be around 11,400 in total as per the 1901 census. There were about 34,250 Badaga speakers as per the 1901 census.

Nasik district of Maharashtra has a distinct tribe called &#x27;Hatkar Kaanadi&#x27; people who speak a Kannada (Kaanadi) dialect with lot of old Kannada words. Per Chidananda Murthy, they are the native people of Nasik from ancient times, which shows that North Maharashtra&#x27;s Nasik area had Kannada population 1000 years ago. Kannada speakers formed 0.12% of Nasik district&#x27;s population as per 1961 census.

==Writing system==
The language uses forty-nine phonemic letters, divided into three groups: &quot;swaragalu&quot; (vowels – thirteen letters); &quot;vyanjanagalu&quot; (consonants – thirty-four letters); and &quot;yogavaahakagalu&quot; (neither vowel nor consonant – two letters: &quot;anusvara&quot; and &quot;visarga&quot; ). The character set is almost identical to that of other Indian languages. The Kannada script is almost entirely phonetic, but for the sound of a &quot;half n&quot; (which becomes a half m). The number of written symbols, however, is far more than the forty-nine characters in the alphabet, because different characters can be combined to form &quot;compound&quot; characters &quot;(ottakshara)&quot;. Each written symbol in the Kannada script corresponds with one syllable, as opposed to one phoneme in languages like English—the Kannada script is syllabic.

== Phonology ==
=== Consonants ===
* Most consonants can be geminated.
* Aspirated consonants very rarely occur in native vocabulary only in a few numerals like the number 9 and 80, which can be written with a /bʱ/, as in &quot;ಒಂಭತ್ತು&quot;, &quot;ಎಂಭತ್ತು&quot;. However, it is usually written with a /b/, as in &quot;ಒಂಬತ್ತು&quot;, &quot;ಎಂಬತ್ತು&quot;.
* The aspiration of consonants depends entirely on the speaker and many do not do it in non-formal situations.
* The alveolar trill /r/ may be pronounced as an alveolar tap [ɾ].
* The voiceless retroflex sibilant /ʂ/ is commonly pronounced as a /ʃ/ except in consonant clusters with retroflex consonants.
* There are also the consonants /f, z/ which occur in recent English and Perso-Arabic loans but they may be replaced by the consonants /pʰ, dʒ/ respectively by speakers.

Additionally, Kannada included the following phonemes, which dropped out of common usage in the 12th and 18th century respectively:
* // ಱ (ṟ), the alveolar trill.
* // ೞ (ḻ), the retroflex central approximant.

Old Kannada had an archaic phoneme /ɻ/ under retroflexes in early inscriptions that merged with /ɭ/ and it maintained the contrast between /r/ (&lt; PD ∗ṯ) and /ɾ/ from (&lt; PD ∗r). Both merged in Medieval Kannada.

In old Kannada at around 10th-14th century, most of the initial /p/ debuccalised into a /h/ e.g. OlKn. pattu, MdKn. hattu &quot;ten&quot;.

Historically, the Tamil-Malayalam languages and, independently, Telugu, phonemically palatalised /k/ before a front vowel; Kannada never developed such phonemic palatalisation (c.f. Kn. ಕಿವಿ , Ta. செவி , Te. చెవి &quot;ear&quot;); however, &quot;phonetically&quot;, Kannada speakers frequently palatalise velar consonants before front vowels, for example, realising ಕಿವಿ &quot;ear&quot; as and ಗಿಳಿ &quot;parrot&quot; as .

=== Vowels ===
* and are phonetically central . may be as open as () or higher .
* The vowels /i iː e eː/ may be preceded by /j/ and the vowels /u uː o oː/ may be preceded by /ʋ/ when they are in an initial position.
* The short vowels /a i u e o/, when in an initial or a medial position tend to be pronounced as [ɐ ɪ ʊ ɛ ɔ]. In a final position, this phenomenon occurs less frequently.
* /æː/ occurs in English loans but can be switched with /aː/ or /ja:/.

At around the 8th century, Kannada raised the vowels e, o to i, u when before a short consonant and a high vowel, before written literature emerged in the language, e.g. Kn. kivi, Ta. cevi, Te. cevi &quot;ear&quot;.

==Grammar==
The canonical word order of Kannada is SOV (subject–object–verb), typical of Indian languages.
Kannada is a highly inflected language with three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter or common) and two numbers (singular and plural). It is inflected for gender, number and tense, among other things. The first available Kannada book, a treatise on poetics, rhetoric and basic grammar is the &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot; from 850 AD.

The most influential account of Kannada grammar is Keshiraja&#x27;s &quot;Shabdamanidarpana&quot; (c. 1260 AD). The earlier grammatical works include portions of &quot;Kavirajamarga&quot; (a treatise on &quot;alańkāra&quot;) of the 9th century, and &quot;Kavyavalokana&quot; and &quot;Karnatakabhashabhushana&quot; (both authored by Nagavarma II in the first half of the 12th century).

===Compound bases===
Compound bases, called &quot;samāsa&quot; in Kannada, are a set of two or more words compounded together. There are several types of compound bases, based on the rules followed for compounding. The types of compound bases or samāsas: tatpurusha, karmadhāraya, dvigu, bahuvreehi, anshi, dvandva, kriya and gamaka samāsa. Examples: &quot;taṅgāḷi&quot;, &quot;hemmara&quot;, &quot;kannusanne&quot;.

===Pronouns===
In many ways the third-person pronouns are more like demonstratives than like the other pronouns. They are pluralised like nouns and the first- and second-person pronouns have different ways to distinguish number.

== Significance to Modern Linguistics ==
While an early account of Kannada&#x27;s grammar is available in &quot;Shabdamanidarpana,&quot; it has played a central role in the modern linguistics thanks to its unique semantic and syntactic properties that have been significant to studies of language acquisition and innateness. Jeff Lidz is a significant Western linguist to have studied Kannada. His investigations found at least two properties of Kannada to be very impactful in developing contemporary understandings of language acquisition. The first observation was that Kannada has a causative morpheme (like -&quot;ify&quot; for English, in &quot;personify&quot; or &quot;deify&quot;), which appears whenever a verb with causative meaning is expressed. This was significant, because it allowed him to test whether an observation of English-learning infants, that they worked out novel verb meanings based on the number of overt NPs they took, applied cross-linguistically. Given that the presence of the aforementioned causative morpheme would be a more obvious and reliable indicator for differentiating meanings, Kannada was a perfect language to test this observation; Lidz et al. (2003) found that Kannada-learning infants relied &quot;more heavily&quot; on the number of overt NPs than the presence of the causative morpheme. This has been used by generativists and UG nativists to argue that verb meaning acquisition based on syntactic bootstrapping is language universal and innate. 

The second property of major significance to develops in modern linguistic understandings lies in the fact that in Kannada negation comes at the end of the sentence and the quantified object linearly precedes it. This means there is no capacity for confounding linear order and hierarchical relations, as there is in English. This can be used to test whether the observation for English-speaking infants of considering hierarchical organisation more than linear order when deciding scope ambiguity is cross-linguistic, or just a product of English&#x27;s confounded linear order. Specifically, analysing the sentence &quot;I didn&#x27;t read two books&quot; (in Kannada), if what matters is linear order, Kannada speaking children&#x27;s preferred interpretation would be one where &#x27;two books&#x27; has wider scope than negation (i.e., there are two books I did not read), and if what matters is hierarchical organisation, their preferred interpretation would be the opposite (i.e., that it is not the case that I read two books). Lidz and Musolino (2002) found that they prefer the second, hierarchical interpretation, just like English-speaking children. This has been used to argue that infants universally represent sentences not as mere strings of adjacent words, but as hierarchical objects, a regular talking point among Chomskyans and nativists.

== Sample text ==
The given sample text is Article 1 from the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

===English===
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

===Kannada===
===Romanisation (ISO 15919)===
Ellā mānavaru svatantrarāgiyē huṭṭiddāre hāgu ghanate mattu adhikāragaḷalli samānarāgiddāre. Tiḷivu mattu antaḥsākṣīyannu paḍedavarāddarinda avaru obbarigobbaru sahōdara bhāvadinda naḍedukoḷḷabēku.

===IPA===
== See also ==

* Bangalore Kannada
* Gokak agitation
* Hermann Mögling
* Kannada cinema
* Kannada dialects
* Kannada flag
* Kannada in computing
* Kuvempu
* List of Kannada-language radio stations
* List of Karnataka literature
* List of languages by number of native speakers in India
* Siribhoovalaya
* Timeline of Karnataka
* Yakshagana

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* George M. Moraes (1931), The Kadamba Kula, A History of Ancient and Medieval Karnataka, Asian Educational Services, New Delhi, Madras, 1990 
* Robert Zydenbos (2020): &quot;A Manual of Modern Kannada.&quot; Heidelberg: XAsia Books (Open Access publication in PDF format)

==External links==
* English to Kannada Dictionary, Kannada to English Dictionary PDF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="0" end="7" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="38" end="46" title="Kannada" label="Canarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275530" start="53" end="62" title="Classical languages of India" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="63" end="81" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="119" end="128" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="145" end="150" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q272756" start="416" end="432" title="Languages with legal status in India" label="scheduled status"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275530" start="489" end="519" title="Classical languages of India" label="designated classical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="593" end="604" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="606" end="619" title="Central India" label="Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="628" end="642" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479952" start="655" end="670" title="Kadamba dynasty" label="Kadamba dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018662" start="672" end="693" title="Western Ganga dynasty" label="Western Ganga dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048166" start="695" end="710" title="Nolamba dynasty" label="Nolamba dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="712" end="728" title="Chalukya dynasty" label="Chalukya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="730" end="742" title="Rashtrakutas" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="744" end="767" title="Western Chalukya Empire" label="Western Chalukya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790" start="769" end="782" title="Seuna (Yadava) dynasty" label="Seuna dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="784" end="801" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587991" start="803" end="820" title="Nayakas of Keladi" label="Nayakas of Keladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="822" end="837" title="Hoysala Kingdom" label="Hoysala dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="846" end="865" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q839666" start="910" end="924" title="Kannada script" label="Kannada script"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345074" start="961" end="975" title="Kadamba script" label="Kadamba script"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="997" end="1011" title="Epigraphy" label="epigraphically"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294994" start="1060" end="1071" title="Rashtrakuta literature" label="Old Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="1106" end="1124" title="Rashtrakuta Empire" label="Rashtrakuta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478722" start="1141" end="1166" title="Kannada literature" label="unbroken literary history"/>
<link wikidata="Q916783" start="1238" end="1254" title="Jnanpith Award" label="Jnanapith awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12420605" start="1429" end="1466" title="Central Institute of Indian Languages" label="Central Institute of Indian Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="1470" end="1476" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="1678" end="1687" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="1852" end="1862" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="1876" end="1887" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="1892" end="1906" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="1911" end="1920" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="1925" end="1931" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="1939" end="1942" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="2218" end="2227" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="2248" end="2259" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="2620" end="2629" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="2634" end="2639" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478506" start="2646" end="2670" title="South Dravidian language" label="South Dravidian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478506" start="2691" end="2704" title="Tamil-Kannada" label="Tamil-Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3043" end="3051" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="3056" end="3063" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="3205" end="3211" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="3344" end="3351" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="3405" end="3414" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536067" start="3840" end="3859" title="Iravatham Mahadevan" label="Iravatham Mahadevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="4903" end="4920" title="Ashoka rock edict" label="Ashoka rock edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955533" start="4930" end="4940" title="Brahmagiri archaeological site" label="Brahmagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="6437" end="6442" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="6525" end="6540" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="6589" end="6596" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520928" start="6610" end="6625" title="Netravati River" label="Netravati River"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="6728" end="6737" title="Mangaluru" label="Mangaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="6879" end="6886" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854999" start="7782" end="7793" title="Bhima River" label="Bhima river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427885" start="7823" end="7831" title="Banavasi" label="Banavasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629848" start="7895" end="7899" title="Indi, Karnataka" label="Indi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523294" start="7917" end="7927" title="Gadhinglaj" label="Gadhinglaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951182" start="7942" end="7958" title="Huvina Hipparagi" label="Huvina Hipparagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427679" start="7973" end="7979" title="Savadi, Gadag" label="Savadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743905" start="7994" end="8001" title="Malkheda" label="Malkhed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353379" start="8016" end="8023" title="Kalkeri" label="Kalkeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451106" start="8038" end="8044" title="Mudgal" label="Mudgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="8062" end="8072" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916834" start="8247" end="8269" title="Vasishthiputra Pulumavi" label="Vasishtiputra Pulumayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="8585" end="8600" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman-era Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074460" start="8692" end="8706" title="Charition mime" label="Charition mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="8835" end="8841" title="Brahmi" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15723156" start="8897" end="8910" title="Halegannada" label="proto-Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643272" start="8996" end="9015" title="Halmidi inscription" label="Halmidi inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="9288" end="9296" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697873" start="9321" end="9339" title="Old Kannada script" label="Old Kannada script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834100" start="9421" end="9431" title="B. Lewis Rice" label="B. L. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46415" start="9897" end="9908" title="Chitradurga" label="Chitradurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q980917" start="9944" end="9958" title="Chikkamagaluru" label="Chikkamagaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q15723156" start="10030" end="10041" title="Halegannada" label="Old Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026193" start="10137" end="10153" title="Shravanabelagola" label="Shravanabelagola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018662" start="10361" end="10374" title="Western Ganga Dynasty" label="Western Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="10591" end="10599" title="Epigraphy" label="epigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493539" start="10653" end="10668" title="Sheldon Pollock" label="Sheldon Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349399" start="10708" end="10723" title="Sahitya Akademi" label="Sahitya Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259171" start="10908" end="10918" title="Pulakesi I" label="Pulakesi I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="11022" end="11036" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="11041" end="11050" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="11052" end="11063" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="11065" end="11075" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="11077" end="11091" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="11096" end="11103" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="11119" end="11128" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063076" start="11386" end="11391" title="Alupas" label="Alupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q950571" start="11701" end="11717" title="Dakshina Kannada" label="Dakshina Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479952" start="11809" end="11824" title="Kadamba Dynasty" label="Kadamba Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q579205" start="12264" end="12287" title="Uttara Kannada district" label="Uttara Kannada district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018662" start="12362" end="12383" title="Western Ganga Dynasty" label="Western Ganga Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="12396" end="12405" title="Chalukyas" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063076" start="12411" end="12417" title="Alupas" label="Alupas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="12423" end="12440" title="Western Chalukyas" label="Western Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="12446" end="12458" title="Rashtrakutas" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="12464" end="12472" title="Hoysalas" label="Hoysalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="12478" end="12496" title="Vijayanagar Empire" label="Vijayanagar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479952" start="12502" end="12517" title="Kadamba Dynasty" label="Kadamba Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587991" start="12535" end="12548" title="Keladi Nayaka" label="Keladi Nayaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="12558" end="12572" title="Mysore Kingdom" label="Mysore Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707624" start="12806" end="12812" title="Hangal" label="Hangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367138" start="12954" end="12969" title="Kappe Arabhatta" label="Kappe Arabhatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379262" start="13002" end="13015" title="Kavirajamarga" label="Kavirajamarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630862" start="13041" end="13053" title="Amoghavarsha" label="Amoghavarsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316814" start="13334" end="13343" title="Durvinita" label="Durvinita"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126563" start="13532" end="13547" title="Kannada grammar" label="Kannada grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="13675" end="13681" title="Extant literature" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019083" start="13739" end="13755" title="Shivakotiacharya" label="Shivakotiacharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026193" start="13829" end="13845" title="Shravanabelagola" label="Shravanabelagola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630862" start="15080" end="15103" title="Amoghavarsha Nripathunga" label="Amoghavarsha Nripatunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379262" start="17259" end="17272" title="Kavirajamarga" label="Kavirajamarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q708370" start="18895" end="18906" title="Pulakesi II" label="Pulakesi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499324" start="19080" end="19092" title="Shivamara II" label="Shivamara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630862" start="19398" end="19412" title="Amoghavarsha I" label="Amoghavarsha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="20869" end="20875" title="Kaveri" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="20879" end="20887" title="Godavari" label="Godavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827642" start="20927" end="20933" title="Varada" label="Varada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741320" start="20938" end="20948" title="Malaprabha" label="Malaprabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="21269" end="21273" title="Jainism" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="21278" end="21283" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657389" start="21340" end="21348" title="Harihara (poet)" label="Harihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282946" start="21468" end="21478" title="Raghavanka" label="Raghavanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="21551" end="21556" title="Jainism" label="Jaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155070" start="21586" end="21591" title="Janna" label="Janna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907990" start="21656" end="21671" title="Vachana" label="Vachana Sahitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q771686" start="22111" end="22120" title="Basavanna" label="Basavanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158193" start="22122" end="22135" title="Allama Prabhu" label="Allama Prabhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518406" start="22140" end="22153" title="Akka Mahadevi" label="Akka Mahadevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="23997" end="24005" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443521" start="24107" end="24119" title="Kumara Vyasa" label="Kumara Vyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="24405" end="24416" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="24564" end="24569" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="24574" end="24581" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="24671" end="24680" title="Vaishnava" label="Vaishnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360377" start="24694" end="24704" title="Kanakadasa" label="Kanakadasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350157" start="24706" end="24719" title="Purandaradasa" label="Purandaradasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965276" start="24721" end="24735" title="Naraharitirtha" label="Naraharitirtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811502" start="24737" end="24748" title="Vyasatirtha" label="Vyasatirtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586470" start="24750" end="24761" title="Sripadaraya" label="Sripadaraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377731" start="24763" end="24777" title="Vadirajatirtha" label="Vadirajatirtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929238" start="24779" end="24790" title="Vijaya Dasa" label="Vijaya Dasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584202" start="24792" end="24803" title="Gopala Dasa" label="Gopala Dasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981567" start="24805" end="24820" title="Jagannatha Dasa (Kannada poet)" label="Jagannatha Dasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657348" start="25048" end="25056" title="Haridasa" label="Haridasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="25145" end="25151" title="Bhakti" label="Bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111526" start="25496" end="25513" title="Muddana" label="Nandalike Muddana"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="25767" end="25779" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q312948" start="25863" end="25868" title="William Carey (missionary)" label="Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815367" start="25880" end="25889" title="Serampore" label="Serampore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903184" start="25913" end="25930" title="Bible translations into Kannada" label="Bible in Canarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237592" start="25940" end="25950" title="John Hands" label="John Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="25988" end="25999" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="26013" end="26036" title="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780258" start="26166" end="26186" title="Mary Martha Sherwood" label="Mary Martha Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q84831" start="26188" end="26211" title="Christian Gottlob Barth" label="Christian Gottlob Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351108" start="26670" end="26677" title="Kuvempu" label="Kuvempu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30329593" start="26679" end="26685" title="Bendre" label="Bendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595870" start="26691" end="26700" title="V K Gokak" label="V K Gokak"/>
<link wikidata="Q916783" start="26750" end="26765" title="Jnanpith" label="Jnanpith awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667386" start="27100" end="27109" title="Abhidhana" label="Abhidhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q77310" start="27408" end="27424" title="Ferdinand Kittel" label="Ferdinand Kittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273064" start="27427" end="27445" title="G. Venkatasubbiah" label="G. Venkatasubbaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363885" start="27545" end="27569" title="Kannada Sahitya Parishat" label="Kannada Sahitya Parishat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="27928" end="27938" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444255" start="28004" end="28016" title="Kundagannada" label="Kundagannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164210" start="28108" end="28116" title="Nadavaru" label="Nadavaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683922" start="28119" end="28130" title="Havigannada" label="Havigannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684129" start="28149" end="28164" title="Havyaka Brahmin" label="Havyaka Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788356" start="28168" end="28178" title="Are Bhashe" label="Are Bhashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q298416" start="28216" end="28224" title="Madikeri" label="Madikeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571896" start="28229" end="28235" title="Sullia" label="Sullia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950571" start="28246" end="28262" title="Dakshina Kannada" label="Dakshina Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500203" start="28326" end="28333" title="Sholaga language" label="Sholaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="28335" end="28351" title="Gulbarga Kannada" label="Gulbarga Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428164" start="28471" end="28480" title="Komarpant" label="Komarpant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641045" start="28688" end="28705" title="Halakki Vokkaliga" label="Halakki Vokkaliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33205" start="28991" end="28997" title="Badaga language" label="Badaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880707" start="28999" end="29005" title="Holiya language" label="Holiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q56589" start="29007" end="29014" title="Kurumba language" label="Kurumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899602" start="29019" end="29024" title="Urali language" label="Urali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536552" start="29040" end="29046" title="Golkar" label="Golkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797367" start="29088" end="29094" title="Nagpur district" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797274" start="29096" end="29102" title="Chandrapur district" label="Chanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813857" start="29104" end="29112" title="Bhandara district" label="Bhandara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221184" start="29114" end="29119" title="Seoni district" label="Seoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q641904" start="29124" end="29132" title="Balaghat district" label="Balaghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="29146" end="29157" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="29162" end="29176" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="29522" end="29530" title="Godavari River" label="Godavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q590056" start="29604" end="29612" title="Ambagarh Chowki" label="Ambagarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132789" start="29677" end="29686" title="Wainganga River" label="Wainganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10094" start="29971" end="29979" title="Nilgiris" label="Nilgiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15136" start="29981" end="29991" title="Coimbatore district" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15192" start="29993" end="29998" title="Salem district" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206" start="30000" end="30005" title="Vellore district" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q955977" start="30010" end="30022" title="South Arcot District (Madras Presidency)" label="South Arcots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840672" start="30024" end="30036" title="Trichinopoly District" label="Trichinopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683395" start="30038" end="30045" title="Tanjore District (Madras Presidency)" label="Tanjore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15190" start="30050" end="30060" title="Pudukkottai district" label="Pudukottai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15342" start="30076" end="30084" title="Kadapa district" label="Cuddapah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212" start="30089" end="30098" title="Anantapur district" label="Anantapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="30102" end="30116" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q239462" start="30118" end="30125" title="Malabar District" label="Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="30130" end="30136" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="30140" end="30146" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566496" start="30151" end="30163" title="South Canara" label="South Canara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553185" start="30168" end="30173" title="Kodagu district" label="Coorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="30177" end="30186" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797269" start="30441" end="30455" title="Nasik district" label="Nasik district"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="30908" end="30916" title="phonemic" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q612871" start="31147" end="31155" title="anusvara" label="anusvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466217" start="31172" end="31179" title="visarga" label="visarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="31244" end="31260" title="Languages of India" label="Indian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="31652" end="31660" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="31680" end="31687" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="31807" end="31815" title="geminate" label="geminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="31820" end="31839" title="Aspirated consonant" label="Aspirated consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q401486" start="33075" end="33086" title="debuccalise" label="debuccalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="34299" end="34302" title="subject–object–verb" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="34375" end="34384" title="inflection" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="34405" end="34411" title="Grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379262" start="34659" end="34672" title="Kavirajamarga" label="Kavirajamarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320858" start="34744" end="34753" title="Keshiraja" label="Keshiraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460085" start="34767" end="34784" title="Shabdamanidarpana" label="Shabdamanidarpana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379262" start="34861" end="34874" title="Kavirajamarga" label="Kavirajamarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011899" start="35026" end="35038" title="Nagavarma II" label="Nagavarma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460085" start="35840" end="35857" title="Shabdamanidarpana" label="Shabdamanidarpana"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="36025" end="36036" title="Language acquisition" label="acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035278" start="36041" end="36051" title="Innateness hypothesis" label="innateness"/>
<link wikidata="Q87056791" start="36053" end="36062" title="Jeffrey Lidz" label="Jeff Lidz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="36315" end="36324" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="36325" end="36333" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="36660" end="36662" title="Noun phrase" label="NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="37085" end="37098" title="Generative grammar" label="generativists"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="37103" end="37105" title="Universal grammar" label="UG"/>
<link wikidata="Q392512" start="37106" end="37115" title="Psychological nativism" label="nativists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662649" start="37164" end="37187" title="syntactic bootstrapping" label="syntactic bootstrapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q980142" start="37191" end="37209" title="Linguistic universal" label="language universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389284" start="37643" end="37668" title="Hierarchical organization" label="hierarchical organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="37679" end="37691" title="Linear order (linguistics)" label="linear order"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853399" start="37706" end="37721" title="Scope (formal semantics)" label="scope ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q87056791" start="38260" end="38264" title="Jeffrey Lidz" label="Lidz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="38557" end="38567" title="Generative grammar" label="Chomskyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855054" start="39159" end="39176" title="Bangalore Kannada" label="Bangalore Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578026" start="39179" end="39194" title="Gokak agitation" label="Gokak agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630944" start="39197" end="39212" title="Hermann Mögling" label="Hermann Mögling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250548" start="39215" end="39229" title="Kannada cinema" label="Kannada cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363888" start="39232" end="39248" title="Kannada dialects" label="Kannada dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363891" start="39251" end="39263" title="Kannada flag" label="Kannada flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363893" start="39266" end="39286" title="Kannada in computing" label="Kannada in computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351108" start="39289" end="39296" title="Kuvempu" label="Kuvempu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363901" start="39299" end="39338" title="List of Kannada-language radio stations" label="List of Kannada-language radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372924" start="39341" end="39369" title="List of Karnataka literature" label="List of Karnataka literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110903" start="39372" end="39427" title="List of languages by number of native speakers in India" label="List of languages by number of native speakers in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514874" start="39430" end="39444" title="Siribhoovalaya" label="Siribhoovalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805779" start="39447" end="39468" title="Timeline of Karnataka" label="Timeline of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="39471" end="39481" title="Yakshagana" label="Yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q114562148" start="39564" end="39580" title="George M. Moraes" label="George M. Moraes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37447" wikidata="Q679367" url="?curid=37447" title="Latin square">
<text>In combinatorics and in experimental design, a Latin square is an &quot;n&quot; × &quot;n&quot; array filled with &quot;n&quot; different symbols, each occurring exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column. An example of a 3×3 Latin square is
The name &quot;Latin square&quot; was inspired by mathematical papers by Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), who used Latin characters as symbols, but any set of symbols can be used: in the above example, the alphabetic sequence A, B, C can be replaced by the integer sequence 1, 2, 3. Euler began the general theory of Latin squares.

== History ==

The Korean mathematician Choi Seok-jeong was the first to publish an example of Latin squares of order nine, in order to construct a magic square in 1700, predating Leonhard Euler by 67 years.

== Reduced form ==

A Latin square is said to be &quot;reduced&quot; (also, &quot;normalized&quot; or &quot;in standard form&quot;) if both its first row and its first column are in their natural order. For example, the Latin square above is not reduced because its first column is A, C, B rather than A, B, C.

Any Latin square can be reduced by permuting (that is, reordering) the rows and columns. Here switching the above matrix&#x27;s second and third rows yields the following square:

This Latin square is reduced; both its first row and its first column are alphabetically ordered A, B, C.

==Properties==

===Orthogonal array representation===

If each entry of an &quot;n&quot; × &quot;n&quot; Latin square is written as a triple (&quot;r&quot;,&quot;c&quot;,&quot;s&quot;), where &quot;r&quot; is the row, &quot;c&quot; is the column, and &quot;s&quot; is the symbol, we obtain a set of &quot;n&quot;2 triples called the orthogonal array representation of the square. For example, the orthogonal array representation of the Latin square

is

: { (1, 1, 1), (1, 2, 2), (1, 3, 3), (2, 1, 2), (2, 2, 3), (2, 3, 1), (3, 1, 3), (3, 2, 1), (3, 3, 2) },
where for example the triple (2, 3, 1) means that in row 2 and column 3 there is the symbol 1. Orthogonal arrays are usually written in array form where the triples are the rows, such as:
The definition of a Latin square can be written in terms of orthogonal arrays: 
* A Latin square is a set of &quot;n&quot;2 triples (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;), where 1 ≤ &quot;r&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot; ≤ &quot;n&quot;, such that all ordered pairs (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;c&quot;) are distinct, all ordered pairs (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;s&quot;) are distinct, and all ordered pairs (&quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;) are distinct.

This means that the &quot;n&quot;2 ordered pairs (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;c&quot;) are all the pairs (&quot;i&quot;, &quot;j&quot;) with 1 ≤ &quot;i&quot;, &quot;j&quot; ≤ &quot;n&quot;, once each. The same is true of the ordered pairs (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;s&quot;) and the ordered pairs (&quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;).

The orthogonal array representation shows that rows, columns and symbols play rather similar roles, as will be made clear below.

===Equivalence classes of Latin squares===

Many operations on a Latin square produce another Latin square (for example, turning it upside down).

If we permute the rows, permute the columns, or permute the names of the symbols of a Latin square, we obtain a new Latin square said to be &quot;isotopic&quot; to the first. Isotopism is an equivalence relation, so the set of all Latin squares is divided into subsets, called &quot;isotopy classes&quot;, such that two squares in the same class are isotopic and two squares in different classes are not isotopic.

Another type of operation is easiest to explain using the orthogonal array representation of the Latin square. If we systematically and consistently reorder the three items in each triple (that is, permute the three columns in the array form), another orthogonal array (and, thus, another Latin square) is obtained. For example, we can replace each triple (&quot;r&quot;,&quot;c&quot;,&quot;s&quot;) by (&quot;c&quot;,&quot;r&quot;,&quot;s&quot;) which corresponds to transposing the square (reflecting about its main diagonal), or we could replace each triple (&quot;r&quot;,&quot;c&quot;,&quot;s&quot;) by (&quot;c&quot;,&quot;s&quot;,&quot;r&quot;), which is a more complicated operation. Altogether there are 6 possibilities including &quot;do nothing&quot;, giving us 6 Latin squares called the conjugates (also parastrophes) of the original square.

Finally, we can combine these two equivalence operations: two Latin squares are said to be &quot;paratopic&quot;, also &quot;main class isotopic&quot;, if one of them is isotopic to a conjugate of the other. This is again an equivalence relation, with the equivalence classes called &quot;main classes&quot;, &quot;species&quot;, or &quot;paratopy classes&quot;. Each main class contains up to six isotopy classes.

=== Number of Latin squares ===

There is no known easily computable formula for the number of Latin squares with symbols . The most accurate upper and lower bounds known for large are far apart. One classic result is that
formula_1

A simple and explicit formula for the number of Latin squares was published in 1992, but it is still not easily computable due to the exponential increase in the number of terms. This formula for the number of Latin squares is
formula_2
where is the set of all {0, 1}-matrices, is the number of zero entries in matrix , and is the permanent of matrix .

The table below contains all known exact values. It can be seen that the numbers grow exceedingly quickly. For each , the number of Latin squares altogether is times the number of reduced Latin squares .

For each , each isotopy class contains up to Latin squares (the exact number varies), while each main class contains either 1, 2, 3 or 6 isotopy classes.

The number of structurally distinct Latin squares (i.e. the squares cannot be made identical by means of rotation, reflection, and/or permutation of the symbols) for = 1 up to 7 is 1, 1, 1, 12, 192, 145164, 1524901344 respectively .

===Examples===

We give one example of a Latin square from each main class up to order five.

formula_3

formula_4

formula_5

They present, respectively, the multiplication tables of the following groups:
*{0} – the trivial 1-element group
*formula_6 – the binary group
*formula_7 – cyclic group of order 3
*formula_8 – the Klein four-group
*formula_9 – cyclic group of order 4
*formula_10 – cyclic group of order 5
* the last one is an example of a quasigroup, or rather a loop, which is not associative.
== Transversals and rainbow matchings ==

A transversal in a Latin square is a choice of &quot;n&quot; cells, where each row contains one cell, each column contains one cell, and there is one cell containing each symbol.

One can consider a Latin square as a complete bipartite graph in which the rows are vertices of one part, the columns are vertices of the other part, each cell is an edge (between its row and its column), and the symbols are colors. The rules of the Latin squares imply that this is a proper edge coloring. With this definition, a Latin transversal is a matching in which each edge has a different color; such a matching is called a rainbow matching.

Therefore, many results on Latin squares/rectangles are contained in papers with the term &quot;rainbow matching&quot; in their title, and vice versa.

Some Latin squares have no transversal. For example, when &quot;n&quot; is even, an &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square in which the value of cell &quot;i&quot;,&quot;j&quot; is (&quot;i&quot;+&quot;j&quot;) mod &quot;n&quot; has no transversal. Here are two examples:formula_11In 1967, H. J. Ryser conjectured that, when &quot;n&quot; is odd, every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a transversal.

In 1975, S. K. Stein and Brualdi conjectured that, when &quot;n&quot; is even, every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size &quot;n&quot;−1.

A more general conjecture of Stein is that a transversal of size &quot;n&quot;−1 exists not only in Latin squares but also in any &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; array of &quot;n&quot; symbols, as long as each symbol appears exactly &quot;n&quot; times.

Some weaker versions of these conjectures have been proved:

* Every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size 2&quot;n&quot;/3.
* Every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size &quot;n&quot; − sqrt(&quot;n&quot;).
* Every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size &quot;n&quot; − 11 log(&quot;n&quot;).
* Every &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size &quot;n&quot; − O(log n/loglog n).
* Every large enough &quot;n&quot;-by-&quot;n&quot; Latin square has a partial transversal of size &quot;n&quot; −1. (Preprint)

==Algorithms==
For small squares it is possible to generate permutations and test whether the Latin square property is met. For larger squares, Jacobson and Matthews&#x27; algorithm allows sampling from a uniform distribution over the space of &quot;n&quot; × &quot;n&quot; Latin squares.

==Applications==

===Statistics and mathematics===
*In the design of experiments, Latin squares are a special case of &quot;row-column designs&quot; for two blocking factors.
*In algebra, Latin squares are related to generalizations of groups; in particular, Latin squares are characterized as being the multiplication tables (Cayley tables) of quasigroups. A binary operation whose table of values forms a Latin square is said to obey the Latin square property.

===Error correcting codes===
Sets of Latin squares that are orthogonal to each other have found an application as error correcting codes in situations where communication is disturbed by more types of noise than simple white noise, such as when attempting to transmit broadband Internet over powerlines.

Firstly, the message is sent by using several frequencies, or channels, a common method that makes the signal less vulnerable to noise at any one specific frequency. A letter in the message to be sent is encoded by sending a series of signals at different frequencies at successive time intervals. In the example below, the letters A to L are encoded by sending signals at four different frequencies, in four time slots. The letter C, for instance, is encoded by first sending at frequency 3, then 4, 1 and 2.

formula_12

The encoding of the twelve letters are formed from three Latin squares that are orthogonal to each other. Now imagine that there&#x27;s added noise in channels 1 and 2 during the whole transmission. The letter A would then be picked up as:
formula_13

In other words, in the first slot we receive signals from both frequency 1 and frequency 2; while the third slot has signals from frequencies 1, 2 and 3. Because of the noise, we can no longer tell if the first two slots were 1,1 or 1,2 or 2,1 or 2,2. But the 1,2 case is the only one that yields a sequence matching a letter in the above table, the letter A. 
Similarly, we may imagine a burst of static over all frequencies in the third slot:
formula_14

Again, we are able to infer from the table of encodings that it must have been the letter A being transmitted. The number of errors this code can spot is one less than the number of time slots. It has also been proven that if the number of frequencies is a prime or a power of a prime, the orthogonal Latin squares produce error detecting codes that are as efficient as possible.

===Mathematical puzzles===
The problem of determining if a partially filled square can be completed to form a Latin square is NP-complete.

The popular Sudoku puzzles are a special case of Latin squares; any solution to a Sudoku puzzle is a Latin square. Sudoku imposes the additional restriction that nine particular 3×3 adjacent subsquares must also contain the digits 1–9 (in the standard version). See also Mathematics of Sudoku.

The more recent KenKen and Strimko puzzles are also examples of Latin squares.

===Board games===

Latin squares have been used as the basis for several board games, notably the popular abstract strategy game Kamisado.

===Agronomic research===

Latin squares are used in the design of agronomic research experiments to minimise experimental errors.

==Heraldry==
The Latin square also figures in the arms of the Statistical Society of Canada, being specifically mentioned in its blazon. Also, it appears in the logo of the International Biometric Society.

== Generalizations ==

* A Latin rectangle is a generalization of a Latin square in which there are &quot;n&quot; columns and &quot;n&quot; possible values, but the number of rows may be smaller than &quot;n&quot;. Each value still appears at most once in each row and column.
* A Graeco-Latin square is a pair of two Latin squares such that, when one is laid on top of the other, each ordered pair of symbols appears exactly once.
* A Latin hypercube is a generalization of a Latin square from two dimensions to multiple dimensions.

==See also==
*Block design
*Combinatorial design
*Eight queens puzzle
*Futoshiki
*Magic square
*Problems in Latin squares
*Rook&#x27;s graph, a graph that has Latin squares as its colorings
*Sator Square
*Vedic square
*Word square

==Notes==
==References==
* 
*

==Further reading==
*
**
* 
* 
*

==External links==
*Latin Squares in the Encyclopaedia of Mathematics
*Latin Squares in the Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="3" end="16" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="24" end="43" title="design of experiments" label="experimental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q679367" start="47" end="59" title="Latin square" label="Latin square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="329" end="343" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="366" end="382" title="Latin characters" label="Latin characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297602" start="508" end="524" title="integer sequence" label="integer sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12619596" start="624" end="639" title="Choi Seok-jeong" label="Choi Seok-jeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q192089" start="732" end="744" title="magic square" label="magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="1140" end="1149" title="Permute" label="permuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031860" start="1725" end="1741" title="orthogonal array" label="orthogonal array"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3335" end="3343" title="Quasigroup#Homotopy and isotopy" label="isotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="3380" end="3400" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="4421" end="4432" title="parastrophe" label="parastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344007" start="5441" end="5450" title="Permanent (mathematics)" label="permanent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="6316" end="6322" title="Binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="6342" end="6354" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q550593" start="6383" end="6399" title="Klein four-group" label="Klein four-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="6509" end="6519" title="quasigroup" label="quasigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="6533" end="6537" title="Loop (algebra)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q174733" start="6833" end="6848" title="bipartite graph" label="bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050972" start="7079" end="7092" title="edge coloring" label="edge coloring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7220" end="7236" title="Rainbow matching#Bounds depending only on the number of vertices" label="rainbow matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608996" start="7686" end="7697" title="H. J. Ryser" label="H. J. Ryser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="9260" end="9281" title="design of experiments" label="design of experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927286" start="9358" end="9374" title="blocking (statistics)" label="blocking factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="9380" end="9387" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="9437" end="9443" title="group theory" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="9505" end="9525" title="multiplication table" label="multiplication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546924" start="9528" end="9540" title="Cayley table" label="Cayley table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="9546" end="9556" title="quasigroup" label="quasigroup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9641" end="9662" title="Quasigroup#Algebra" label="Latin square property"/>
<link wikidata="Q615342" start="9725" end="9735" title="Graeco-Latin square" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="9779" end="9801" title="error correcting codes" label="error correcting codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q381287" start="9884" end="9895" title="white noise" label="white noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="11709" end="11720" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299062" start="11735" end="11741" title="Mathematics of Sudoku" label="Sudoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299062" start="11994" end="12015" title="Mathematics of Sudoku" label="Mathematics of Sudoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q372499" start="12034" end="12040" title="KenKen" label="KenKen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623890" start="12045" end="12052" title="Strimko" label="Strimko"/>
<link wikidata="Q333677" start="12227" end="12235" title="Kamisado" label="Kamisado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488678" start="12431" end="12460" title="Statistical Society of Canada" label="Statistical Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="12498" end="12504" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q59366" start="12542" end="12573" title="International Biometric Society" label="International Biometric Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496545" start="12603" end="12618" title="Latin rectangle" label="Latin rectangle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12857" end="12876" title="Mutually orthogonal Latin squares#Graeco-Latin squares" label="Graeco-Latin square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496514" start="13012" end="13027" title="Latin hypercube sampling" label="Latin hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="Q751484" start="13125" end="13137" title="Block design" label="Block design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150824" start="13139" end="13159" title="Combinatorial design" label="Combinatorial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q623317" start="13161" end="13180" title="Eight queens puzzle" label="Eight queens puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402407" start="13182" end="13191" title="Futoshiki" label="Futoshiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q192089" start="13193" end="13205" title="Magic square" label="Magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246975" start="13207" end="13232" title="Problems in Latin squares" label="Problems in Latin squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366184" start="13234" end="13251" title="Rook&amp;#x27;s graph" label="Rook&amp;#x27;s graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="13291" end="13300" title="graph coloring" label="colorings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41898" start="13302" end="13314" title="Sator Square" label="Sator Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610529" start="13316" end="13328" title="Vedic square" label="Vedic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940408" start="13330" end="13341" title="Word square" label="Word square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340196" start="13449" end="13477" title="Encyclopaedia of Mathematics" label="Encyclopaedia of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="13500" end="13540" title="Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37448" wikidata="Q7113675" url="?curid=37448" title="Overhand">
<text>Overhand may refer to:

* Overhand (boxing), a looping punch
* Overhand knot
* Overhand throwing motion
* Overhand grip</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2998992" start="26" end="43" title="Overhand (boxing)" label="Overhand (boxing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q332491" start="63" end="76" title="Overhand knot" label="Overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10868220" start="79" end="103" title="Overhand throwing motion" label="Overhand throwing motion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106" end="119" title="Overhand grip" label="Overhand grip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37449" wikidata="Q203801" url="?curid=37449" title="Mariner 9">
<text>Mariner 9 (Mariner Mars &#x27;71 / Mariner-I) was a robotic spacecraft that contributed greatly to the exploration of Mars and was part of the NASA Mariner program. Mariner 9 was launched toward Mars on May 30, 1971, from LC-36B at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, and reached the planet on November 14 of the same year, becoming the first spacecraft to orbit another planet – only narrowly beating the Soviet probes &quot;Mars 2&quot; (launched May 19) and &quot;Mars 3&quot; (launched May 28), which both arrived at Mars only weeks later.

After the occurrence of dust storms on the planet for several months following its arrival, the orbiter managed to send back clear pictures of the surface. Mariner 9 successfully returned 7,329 images over the course of its mission, which concluded in October 1972.

== Objectives ==

Mariner 9 was designed to continue the atmospheric studies begun by Mariner 6 and 7, and to map over 70% of the Martian surface from the lowest altitude () and at the highest resolutions (from 1 kilometer to 100 meters (1,100 to 110 yards) per pixel) of any Mars mission up to that point. An infrared radiometer was included to detect heat sources in search of evidence of volcanic activity. It was to study temporal changes in the Martian atmosphere and surface. Mars&#x27; two moons, Deimos and Phobos, were also to be analyzed. Mariner 9 more than met its objectives.

Under original plans, a dual mission was to be flown like Mariners 6–7, however the launch failure of Mariner 8 ruined this scheme and forced NASA planners to fall back on a simpler one-probe mission. NASA still held out hope that another Mariner probe and Atlas-Centaur could be readied before the 1971 Mars launch window closed. A few logistical problems emerged, including the lack of an available Centaur payload shroud of the correct configuration for the Mariner probes, however there was a shroud in NASA&#x27;s inventory which could be modified. Convair also had an available Centaur stage on hand and could have an Atlas readied in time, but the idea was ultimately abandoned for lack of funding.

Mariner 9 was mated to Atlas-Centaur AC-23 on May 9 with investigation into Mariner 8&#x27;s failure ongoing. The malfunction was traced to a problem in the Centaur&#x27;s pitch control servoamplifier and because it was not clear if the spacecraft itself had been responsible, RFI testing was conducted on Mariner 9 to ensure the probe was not releasing interference that could cause problems with the Centaur&#x27;s electronics. All testing came back negative and on May 22, a tested and verified rate gyro package arrived from Convair and was installed in the Centaur.

Liftoff took place on May 30 at 22:23:04 UT. All launch vehicle systems performed normally and the Mariner separated from the Centaur at 13 minutes and 18 seconds after launch.

== Instruments and experiments ==

=== Ultraviolet Spectrometer (UVS) ===
The Ultraviolet Spectrometer (UVS) studied the composition and density of Mars&#x27; upper atmosphere, detecting hydrogen, oxygen, and ozone. It worked on a wavelength range of 110–340 nm with a spectral resolution of 2.5 nm.

The instrument identified atomic hydrogen and oxygen in the upper atmosphere; provided data on the escape rates of these elements, influencing Mars&#x27; atmospheric evolution and mapped ozone distribution, showing seasonal variations.

=== Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) ===
The Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) measured thermal radiation emitted by Mars to analyze atmospheric composition, surface temperature, and dust properties. It worked on a wavelength range of 6–50 µm with a spectral resolution of 2.4 cm⁻¹.

The instrument confirmed the presence of CO₂ as the dominant atmospheric gas; detected water vapor in the Martian atmosphere; measured surface and atmospheric temperatures and provided insights into dust storms&#x27; thermal properties.

=== Celestial Mechanics ===
The Celestial Mechanics Experiment was not a separate instrument. It used radio tracking to determine Mars&#x27; gravitational field and refine its mass estimates. It was based on analysis of Doppler shifts in the spacecraft’s radio signals and measuring range and range rate to track Mariner 9’s precise motion. 

The experiment improved the understanding of Mars’ gravitational field, provided more accurate estimates of Mars&#x27; mass and shape and helped refine the planet’s rotational parameters.

=== S-Band Occultation ===
The S-Band Occultation Experiment was not a separate instrument. It used Mariner 9’s radio signal at 2.295 GHz (S-band) passing through Mars&#x27; atmosphere to study its density, pressure, and temperature profiles. 

The experiment measured vertical profiles of temperature and pressure in the Martian atmosphere, detected variations in the ionosphere and confirmed the presence of CO₂ as the main atmospheric component.

=== Infrared Radiometer (IRR) ===
The Infrared Radiometer (IRR) measured surface and atmospheric temperatures using infrared radiation. It worked on a wavelength range of 10–12 µm with a field of view of 1.7° × 1.7°. 

The instrument provided surface temperature maps of Mars, monitored thermal properties of dust storms and identified temperature variations between day and night cycles.

=== Visual Imaging System ===
The Visual Imaging System captured high-resolution images of Mars’ surface, weather patterns, and moons. In a lower orbit, half that of Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 flyby missions, and with a vastly improved imaging system, Mariner 9 achieved a resolution of per pixel, whereas previous Martian probes had achieved only approximately per pixel. It used broadband filters of various wavelengths optimized for surface and atmospheric studies. 

The instrument provided the first global mapping of Mars&#x27; surface; discovered volcanoes, valleys, and dried riverbeds, suggesting past water activity; captured dust storms covering the entire planet and mapped Phobos and Deimos, Mars’ two moons.

== Spacecraft and subsystems ==
The power for the spacecraft was provided by a total of 14,742 solar cells, being distributed between 4 solar panels, which in total resulted in 7.7 meters of solar panels being present in the spacecraft. The solar panels produced 500 watts in the orbit of Mars. The energy was stored in a 20 amp-hr nickel-cadmium battery.

Propulsion was provided by the RS-2101a engine, which could produce 1340 N thrust, and in total could have 5 restarts. The engine was fueled by monomethyl hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide. For attitude control, the spacecraft contained 2 sets of 6 nitrogen jets on the tip of the solar panels. Attitude knowledge was provided by a Sun sensor, a Canopus star tracker, gyroscopes, an inertial reference unit, and an accelerometer. The thermal control was achieved by the use of louvers on the eight sides of the frame and thermal blankets.

== Achievements ==
Mariner 9 was the first spacecraft to orbit another planet. It carried an instrument payload similar to Mariners 6 and 7, but because of the need for a larger propulsion system to control the spacecraft in Martian orbit, it weighed more than Mariners 6 and 7 combined (Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 weighed 413 kilograms while Mariner 9 weighed 997.9 kilograms). When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars on November 10, 1971, planetary scientists were surprised (although had anticipated during perihelic opposition) to find the atmosphere was thick with &quot;a planet-wide robe of dust, the largest storm ever observed.&quot; The surface was totally obscured. On November 14 1971 after slowing down, Mariner 9&#x27;s computer was thus reprogrammed from Earth to delay imaging of the surface for a couple of months until the dust settled. Closing down the camera in order to save energy. The main surface imaging did not get underway until mid-January 1972. However, surface-obscured images did contribute to the collection of Mars science, including understanding of the existence of several huge high-altitude volcanoes of the Tharsis Bulge that gradually became visible as the dust storm abated. This unexpected situation made a strong case for the desirability of studying a planet from orbit rather than merely flying past. It also highlighted the importance of flexible mission software. The Soviet Union&#x27;s Mars 2 and Mars 3 probes, which arrived during the same dust storm, were unable to adapt to the unexpected conditions having been preprogrammed, which severely limited the amount of data that they were able to collect.

After 349 days in orbit, Mariner 9 had transmitted 7,329 images, covering 85% of Mars&#x27; surface, whereas previous flyby missions had returned less than one thousand images covering only a small portion of the planetary surface. 
The images revealed river beds, craters, massive extinct volcanoes (such as Olympus Mons, the largest known volcano in the Solar System; Mariner 9 led directly to its reclassification from Nix Olympica), canyons (including the Valles Marineris, a system of canyons over about long), evidence of wind and water erosion and deposition, weather fronts, fogs, and more. Mars&#x27; small moons, Phobos and Deimos, were also photographed.

The findings from the Mariner 9 mission underpinned the later Viking program.

The enormous Valles Marineris canyon system is named after Mariner 9 in honor of its achievements.

After depleting its supply of attitude control gas, the spacecraft was turned off on October 27, 1972.

== Construction ==

The ultraviolet spectrometer (UVS) aboard Mariner 9 was constructed by the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado. The ultraviolet spectrometer team was led by Professor Charles Barth.

The Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) team was led by Dr. Rudolf A. Hanel from NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center (GSFC). The IRIS instrument was built by Texas Instruments, Dallas, Texas.

The Infrared Radiometer (IRR) team was led by Professor Gerald Neugebauer from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech).

== Error-correction codes achievements ==
To control for errors in the reception of the grayscale image data sent by Mariner 9 (caused by a low signal-to-noise ratio), the data had to be encoded before transmission using a so-called forward error-correcting code (FEC). Without FEC, noise would have made up roughly a quarter of a received image, while the FEC encoded the data in a redundant way which allowed for the reconstruction of most of the sent image data at reception.

Since the flown hardware was constrained with regards to weight, power consumption, storage, and computing power, some considerations had to be put into choosing an FEC, and it was decided to use a Hadamard code for Mariner 9. Each image pixel was represented as a six-bit binary value, which had 64 possible grayscale levels. Because of limitations of the transmitter, the maximum useful data length was about 30 bits. Instead of using a repetition code, a [32, 6, 16] Hadamard code was used, which is also a 1st-order Reed-Muller code. Errors of up to seven bits per each 32-bit word could be corrected using this scheme. Compared to a five-repetition code, the error correcting properties of this Hadamard code were much better, yet its data rate was comparable. The efficient decoding algorithm was an important factor in the decision to use this code. The circuitry used was called the &quot;Green Machine&quot;, which employed the fast Fourier transform, increasing the decoding speed by a factor of three.

== Present location ==

Mariner 9 remained in orbit around Mars after its operational use. Today it is thought Mariner 9 either burnt up on entry of the martian atmosphere or impacted the surface. 

NASA had provided multiple dates for when Mariner 9 could enter the Martian atmosphere. At the time of the mission, Mariner 9 was left in an orbit that would not decay for at least 50 years. In 2011, NASA predicted that Mariner 9 would burn up or crash into Mars around 2022. However, a 2018 revision to the Mariner 9 mission page by NASA expected Mariner 9 would crash into Mars &quot;sometime around 2020&quot;. 

== See also ==

* Exploration of Mars
* List of Mars orbiters
* List of missions to Mars
* Space exploration
* Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes
* Uncrewed space missions
* Mars flyby

== References ==
== External links ==

*Mariner 9 Mission Profile by NASA&#x27;s Solar System Exploration
*NSSDC Master Catalog: Spacecraft – Mariner 9
*NASA-JPL Guide to Mariner 9
*some Mariner 9 images of Mars
*Mariner 9 approaching Mars movie 
*Mariner 9 images, including dust storm
*Mariner 9 view of Phobos (hosted by The Planetary Society)
*Mariner 9 image compared to MGS image, helps determine if Dunes moved in decades
*P.418 Correct DN values appear to be 512, not 64 i.e. 9bits per pixel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="0" end="9" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="11" end="32" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner Mars &amp;#x27;71"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="35" end="44" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="52" end="70" title="robotic spacecraft" label="robotic spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="118" end="122" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="143" end="147" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q202894" start="148" end="163" title="Mariner program" label="Mariner program"/>
<link wikidata="Q672830" start="222" end="228" title="Spaceport Florida Launch Complex 36" label="LC-36B"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="232" end="264" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="266" end="273" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="413" end="419" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="433" end="439" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="474" end="480" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="576" end="587" title="Climate of Mars#Dust storms" label="dust storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q719710" start="905" end="920" title="Mariner 6 and 7" label="Mariner 6 and 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q850281" start="1138" end="1148" title="radiometer" label="radiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="1210" end="1227" title="volcanic activity" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177268" start="1301" end="1321" title="Moons of Mars" label="Mars&amp;#x27; two moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="1323" end="1329" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="1334" end="1340" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q746536" start="1511" end="1520" title="Mariner 8" label="Mariner 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q862321" start="1666" end="1679" title="Atlas-Centaur" label="Atlas-Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q855377" start="1718" end="1731" title="launch window" label="launch window"/>
<link wikidata="Q836947" start="1963" end="1970" title="Convair" label="Convair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="2393" end="2396" title="Electromagnetic interference" label="RFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="2956" end="2968" title="Spectrometer" label="Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="3193" end="3208" title="Hydrogen atom" label="atomic hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="3469" end="3483" title="Interferometry" label="Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="3513" end="3530" title="thermal radiation" label="thermal radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3750" end="3753" title="Carbon dioxide" label="CO₂"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="3979" end="3998" title="Celestial mechanics" label="Celestial Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="4167" end="4181" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler shifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="4517" end="4528" title="Occultation" label="Occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018880" start="4618" end="4624" title="S band" label="S-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q850281" start="4976" end="4986" title="Radiometer" label="Radiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q719710" start="5485" end="5494" title="Mariner 6" label="Mariner 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q719710" start="5499" end="5508" title="Mariner 7" label="Mariner 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="5607" end="5612" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="6075" end="6080" title="Electric power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="6089" end="6099" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556726" start="6175" end="6187" title="Solar panels on spacecraft" label="solar panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="6306" end="6311" title="Watt" label="watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="6328" end="6332" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="6386" end="6393" title="Electric battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="6396" end="6406" title="Propulsion" label="Propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="6469" end="6470" title="Newton (unit)" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q417347" start="6540" end="6560" title="Monomethylhydrazine" label="monomethyl hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="6565" end="6583" title="Dinitrogen tetroxide" label="nitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="6589" end="6605" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="6644" end="6652" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551438" start="6727" end="6737" title="Sun sensor" label="Sun sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="6763" end="6773" title="Gyroscope" label="gyroscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="6810" end="6823" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361656" start="6829" end="6844" title="Spacecraft thermal control" label="thermal control"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="6978" end="6988" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="6992" end="6997" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="7006" end="7012" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="7364" end="7384" title="Planetary science" label="planetary scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="7467" end="7477" title="celestial body&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7521" end="7525" title="Martian soil#Atmospheric dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7539" end="7544" title="Climate of mars#Dust storms" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170645" start="8068" end="8081" title="Tharsis Bulge" label="Tharsis Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="8357" end="8363" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="8368" end="8374" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="8830" end="8835" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="8842" end="8848" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="8867" end="8874" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q520" start="8886" end="8898" title="Olympus Mons" label="Olympus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="8933" end="8945" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="9014" end="9020" title="canyon" label="canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q621110" start="9037" end="9053" title="Valles Marineris" label="Valles Marineris"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="9120" end="9127" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="9160" end="9163" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="9193" end="9197" title="natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="9200" end="9206" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="9211" end="9217" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q233708" start="9306" end="9320" title="Viking program" label="Viking program"/>
<link wikidata="Q621110" start="9336" end="9352" title="Valles Marineris" label="Valles Marineris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="9453" end="9469" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="9551" end="9562" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="9563" end="9575" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467281" start="9622" end="9666" title="Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics" label="Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="9674" end="9696" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="9698" end="9715" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="9877" end="9908" title="NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center" label="NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="9950" end="9967" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="9969" end="9982" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="10068" end="10102" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="10203" end="10212" title="grayscale" label="grayscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="10259" end="10280" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="10348" end="10377" title="forward error correction" label="forward error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567339" start="10793" end="10806" title="Hadamard code" label="Hadamard code"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="10904" end="10913" title="grayscale" label="grayscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q369367" start="11034" end="11049" title="repetition code" label="repetition code"/>
<link wikidata="Q201972" start="11115" end="11131" title="Reed-Muller code" label="Reed-Muller code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="11384" end="11393" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="11532" end="11554" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q716774" start="12242" end="12261" title="Exploration of Mars" label="Exploration of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18230370" start="12264" end="12285" title="List of Mars orbiters" label="List of Mars orbiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164101" start="12288" end="12312" title="List of missions to Mars" label="List of missions to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="12315" end="12332" title="Space exploration" label="Space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q604626" start="12335" end="12385" title="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes" label="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="12388" end="12410" title="Uncrewed space mission" label="Uncrewed space mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773185" start="12414" end="12424" title="Mars flyby" label="Mars flyby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37453" wikidata="Q1466031" url="?curid=37453" title="Funeral home">
<text>A funeral home, funeral parlor or mortuary is a business that provides burial and cremation services for the dead and their families. These services may include a prepared visitation and funeral, and the provision of a chapel for the funeral.

==Services==
Funeral homes arrange services in accordance with the wishes of surviving friends and family, whether immediate next of kin or an executor so named in a legal will. The funeral home often takes care of the necessary paperwork, permits, and other details, such as making arrangements with the cemetery, and providing obituaries to the news media. The funeral business has a history that dates to the age of the Egyptians who mastered the science of preservation. In recent years many funeral homes have started posting obituaries online and use materials submitted by families to create memorial websites.

There are certain common types of services in North America.
A traditional funeral service consists of a viewing (sometimes referred to as a visitation), a funeral service in a place of worship or the funeral home chapel and a graveside committal service. 
Direct cremation consists of the funeral home receiving the body, preparing it for the crematory and filing the necessary legal paperwork.
Direct/immediate burial is the forgoing of a funeral ceremony for a prompt, simple burial.
Moving a body between mortuaries involves preparing it for shipment in a coffin strapped into an arbitrary or a combination unit (mac pac / airtray). This is common when it is to be buried in a different locality than where the person died.

When a body is brought to a funeral home, it is sometimes embalmed to delay decomposition or to make the viewing of the body more pleasant. The procedure typically involves removing sufficient blood material to accommodate the preservative chemicals and dyes, aspirating the internal organs and setting the facial features. Cosmetics are used with the consent of the family to improve the appearance of face and hands for a more natural look. If the face or hands are disfigured by accident, illness or decomposition, the embalmer may utilize restorative techniques to make them presentable for an &quot;open casket&quot; service. If this is not possible, or the family wishes, the funeral home can perform a &quot;closed casket&quot; service.

The funeral home often sets aside one or more large areas for people to gather at a visitation. This area may contain a space to display the body in a casket to visitors who may pay their respects. Funeral and memorial services may also take place at the funeral home. Many funeral homes offer prearrangement options for those who wish to plan their own funerals.

Several large multi-national corporations in this service field have received exposure from high-profile litigation. The Loewen Group, Inc., received a particularly large jury verdict in Mississippi, which was later found to be in error, as the allegations against Loewen Group proved false. The Canadian-based company then brought suit against the United States alleging violations under NAFTA.

Houston based Service Corporation International has also had its share of legal troubles in its operations of both funeral homes and cemeteries. In 2009, a class-action lawsuit was filed against SCI and Eden Memorial Park, one of the cemeteries the corporation manages, based on allegations that remains were being moved around to create additional space for future interments. A settlement of $80 million was reached in 2014.

Most funeral homes will handle everything from the start till the end including the body preparation and venue preparation but if you wish to do these arrangements on your own individually, you can also do so.

==See also==

* Cremation Society of Great Britain 
* Funeral Consumers Alliance
* LeMoyne Crematory, historically America&#x27;s first crematory 
* Neptune Society, America&#x27;s cremation service company

==Image gallery==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1466031" start="2" end="14" title="Funeral home" label="funeral home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466031" start="16" end="30" title="Funeral home" label="funeral parlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466031" start="34" end="42" title="Funeral home" label="mortuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="71" end="77" title="burial" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="82" end="91" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472138" start="172" end="182" title="wake (ceremony)" label="visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="187" end="194" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="219" end="225" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="549" end="557" title="cemetery" label="cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q309481" start="573" end="583" title="obituary" label="obituaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="909" end="922" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q157570" start="1207" end="1216" title="crematory" label="crematory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="1423" end="1429" title="coffin" label="coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="1650" end="1658" title="embalming" label="embalmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="1876" end="1882" title="Organ (anatomy)" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298966" start="2823" end="2835" title="Loewen Group" label="Loewen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="2889" end="2900" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2998" end="3006" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3051" end="3064" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="3091" end="3096" title="NAFTA" label="NAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="3099" end="3106" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306218" start="3113" end="3146" title="Service Corporation International" label="Service Corporation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754525" start="3754" end="3788" title="Cremation Society of Great Britain" label="Cremation Society of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509096" start="3792" end="3818" title="Funeral Consumers Alliance" label="Funeral Consumers Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506384" start="3821" end="3838" title="LeMoyne Crematory" label="LeMoyne Crematory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391802" start="3887" end="3902" title="Neptune Society" label="Neptune Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37454" wikidata="Q332491" url="?curid=37454" title="Overhand knot">
<text>The overhand knot is one of the most fundamental knots, and it forms the basis of many others, including the simple noose, overhand loop, angler&#x27;s loop, reef knot, fisherman&#x27;s knot, half hitch, and water knot. The overhand knot is a stopper, especially when used alone, and hence it is very secure, to the point of jamming badly. It should be used if the knot is intended to be permanent. It is often used to prevent the end of a rope from unraveling. An overhand knot becomes a trefoil knot, a true knot in the mathematical sense, by joining the ends. It can also be adjusted, faired, or mis-tied as a half hitch.

==Tying==
There are a number of ways to tie the Overhand knot.
* Thumb method – create a loop and push the working end through the loop with your thumb.
* Overhand method – create a bight, by twisting the hand over at the wrist and sticking your hand in the hole, pinch the working end with your fingers and pull through the loop.

==Heraldry==
In heraldry, the overhand knot is known as a &quot;Stafford knot&quot;, owing to a representation of it being used first as a heraldic badge by the Earls of Stafford, and later as a general symbol of Staffordshire.

==In nature==
As a defensive measure, hagfishes, which resemble eels, produce large volumes of thick slime when disturbed. A hagfish can dislodge large quantities of slime on its skin, which it uses to evade predation, by tying its own body into an overhand knot, then sliding the knot from its head down to the tail. This action scrapes the slime off the fish&#x27;s body. Hagfish also tie their bodies into overhand knots in order to create leverage to rip off chunks of their prey&#x27;s flesh, but do so &quot;in reverse&quot; (starting at the tail, and sliding the knot towards the head for mechanical advantage).

==Knot theory==
If the two loose ends of an overhand knot are joined together (without creating additional crossings), this becomes equivalent to the trefoil knot of mathematical knot theory.

==In paper-folding==
If a flat ribbon or strip is tightly folded into a flattened overhand knot, it assumes a regular pentagonal shape.

==See also==
* List of knots
* Trefoil knot, the mathematical treatment of the overhand knot
* Double overhand knot
* Slip knot

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332491" start="4" end="17" title="Overhand knot" label="overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="49" end="53" title="knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583329" start="109" end="121" title="Noose" label="simple noose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480812" start="123" end="136" title="overhand loop" label="overhand loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q540429" start="138" end="156" title="angler&amp;#x27;s loop" label="angler&amp;#x27;s loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q378077" start="158" end="167" title="reef knot" label="reef knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364501" start="169" end="190" title="fisherman&amp;#x27;s knot" label="fisherman&amp;#x27;s knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365509" start="192" end="202" title="half hitch" label="half hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q647152" start="208" end="218" title="water knot" label="water knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623437" start="243" end="250" title="stopper knot" label="stopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q168620" start="489" end="501" title="trefoil knot" label="trefoil knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="733" end="744" title="working end" label="working end"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="808" end="813" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="974" end="982" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596673" start="1022" end="1035" title="Stafford knot" label="Stafford knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="1097" end="1111" title="heraldic badge" label="heraldic badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078458" start="1119" end="1136" title="Baron Stafford" label="Earls of Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="1171" end="1184" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q75713" start="1225" end="1232" title="hagfish" label="hagfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="1251" end="1254" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="1288" end="1293" title="Mucus" label="slime"/>
<link wikidata="Q168620" start="1957" end="1969" title="trefoil knot" label="trefoil knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q849798" start="1986" end="1997" title="knot theory" label="knot theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854739" start="2152" end="2165" title="List of knots" label="List of knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q168620" start="2168" end="2180" title="Trefoil knot" label="Trefoil knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759117" start="2232" end="2252" title="Double overhand knot" label="Double overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096451" start="2255" end="2264" title="Slip knot" label="Slip knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37457" wikidata="Q339791" url="?curid=37457" title="Granny knot">
<text>The granny knot is a binding knot, used to secure a rope or line around an object. It is considered inferior to the reef knot (square knot), which it superficially resembles. Neither of these knots should be used as a bend knot for attaching two ropes together.

== Etymology ==
Called the &quot;granny&#x27;s knot&quot; with references going back to at least 1849, the knot was so-called because it is &quot;the natural knot tied by women or landsmen&quot;.

==Tying==
When attempting to tie a reef knot (square knot), it is easy to produce a granny knot accidentally. This is dangerous because the granny knot can slip when heavily loaded. A tightened granny knot can also jam and is often more difficult to untie than the reef knot. It is better to tie a reef knot in nearly all circumstances. One way to distinguish them is that in the reef knot each loop passes completely over, or completely under (not through) the neck of the other.

The reef knot is commonly taught as &quot;left over right, tuck under&quot; then &quot;right over left, tuck under&quot;. The granny knot is the first step repeated twice, &quot;left over right, tuck under&quot;. This is a very common mistake made by people learning to tie a reef knot.

==Heraldry==
In heraldry, the granny knot is known as the Bourchier knot, due to being a heraldic badge of the Bourchier family.

==Related knots==
==See also==

*List of binding knots
*List of knots

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;The Reef Knot Family &quot;, &quot;NotableKnotIndex.webs.com&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339791" start="4" end="15" title="Granny knot" label="granny knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607558" start="21" end="33" title="binding knot" label="binding knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="52" end="56" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q378077" start="116" end="125" title="reef knot" label="reef knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005650" start="218" end="227" title="bend knot" label="bend knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q378077" start="495" end="504" title="reef knot" label="reef knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975531" start="1288" end="1302" title="Bourchier knot" label="Bourchier knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="1319" end="1333" title="heraldic badge" label="heraldic badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686624" start="1341" end="1357" title="Robert Bourchier, 1st Baron Bourchier" label="Bourchier family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607558" start="1393" end="1414" title="List of binding knots" label="List of binding knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854739" start="1416" end="1429" title="List of knots" label="List of knots"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37459" wikidata="Q11306218" url="?curid=37459" title="Service Corporation International">
<text>Service Corporation International is an American provider of funeral goods and services as well as cemetery property and services. It is headquartered in Neartown, Houston, Texas, and operates secondary corporate offices in Jefferson, Louisiana (near New Orleans). SCI operates more than 1500 funeral homes and 400 cemeteries.

== Company history ==
Robert L. Waltrip founded the company in 1962. SCI began as a small network of funeral homes and cemeteries in the Houston area.

SCI, Alderwoods Group, and Stewart Enterprises emerged from the 1990s as the three largest companies in the industry. On , SCI owned and operated 3,823 funeral service locations, 525 cemeteries, 198 crematoria and two insurance operations located in 20 countries on five continents.

In 1999, SCI also introduced its Dignity Memorial branding. 

Between 2002 and 2006, SCI reduced its net debt (total debt minus cash) by more than , increased operating cash flow, and simplified its field management organization to enhance efficiency, performance, and accountability. It also changed business and sales processes, tightened internal controls following the protocols, strengthened corporate governance standards, and established a new training and development system. For its shareholders, SCI returned value through more than in share repurchases and it resumed payment of a regular quarterly dividend in early 2005, the first since 1999. 

== Acquisitions ==
In 2006, SCI merged with Alderwoods Group, its nearest competitor in terms of size. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) blocked the merger, citing concerns over consumer choice. After SCI agreed to divest funeral home and cemetery locations in several markets and end licensing agreements with other funeral homes, the FTC allowed the merger to continue. By 2007, the integration of Alderwoods&#x27;s locations and operations was complete.

In 2009, SCI put in a bid to purchase Keystone North America for ( million as of ). The purchase was completed in 2010 and added about 200 locations.

In May 2013, SCI signed a deal to purchase Stewart Enterprises, the second-largest death care company. In December 2013, the FTC imposed conditions on the acquisition, requiring the two companies to sell 53 funeral homes and 38 cemeteries in 59 local markets, and requiring the merged company to be subject to a ten-year period during which the FTC will review any attempt by the company to acquire funeral or cemetery assets in those local markets.

== Brands ==
SCI operates the following brands in the United States and Canada:

* Advantage
* 
* Dignity Memorial
* Dignity Memorial Premier Collection
* LHT Consulting Group, LLC
* Neptune Memorial Reef
* Neptune Society/Trident Society/Neptune Society of Northern California
* National Cremation
* Rose Hills Memorial Park

== Notable properties ==
* Caballero Rivero Woodlawn Park North Cemetery and Mausoleum in Miami
* Crown Hill Funeral Home and Cemetery in Indianapolis
* Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel in Manhattan, New York City
* Glenwood Memorial Gardens, Broomall, Pennsylvania
* Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp; Cemetery in Phoenix, Arizona
* Joseph Gawler&#x27;s Sons in Washington, D.C.
* Lake Lawn Metairie Funeral Home and Cemeteries in New Orleans
* Pierce Brothers Westwood Village Memorial Park and Mortuary in Los Angeles
* Riverside Memorial Chapel in Manhattan, New York City
* Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas
* Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery in North Hollywood, Los Angeles, California
* Westwood Village Memorial Park in Westwood, Los Angeles, California
* Woodlawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Colma, California

== Controversies ==

=== Costs ===
Writing in an , issue of &quot;Bloomberg Businessweek&quot;, journalist Paul M. Barrett found, despite its lower overhead, SCI has higher prices than independent funeral home operators. Barrett quoted &quot;data compiled&quot; by a concierge&#x27; funeral planning service&quot; Everest Funeral Package, which found that for &quot;traditional funerals, SCI charges on average (excluding casket and cemetery plot), 42 percent more than independents.&quot; In reply, SCI points to &quot;overwhelmingly positive responses&quot; on customer surveys and states they provide &quot;top value&quot; at a variety of funeral price points.

=== Texas ===
In the late 1990s, SCI was involved in a controversy involving alleged violations of Texas State embalming laws. The proceedings took a political slant due to Robert Waltrip&#x27;s friendship with the family of then-governor George W. Bush and Waltrip&#x27;s campaign contributions to various members of the Bush family.

Referred to as &quot;Funeralgate&quot; or &quot;Formaldegate&quot; in the media, the controversy was widely publicized when Eliza May, a director with the Texas Funeral Service Commission (TFSC), was fired while investigating SCI. May alleged in a civil suit that she was fired because she refused to halt her investigation despite pressure to do so from Governor Bush.

May&#x27;s lawyers subpoenaed President Bush to testify at the trial, but Texas judge John K. Dietz threw out the subpoena on the grounds that the then-governor was not in a position to have enough specialized information to require his involvement.

The lawsuit was settled in 2001 for more than (equivalent to in ). SCI and the state of Texas were required to jointly pay the decision. On , the TFSC fined SCI an additional for administrative penalties.

=== Florida ===
On January 18, 2023, it was reported on local news that the Escambia County Sheriffs Office was called to investigate a crime of corpse abuse by an employee who was caught in the act, by another employee. The alleged criminal was never charged with the crime because he committed suicide the same day. 
The investigation into the crime and the Oaklawn Funeral Home is still pending.

In 2001, it was reported that employees of the Memorial Gardens cemetery near Fort Lauderdale, Florida, had oversold the cemetery, so bodies were buried in the wrong places, separating husbands from wives; vaults were cracked open by a backhoe, bodies were exhumed, with bones, skulls and shrouds thrown into nearby woods, bodies were stacked on top of each other, and remains were relocated without notifying relatives.

The allegations were particularly appalling to the Jewish cemetery&#x27;s more religiously observant customers, &quot;The Miami Herald&quot; reported. Traditional Jewish law requires bodies to be buried intact and prohibits disturbing the dead. SCI reached a agreement with the Florida attorney general&#x27;s office in 2003 that required it to repair plots and reorganize the cemeteries to ensure all graves were properly marked and the grounds could accommodate all plots sold. SCI also settled a separate class-action lawsuit on behalf of 350 families for .

=== Virginia ===
On , &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that an SCI cemetery in Alexandria, Virginia, had improperly buried the remains of the stillborn daughter of Nsombi Hale in a grave too shallow (in a grave about deep). Nsombi Hale was filing suit against SCI.

After an internal investigation by SCI, attorneys working for SCI denied the charges against the company in a letter to Virginia funeral regulators, and a few days later, the &quot;Post&quot; reported that Robert Ranghelli, one of the SCI employees who had corroborated the initial reports of improper handing of corpses, was fired for &quot;exercising his first amendment rights/speaking with the media&quot; after having been on administrative leave for several months following the initial reports in the newspaper.

On , &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that the National Funeral Home, a facility owned by SCI in the Falls Church area of Fairfax County, Virginia, which also acts as a centralized embalming and dressing station for embalming and body preparation for other nearby SCI-owned operations (Arlington Funeral Home, Danzansky-Goldberg Memorial Chapel, and Demaine Funeral Home), was storing naked bodies in various stages of decomposition in conditions described as &quot;disgusting, degrading and humiliating&quot;. The story went on to report that as many as 200 bodies were stored on &quot;makeshift gurneys in the garage&quot; and &quot;at least half a dozen veterans destined for the hallowed ground at Arlington National Cemetery were left in their coffins on a garage rack&quot;. The &quot;Post&quot; reported that documentation describing these conditions had been reported to the Virginia Board of Funeral Directors and Embalmers.

A few days later, the &quot;Post&quot; reported that family members of a deceased Army veteran whose remains were stored in an unrefrigerated garage at National Funeral Home asked the Fairfax County Commonwealth&#x27;s Attorney to investigate the actions of National and its parent company, SCI, as crimes.

The &quot;Post&quot; further reported that the family of retired U.S. Army Colonel Andrew DeGraff filed a lawsuit in Fairfax County alleging that SCI mishandled DeGraff&#x27;s remains. According to the article, an SCI spokesman said that the company is conducting an internal investigation.

=== California ===
On , a class-action lawsuit was filed against SCI and Eden Memorial Park, a Jewish cemetery managed by SCI in Mission Hills charging that they were destroying graves to make room for new interments.

The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; reported that state officials found no evidence of mass grave disturbances. Russ Heimerich, a spokesman for the state Department of Consumer Affairs, said, &quot;We have not seen any evidence of the kind of massive desecration that is being alleged. The kind of activity they&#x27;re alleging is not easily hidden, especially on a willful, large-scale basis.&quot; The plaintiff&#x27;s attorney rejected the findings of the state&#x27;s investigation.

Michael Avenatti, the plaintiff&#x27;s attorney, said more than 800 families have joined the class action suit. Avenatti claims the state&#x27;s investigation was shoddy, saying, &quot;Investigators from the state were told by various groundskeepers over a year ago that they had been repeatedly told to throw bones away, and yet for some reason, the state didn&#x27;t adequately follow up.&quot;

SCI denied all charges. After the lawsuit was filed, the Consumer Affairs Department reviewed five to six years of the cemetery&#x27;s annual inspection records and found no indication that graves had been disturbed. According to the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; article, &quot;The agency also asked the dozens of families that contacted officials to look for signs of disturbancesshifted or cracked gravestones or anything else that appeared different from previous visitsand didn&#x27;t receive a single call back, he said.&quot; 

In January 2012, the lawsuit against Eden Memorial Park was ruled to be a valid class action in Los Angeles Superior Court, with the trial scheduled to begin in May 2012. In February 2014, the parties reached a settlement in the amount of .

In 2015, families filed a second suit alleging that the practice continued after the first settlement. The suit remains pending .

In 2024, the attorney general of California announced a settlement with SCI, which does business in the state under their Neptune Society and Trident Society brands, for state enforcement actions that alleged that SCI had violated the California Unfair Competition Law and False Advertising Law by engaging in false and deceptive advertising in the marketing and sale of pre-need cremation packages. The proposed settlement which is pending court approval, would provide full restitution to customers, comprehensive injunctive relief, and $23 million in civil penalties.

=== Massachusetts ===
In 2010, the State Board of Registration charged the SCI-owned Stanetsky Chapel, a Jewish funeral home in Brookline with serious violations of state law and regulations in connection with an incident where a woman was buried in the wrong grave, then disinterred without a legal permit and reburied in the correct grave with the woman&#x27;s family not being notified of the mistake and the corrective procedure. As a result, in December 2011, the State Board announced a Consent Agreement and levied the biggest fine in its history, , against Stanetsky and SCI, and suspended the license of the Stanetsky general manager for a year. Other staff members involved in the incident were subject to punitive actions ranging from additional professional training to license revocation. The incident received widespread local media coverage. The Board&#x27;s action was also published on its website.

In a case first reported on , &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; reported J.S. Waterman&#x27;s &amp; Sons, also owned by SCI, was found by the Board to have accidentally cremated the body of a stillborn infant in 2003. The infant&#x27;s body was apparently placed on a gurney that held an adult woman&#x27;s body that was scheduled for cremation. As a result of a civil suit brought by the infant&#x27;s family, Waterman&#x27;s was ordered to pay the parents (equivalent to in ), with a pending legal claim that the mortuary violated the state&#x27;s consumer protection law that could triple the damages, &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; reported. The family&#x27;s lawyer, Gordon T. Walker, said SCI could be hit with additional costs, as there is a pending claim that the company violated the state&#x27;s consumer protection law. The civil verdict was made in Suffolk Superior Court on . The jury awarded because of emotional distress and because it found the funeral home was negligent and intentionally inflicted emotional harm.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11306218" start="0" end="33" title="Service Corporation International" label="Service Corporation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="61" end="68" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="99" end="107" title="cemetery" label="cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337596" start="154" end="178" title="Neartown, Houston, Texas" label="Neartown, Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498106" start="224" end="244" title="Jefferson, Louisiana" label="Jefferson, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="465" end="472" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713781" start="485" end="501" title="Alderwoods Group" label="Alderwoods Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615782" start="507" end="526" title="Stewart Enterprises" label="Stewart Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="663" end="673" title="cemeteries" label="cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q939290" start="1310" end="1326" title="share repurchase" label="share repurchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="1529" end="1553" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615782" start="2075" end="2094" title="Stewart Enterprises" label="Stewart Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297311" start="2115" end="2125" title="death care" label="death care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506430" start="2666" end="2687" title="Neptune Memorial Reef" label="Neptune Memorial Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391802" start="2690" end="2705" title="Neptune Society" label="Neptune Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398719" start="2784" end="2808" title="Rose Hills Memorial Park" label="Rose Hills Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015199" start="2837" end="2896" title="Caballero Rivero Woodlawn Park North Cemetery and Mausoleum" label="Caballero Rivero Woodlawn Park North Cemetery and Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="2900" end="2905" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189371" start="2908" end="2944" title="Crown Hill Cemetery" label="Crown Hill Funeral Home and Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="2948" end="2960" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486364" start="2963" end="2995" title="Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel" label="Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2999" end="3008" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3010" end="3023" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918843" start="3026" end="3051" title="Glenwood Memorial Gardens" label="Glenwood Memorial Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q990622" start="3053" end="3075" title="Broomall, Pennsylvania" label="Broomall, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q24898227" start="3078" end="3123" title="Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp;amp; Cemetery" label="Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp;amp; Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3127" end="3143" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3175" end="3191" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6822541" start="3194" end="3255" title="Metairie Cemetery" label="Lake Lawn Metairie Funeral Home and Cemeteries in New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="3258" end="3317" title="Pierce Brothers Westwood Village Memorial Park and Mortuary" label="Pierce Brothers Westwood Village Memorial Park and Mortuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3321" end="3332" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134901" start="3335" end="3360" title="Riverside Memorial Chapel" label="Riverside Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573689" start="3391" end="3432" title="Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3436" end="3442" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007954" start="3445" end="3476" title="Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="3480" end="3508" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="North Hollywood, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="3523" end="3553" title="Westwood Village Memorial Park" label="Westwood Village Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199774" start="3557" end="3590" title="Westwood, Los Angeles, California" label="Westwood, Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q98598257" start="3593" end="3624" title="Woodlawn Memorial Park Cemetery (Colma, California)" label="Woodlawn Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q987296" start="3628" end="3645" title="Colma, California" label="Colma, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="3713" end="3735" title="Bloomberg Businessweek" label="Bloomberg Businessweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="4423" end="4432" title="embalming" label="embalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4551" end="4565" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5358" end="5363" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="5954" end="5978" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6349" end="6355" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706651" start="6416" end="6432" title="The Miami Herald" label="The Miami Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6888" end="6907" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="6947" end="6967" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55947090" start="7709" end="7730" title="National Memorial Park" label="National Funeral Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q408744" start="7763" end="7775" title="Falls Church" label="Falls Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="7784" end="7808" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="8364" end="8391" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="8781" end="8795" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="8796" end="8824" title="Commonwealth&amp;#x27;s Attorney" label="Commonwealth&amp;#x27;s Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8970" end="8979" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="9223" end="9235" title="class-action" label="class-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q384807" start="9326" end="9339" title="Mission Hills, Los Angeles" label="Mission Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="9426" end="9443" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380465" start="9903" end="9919" title="Michael Avenatti" label="Michael Avenatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643515" start="10944" end="10958" title="California Superior Court" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241057" start="11444" end="11477" title="California Unfair Competition Law" label="California Unfair Competition Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11482" end="11503" title="California Unfair Competition Law#Elements of a false advertising claim" label="False Advertising Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="11909" end="11918" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="12734" end="12750" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="13243" end="13262" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37461" wikidata="Q11430" url="?curid=37461" title="State of matter">
<text>In physics, a state of matter is one of the distinct forms in which matter can exist. Four states of matter are observable in everyday life: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. Many intermediate states are known to exist, such as liquid crystal, and some states only exist under extreme conditions, such as Bose–Einstein condensates and Fermionic condensates (in extreme cold), neutron-degenerate matter (in extreme density), and quark–gluon plasma (at extremely high energy).

Historically, the distinction is based on qualitative differences in properties. Matter in the solid state maintains a fixed volume (assuming no change in temperature or air pressure) and shape, with component particles (atoms, molecules or ions) close together and fixed into place. Matter in the liquid state maintains a fixed volume (assuming no change in temperature or air pressure), but has a variable shape that adapts to fit its container. Its particles are still close together but move freely. Matter in the gaseous state has both variable volume and shape, adapting both to fit its container. Its particles are neither close together nor fixed in place. Matter in the plasma state has variable volume and shape, and contains neutral atoms as well as a significant number of ions and electrons, both of which can move around freely.

The term &quot;phase&quot; is sometimes used as a synonym for state of matter, but it is possible for a single compound to form different phases that are in the same state of matter. For example, ice is the solid state of water, but there are multiple phases of ice with different crystal structures, which are formed at different pressures and temperatures.

== Four classical states ==

===Solid===

In a solid, constituent particles (ions, atoms, or molecules) are closely packed together. The forces between particles are so strong that the particles cannot move freely but can only vibrate. As a result, a solid has a stable, definite shape, and a definite volume. Solids can only change their shape by an outside force, as when broken or cut.

In crystalline solids, the particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) are packed in a regularly ordered, repeating pattern. There are various different crystal structures, and the same substance can have more than one structure (or solid phase). For example, iron has a body-centred cubic structure at temperatures below , and a face-centred cubic structure between 912 and . Ice has fifteen known crystal structures, or fifteen solid phases, which exist at various temperatures and pressures.

Glasses and other non-crystalline, amorphous solids without long-range order are not thermal equilibrium ground states; therefore they are described below as nonclassical states of matter.

Solids can be transformed into liquids by melting, and liquids can be transformed into solids by freezing. Solids can also change directly into gases through the process of sublimation, and gases can likewise change directly into solids through deposition.

===Liquid===

A liquid is a nearly incompressible fluid that conforms to the shape of its container but retains a (nearly) constant volume independent of pressure. The volume is definite if the temperature and pressure are constant. When a solid is heated above its melting point, it becomes liquid, given that the pressure is higher than the triple point of the substance. Intermolecular (or interatomic or interionic) forces are still important, but the molecules have enough energy to move relative to each other and the structure is mobile. This means that the shape of a liquid is not definite but is determined by its container. The volume is usually greater than that of the corresponding solid, the best known exception being water, HO. The highest temperature at which a given liquid can exist is its critical temperature.

===Gas===


A gas is a compressible fluid. Not only will a gas conform to the shape of its container but it will also expand to fill the container.

In a gas, the molecules have enough kinetic energy so that the effect of intermolecular forces is small (or zero for an ideal gas), and the typical distance between neighboring molecules is much greater than the molecular size. A gas has no definite shape or volume, but occupies the entire container in which it is confined. A liquid may be converted to a gas by heating at constant pressure to the boiling point, or else by reducing the pressure at constant temperature.

At temperatures below its critical temperature, a gas is also called a vapor, and can be liquefied by compression alone without cooling. A vapor can exist in equilibrium with a liquid (or solid), in which case the gas pressure equals the vapor pressure of the liquid (or solid).

A supercritical fluid (SCF) is a gas whose temperature and pressure are above the critical temperature and critical pressure respectively. In this state, the distinction between liquid and gas disappears. A supercritical fluid has the physical properties of a gas, but its high density confers solvent properties in some cases, which leads to useful applications. For example, supercritical carbon dioxide is used to extract caffeine in the manufacture of decaffeinated coffee.

===Plasma===

A gas is usually converted to a plasma in one of two ways, either from a huge voltage difference between two points, or by exposing it to extremely high temperatures. Heating matter to high temperatures causes electrons to leave the atoms, resulting in the presence of free electrons. This creates a so-called partially ionised plasma. At very high temperatures, such as those present in stars, it is assumed that essentially all electrons are &quot;free&quot;, and that a very high-energy plasma is essentially bare nuclei swimming in a sea of electrons. This forms the so-called fully ionised plasma.

The plasma state is often misunderstood, and although not freely existing under normal conditions on Earth, it is quite commonly generated by either lightning, electric sparks, fluorescent lights, neon lights or in plasma televisions. The Sun&#x27;s corona, some types of flame, and stars are all examples of illuminated matter in the plasma state. Plasma is by far the most abundant of the four fundamental states, as 99% of all ordinary matter in the universe is plasma, as it composes all stars.

==Phase transitions==

A state of matter is also characterized by phase transitions. A phase transition indicates a change in structure and can be recognized by an abrupt change in properties. A distinct state of matter can be defined as any set of states distinguished from any other set of states by a phase transition. Water can be said to have several distinct solid states. The appearance of superconductivity is associated with a phase transition, so there are superconductive states. Likewise, ferromagnetic states are demarcated by phase transitions and have distinctive properties.
When the change of state occurs in stages the intermediate steps are called mesophases. Such phases have been exploited by the introduction of liquid crystal technology.


The state or &quot;phase&quot; of a given set of matter can change depending on pressure and temperature conditions, transitioning to other phases as these conditions change to favor their existence; for example, solid transitions to liquid with an increase in temperature. Near absolute zero, a substance exists as a solid. As heat is added to this substance it melts into a liquid at its melting point, boils into a gas at its boiling point, and if heated high enough would enter a plasma state in which the electrons are so energized that they leave their parent atoms.

Forms of matter that are not composed of molecules and are organized by different forces can also be considered different states of matter. Superfluids (like Fermionic condensate) and the quark–gluon plasma are examples.

In a chemical equation, the state of matter of the chemicals may be shown as (s) for solid, (l) for liquid, and (g) for gas. An aqueous solution is denoted (aq), for example,
:formula_1
Matter in the plasma state is seldom used (if at all) in chemical equations, so there is no standard symbol to denote it. In the rare equations that plasma is used it is symbolized as (p).

==Non-classical states==

=== Glass ===


Glass is a non-crystalline or amorphous solid material that exhibits a glass transition when heated towards the liquid state. Glasses can be made of quite different classes of materials: inorganic networks (such as window glass, made of silicate plus additives), metallic alloys, ionic melts, aqueous solutions, molecular liquids, and polymers.
Thermodynamically, a glass is in a metastable state with respect to its crystalline counterpart. The conversion rate, however, is practically zero.

=== Crystals with some degree of disorder ===

A plastic crystal is a molecular solid with long-range positional order but with constituent molecules retaining rotational freedom; in an orientational glass this degree of freedom is frozen in a quenched disordered state.

Similarly, in a spin glass magnetic disorder is frozen.

===Liquid crystal states===
Liquid crystal states have properties intermediate between mobile liquids and ordered solids. Generally, they are able to flow like a liquid, but exhibiting long-range order. For example, the nematic phase consists of long rod-like molecules such as para-azoxyanisole, which is nematic in the temperature range . In this state the molecules flow as in a liquid, but they all point in the same direction (within each domain) and cannot rotate freely. Like a crystalline solid, but unlike a liquid, liquid crystals react to polarized light.

Other types of liquid crystals are described in the main article on these states. Several types have technological importance, for example, in liquid crystal displays.

===Microphase separation===
 Copolymers can undergo microphase separation to form a diverse array of periodic nanostructures, as shown in the example of the styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer shown at right. Microphase separation can be understood by analogy to the phase separation between oil and water. Due to chemical incompatibility between the blocks, block copolymers undergo a similar phase separation. However, because the blocks are covalently bonded to each other, they cannot demix macroscopically as water and oil can, and so instead the blocks form nanometre-sized structures. Depending on the relative lengths of each block and the overall block topology of the polymer, many morphologies can be obtained, each its own phase of matter.

Ionic liquids also display microphase separation. The anion and cation are not necessarily compatible and would demix otherwise, but electric charge attraction prevents them from separating. Their anions and cations appear to diffuse within compartmentalized layers or micelles instead of freely as in a uniform liquid.

== Magnetically ordered states ==
Transition metal atoms often have magnetic moments due to the net spin of electrons that remain unpaired and do not form chemical bonds. In some solids the magnetic moments on different atoms are ordered and can form a ferromagnet, an antiferromagnet or a ferrimagnet.

In a ferromagnet—for instance, solid iron—the magnetic moment on each atom is aligned in the same direction (within a magnetic domain). If the domains are also aligned, the solid is a permanent magnet, which is magnetic even in the absence of an external magnetic field. The magnetization disappears when the magnet is heated to the Curie point, which for iron is .

An antiferromagnet has two networks of equal and opposite magnetic moments, which cancel each other out so that the net magnetization is zero. For example, in nickel(II) oxide (NiO), half the nickel atoms have moments aligned in one direction and half in the opposite direction.

In a ferrimagnet, the two networks of magnetic moments are opposite but unequal, so that cancellation is incomplete and there is a non-zero net magnetization. An example is magnetite (FeO), which contains Fe and Fe ions with different magnetic moments.

A quantum spin liquid (QSL) is a disordered state in a system of interacting quantum spins which preserves its disorder to very low temperatures, unlike other disordered states. It is not a liquid in physical sense, but a solid whose magnetic order is inherently disordered. The name &quot;liquid&quot; is due to an analogy with the molecular disorder in a conventional liquid. A QSL is neither a ferromagnet, where magnetic domains are parallel, nor an antiferromagnet, where the magnetic domains are antiparallel; instead, the magnetic domains are randomly oriented. This can be realized e.g. by geometrically frustrated magnetic moments that cannot point uniformly parallel or antiparallel. When cooling down and settling to a state, the domain must &quot;choose&quot; an orientation, but if the possible states are similar in energy, one will be chosen randomly. Consequently, despite strong short-range order, there is no long-range magnetic order.

==Superfluids and condensates==

===Superconductor===

Superconductors are materials which have zero electrical resistivity, and therefore perfect conductivity. This is a distinct physical state which exists at low temperature, and the resistivity increases discontinuously to a finite value at a sharply-defined transition temperature for each superconductor.

A superconductor also excludes all magnetic fields from its interior, a phenomenon known as the Meissner effect or perfect diamagnetism. Superconducting magnets are used as electromagnets in magnetic resonance imaging machines.

The phenomenon of superconductivity was discovered in 1911, and for 75 years was only known in some metals and metallic alloys at temperatures below 30 K. In 1986 so-called high-temperature superconductivity was discovered in certain ceramic oxides, and has now been observed in temperatures as high as 164 K.

===Superfluid===
Close to absolute zero, some liquids form a second liquid state described as superfluid because it has zero viscosity (or infinite fluidity; i.e., flowing without friction). This was discovered in 1937 for helium, which forms a superfluid below the lambda temperature of . In this state it will attempt to &quot;climb&quot; out of its container. It also has infinite thermal conductivity so that no temperature gradient can form in a superfluid. Placing a superfluid in a spinning container will result in quantized vortices.

These properties are explained by the theory that the common isotope helium-4 forms a Bose–Einstein condensate (see next section) in the superfluid state. More recently, fermionic condensate superfluids have been formed at even lower temperatures by the rare isotope helium-3 and by lithium-6.

===Bose–Einstein condensate===
In 1924, Albert Einstein and Satyendra Nath Bose predicted the &quot;Bose–Einstein condensate&quot; (BEC), sometimes referred to as the fifth state of matter. In a BEC, matter stops behaving as independent particles, and collapses into a single quantum state that can be described with a single, uniform wavefunction.

In the gas phase, the Bose–Einstein condensate remained an unverified theoretical prediction for many years. In 1995, the research groups of Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman, of JILA at the University of Colorado at Boulder, produced the first such condensate experimentally. A Bose–Einstein condensate is &quot;colder&quot; than a solid. It may occur when atoms have very similar (or the same) quantum levels, at temperatures very close to absolute zero, .

===Fermionic condensate===

A &quot;fermionic condensate&quot; is similar to the Bose–Einstein condensate but composed of fermions. The Pauli exclusion principle prevents fermions from entering the same quantum state, but a pair of fermions can behave as a boson, and multiple such pairs can then enter the same quantum state without restriction.

==High-energy states==

===Degenerate matter===
Under extremely high pressure, as in the cores of dead stars, ordinary matter undergoes a transition to a series of exotic states of matter collectively known as degenerate matter, which are supported mainly by quantum mechanical effects. In physics, &quot;degenerate&quot; refers to two states that have the same energy and are thus interchangeable. Degenerate matter is supported by the Pauli exclusion principle, which prevents two fermionic particles from occupying the same quantum state. Unlike regular plasma, degenerate plasma expands little when heated, because there are simply no momentum states left. Consequently, degenerate stars collapse into very high densities. More massive degenerate stars are smaller, because the gravitational force increases, but pressure does not increase proportionally.

Electron-degenerate matter is found inside white dwarf stars. Electrons remain bound to atoms but are able to transfer to adjacent atoms. Neutron-degenerate matter is found in neutron stars. Vast gravitational pressure compresses atoms so strongly that the electrons are forced to combine with protons via inverse beta-decay, resulting in a superdense conglomeration of neutrons. Normally free neutrons outside an atomic nucleus will decay with a half life of approximately 10 minutes, but in a neutron star, the decay is overtaken by inverse decay. Cold degenerate matter is also present in planets such as Jupiter and in the even more massive brown dwarfs, which are expected to have a core with metallic hydrogen. Because of the degeneracy, more massive brown dwarfs are not significantly larger. In metals, the electrons can be modeled as a degenerate gas moving in a lattice of non-degenerate positive ions.

===Quark matter===
In regular cold matter, quarks, fundamental particles of nuclear matter, are confined by the strong force into hadrons that consist of 2–4 quarks, such as protons and neutrons. Quark matter or quantum chromodynamical (QCD) matter is a group of phases where the strong force is overcome and quarks are deconfined and free to move. Quark matter phases occur at extremely high densities or temperatures, and there are no known ways to produce them in equilibrium in the laboratory; in ordinary conditions, any quark matter formed immediately undergoes radioactive decay.

Strange matter is a type of quark matter that is suspected to exist inside some neutron stars close to the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (approximately 2–3 solar masses), although there is no direct evidence of its existence. In strange matter, part of the energy available manifests as strange quarks, a heavier analogue of the common down quark. It may be stable at lower energy states once formed, although this is not known.

Quark–gluon plasma is a very high-temperature phase in which quarks become free and able to move independently, rather than being perpetually bound into particles, in a sea of gluons, subatomic particles that transmit the strong force that binds quarks together. This is analogous to the liberation of electrons from atoms in a plasma. This state is briefly attainable in extremely high-energy heavy ion collisions in particle accelerators, and allows scientists to observe the properties of individual quarks. Theories predicting the existence of quark–gluon plasma were developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and it was detected for the first time in the laboratory at CERN in the year 2000. Unlike plasma, which flows like a gas, interactions within QGP are strong and it flows like a liquid.

At high densities but relatively low temperatures, quarks are theorized to form a quark liquid whose nature is presently unknown. It forms a distinct color-flavor locked (CFL) phase at even higher densities. This phase is superconductive for color charge. These phases may occur in neutron stars but they are presently theoretical.

===Color-glass condensate===
Color-glass condensate is a type of matter theorized to exist in atomic nuclei traveling near the speed of light. According to Einstein&#x27;s theory of relativity, a high-energy nucleus appears length contracted, or compressed, along its direction of motion. As a result, the gluons inside the nucleus appear to a stationary observer as a &quot;gluonic wall&quot; traveling near the speed of light. At very high energies, the density of the gluons in this wall is seen to increase greatly. Unlike the quark–gluon plasma produced in the collision of such walls, the color-glass condensate describes the walls themselves, and is an intrinsic property of the particles that can only be observed under high-energy conditions such as those at RHIC and possibly at the Large Hadron Collider as well.

=== Very high energy states ===
Various theories predict new states of matter at very high energies. An unknown state has created the baryon asymmetry in the universe, but little is known about it. In string theory, a Hagedorn temperature is predicted for superstrings at about 1030 K, where superstrings are copiously produced. At Planck temperature (1032 K), gravity becomes a significant force between individual particles. No current theory can describe these states and they cannot be produced with any foreseeable experiment. However, these states are important in cosmology because the universe may have passed through these states in the Big Bang.

==Other proposed states==

===Supersolid===
A supersolid is a spatially ordered material (that is, a solid or crystal) with superfluid properties. Similar to a superfluid, a supersolid is able to move without friction but retains a rigid shape. Although a supersolid is a solid, it exhibits so many characteristic properties different from other solids that many argue it is another state of matter.

===String-net liquid===
In a string-net liquid, atoms have apparently unstable arrangement, like a liquid, but are still consistent in overall pattern, like a solid. When in a normal solid state, the atoms of matter align themselves in a grid pattern, so that the spin of any electron is the opposite of the spin of all electrons touching it. But in a string-net liquid, atoms are arranged in some pattern that requires some electrons to have neighbors with the same spin. This gives rise to curious properties, as well as supporting some unusual proposals about the fundamental conditions of the universe itself.

===Superglass===
A superglass is a phase of matter characterized, at the same time, by superfluidity and a frozen amorphous structure.

=== Chain-melted state ===
Metals, like potassium, in the chain-melted state appear to be in the liquid and solid state at the same time. This is a result of being subjected to high temperature and pressure, leading to the chains in the potassium to dissolve into liquid while the crystals remain solid.

===Quantum Hall state===
A &quot;quantum Hall state&quot; gives rise to quantized Hall voltage measured in the direction perpendicular to the current flow. A &quot;quantum spin Hall state&quot; is a theoretical phase that may pave the way for the development of electronic devices that dissipate less energy and generate less heat. This is a derivation of the Quantum Hall state of matter.

===Photonic matter===
Photonic matter is a phenomenon where photons interacting with a gas develop apparent mass, and can interact with each other, even forming photonic &quot;molecules&quot;. The source of mass is the gas, which is massive. This is in contrast to photons moving in empty space, which have no rest mass, and cannot interact.

==See also==
* Hidden states of matter
* Classical element
* Condensed matter physics
* Cooling curve
* Supercooling
* Superheating
* List of states of matter

==Notes and references==
==External links==

* 2005-06-22, MIT News: MIT physicists create new form of matter Citat: &quot;... They have become the first to create a new type of matter, a gas of atoms that shows high-temperature superfluidity.&quot;
* 2003-10-10, Science Daily: Metallic Phase For Bosons Implies New State Of Matter
* 2004-01-15, ScienceDaily: Probable Discovery Of A New, Supersolid, Phase Of Matter Citat: &quot;...We apparently have observed, for the first time, a solid material with the characteristics of a superfluid...but because all its particles are in the identical quantum state, it remains a solid even though its component particles are continually flowing...&quot;
* 2004-01-29, ScienceDaily: NIST/University Of Colorado Scientists Create New Form Of Matter: A Fermionic Condensate
* Short videos demonstrating of States of Matter, solids, liquids and gases by Prof. J M Murrell, University of Sussex </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="14" end="29" title="State of matter" label="state of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="68" end="74" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="141" end="146" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="148" end="154" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="156" end="159" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="165" end="171" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="226" end="240" title="liquid crystal" label="liquid crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="303" end="327" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898383" start="333" end="353" title="Fermionic condensate" label="Fermionic condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="374" end="399" title="neutron-degenerate matter" label="neutron-degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="426" end="444" title="quark–gluon plasma" label="quark–gluon plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12416032" start="459" end="470" title="High-energy nuclear physics" label="high energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="599" end="605" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="695" end="700" title="atoms" label="atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="702" end="711" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="715" end="719" title="ions" label="ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="1268" end="1276" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="1333" end="1338" title="phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="1368" end="1375" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="1514" end="1517" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q125745585" start="1570" end="1583" title="phases of ice" label="phases of ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="1599" end="1616" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819604" start="1815" end="1839" title="Bonding in solids" label="forces between particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="2071" end="2089" title="crystal" label="crystalline solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="2215" end="2232" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2322" end="2326" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2333" end="2351" title="cubic crystal system" label="body-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2392" end="2410" title="cubic crystal system" label="face-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="2439" end="2442" title="Ice" label="Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="2558" end="2563" title="Glass" label="Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="2593" end="2608" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142196" start="2618" end="2634" title="order and disorder (physics)" label="long-range order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175122" start="2643" end="2662" title="thermal equilibrium" label="thermal equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="2921" end="2932" title="sublimation (chemistry)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q871279" start="2993" end="3003" title="deposition (phase transition)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="3056" end="3061" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="3200" end="3211" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="3216" end="3224" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="3272" end="3285" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q106410" start="3349" end="3361" title="triple point" label="triple point"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="3740" end="3745" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="3816" end="3836" title="critical temperature" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="4024" end="4038" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172280" start="4108" end="4117" title="ideal gas" label="ideal gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="4388" end="4401" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="4488" end="4508" title="critical temperature" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="4533" end="4538" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="4700" end="4714" title="vapor pressure" label="vapor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="4744" end="4763" title="supercritical fluid" label="supercritical fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="4849" end="4866" title="critical temperature" label="critical pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q332582" start="5119" end="5147" title="supercritical carbon dioxide" label="supercritical carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410204" start="5159" end="5166" title="supercritical fluid extraction" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="5167" end="5175" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497571" start="5198" end="5211" title="decaffeination" label="decaffeinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="5988" end="5997" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622721" start="5999" end="6013" title="electric spark" label="electric spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="6016" end="6034" title="Fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006" start="6036" end="6047" title="Neon sign" label="neon lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="6054" end="6072" title="Plasma display" label="plasma televisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="6078" end="6095" title="solar corona" label="Sun&amp;#x27;s corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="6111" end="6116" title="flame" label="flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="6269" end="6284" title="ordinary matter" label="ordinary matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="6331" end="6336" title="stars" label="stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="6405" end="6422" title="phase transitions" label="phase transitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q230875" start="6588" end="6594" title="thermodynamic state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="6643" end="6659" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="6806" end="6821" title="superconductivity" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="6840" end="6853" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333391" start="7006" end="7015" title="mesophase" label="mesophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="7073" end="7087" title="liquid crystal" label="liquid crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="7182" end="7190" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="7195" end="7206" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="7381" end="7394" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="7420" end="7425" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="7492" end="7505" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="7531" end="7544" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="7586" end="7592" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="7612" end="7621" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="7816" end="7827" title="Superfluids" label="Superfluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q898383" start="7834" end="7854" title="Fermionic condensate" label="Fermionic condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="7864" end="7882" title="quark–gluon plasma" label="quark–gluon plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8026" end="8042" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="8316" end="8321" title="Glass" label="Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="8346" end="8361" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q825643" start="8387" end="8403" title="glass transition" label="glass transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="8553" end="8561" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898579" start="8596" end="8607" title="Ionic liquid" label="ionic melts"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8609" end="8625" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="8651" end="8659" title="polymers" label="polymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="8696" end="8712" title="metastable state" label="metastable state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202080" start="8859" end="8874" title="plastic crystal" label="plastic crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102409" start="8996" end="9015" title="orientational glass" label="orientational glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142196" start="9054" end="9073" title="order and disorder (physics)" label="quenched disordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490646" start="9098" end="9108" title="spin glass" label="spin glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="9359" end="9372" title="nematic phase" label="nematic phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363052" start="9417" end="9434" title="para-azoxyanisole" label="para-azoxyanisole"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="9850" end="9872" title="liquid crystal display" label="liquid crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="9905" end="9915" title="Copolymers" label="Copolymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417728" start="10033" end="10074" title="Kraton (polymer)" label="styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="10174" end="10177" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="10326" end="10343" title="covalent bond" label="covalently bonded"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="10446" end="10461" title="nanometer" label="nanometre-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q898579" start="10635" end="10647" title="Ionic liquid" label="Ionic liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="10990" end="11006" title="Transition metal" label="Transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="11024" end="11039" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="11056" end="11060" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="11265" end="11276" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="11297" end="11301" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069637" start="11378" end="11393" title="magnetic domain" label="magnetic domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="11454" end="11460" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="11515" end="11529" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="11535" end="11548" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="11593" end="11604" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="11630" end="11645" title="antiferromagnetism" label="antiferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q411221" start="11786" end="11802" title="nickel(II) oxide" label="nickel(II) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q217121" start="11912" end="11923" title="ferrimagnetism" label="ferrimagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="12080" end="12089" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661413" start="12163" end="12182" title="quantum spin liquid" label="quantum spin liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="12558" end="12569" title="Ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="12615" end="12630" title="Antiferromagnetism" label="antiferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q902635" start="12759" end="12783" title="Geometrical frustration" label="geometrically frustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="13217" end="13239" title="electrical resistivity and conductivity" label="electrical resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220620" start="13574" end="13589" title="Meissner effect" label="Meissner effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="13601" end="13613" title="diamagnetism" label="diamagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="13615" end="13637" title="Superconducting magnet" label="Superconducting magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="13669" end="13695" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="13880" end="13914" title="high-temperature superconductivity" label="high-temperature superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="13941" end="13948" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="14143" end="14152" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="14241" end="14247" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q910137" start="14284" end="14302" title="lambda point" label="lambda temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="14402" end="14422" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q554388" start="14434" end="14454" title="temperature gradient" label="temperature gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q844778" start="14541" end="14559" title="quantum vortex" label="quantized vortices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151346" start="14631" end="14639" title="helium-4" label="helium-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="14648" end="14672" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898383" start="14732" end="14752" title="fermionic condensate" label="fermionic condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="14829" end="14837" title="helium-3" label="helium-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q468718" start="14845" end="14854" title="Isotopes of lithium" label="lithium-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="14897" end="14912" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q45789" start="14917" end="14936" title="Satyendra Nath Bose" label="Satyendra Nath Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q205954" start="15348" end="15360" title="Eric Cornell" label="Eric Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206379" start="15365" end="15376" title="Carl Wieman" label="Carl Wieman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586184" start="15381" end="15385" title="JILA" label="JILA"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="15393" end="15426" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado at Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="15598" end="15612" title="Energy level" label="quantum levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="15644" end="15657" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="15784" end="15791" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="15798" end="15823" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="16220" end="16237" title="degenerate matter" label="degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="16447" end="16472" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="16493" end="16500" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16871" end="16897" title="Degenerate matter#Electron degeneracy" label="Electron-degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="16914" end="16925" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17009" end="17034" title="Degenerate matter#Neutron degeneracy" label="Neutron-degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="17047" end="17059" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="17265" end="17272" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085936" start="17305" end="17310" title="Free neutron decay" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="17479" end="17486" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="17516" end="17527" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q428895" start="17569" end="17586" title="metallic hydrogen" label="metallic hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="17828" end="17833" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="17897" end="17909" title="strong force" label="strong force"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="17915" end="17921" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q925640" start="18373" end="18387" title="Strange matter" label="Strange matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755153" start="18401" end="18413" title="quark matter" label="quark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139232" start="18480" end="18512" title="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit" label="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="18532" end="18542" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763" start="18663" end="18676" title="strange quark" label="strange quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745" start="18712" end="18722" title="down quark" label="down quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="18806" end="18824" title="Quark–gluon plasma" label="Quark–gluon plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="18867" end="18872" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="18982" end="18987" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="19028" end="19040" title="strong interaction" label="strong force"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="19224" end="19244" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149101" start="19759" end="19778" title="Color–flavor locking" label="color-flavor locked"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="19831" end="19846" title="superconductive" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="19891" end="19903" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q809677" start="20901" end="20917" title="baryon asymmetry" label="baryon asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="20968" end="20981" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638576" start="20985" end="21005" title="Hagedorn temperature" label="Hagedorn temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="21099" end="21117" title="Planck temperature" label="Planck temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="21338" end="21347" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="21413" end="21421" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="22527" end="22537" title="superfluid" label="superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="22963" end="22975" title="Hall voltage" label="Hall voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269101" start="23045" end="23068" title="Quantum spin Hall effect" label="quantum spin Hall state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="23332" end="23338" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="23582" end="23591" title="rest mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207763" start="23630" end="23653" title="Hidden states of matter" label="Hidden states of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="23656" end="23673" title="Classical element" label="Classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="23676" end="23700" title="Condensed matter physics" label="Condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084485" start="23703" end="23716" title="Cooling curve" label="Cooling curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="23719" end="23731" title="Supercooling" label="Supercooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q644139" start="23734" end="23746" title="Superheating" label="Superheating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271631" start="23749" end="23773" title="List of states of matter" label="List of states of matter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37462" wikidata="Q1972377" url="?curid=37462" title="Paul Molitor">
<text>Paul Leo Molitor (born August 22, 1956), nicknamed &quot;Molly&quot; and &quot;the Ignitor&quot;, is an American former professional baseball player and manager. During his 21-year playing career in Major League Baseball (MLB), he played for the Milwaukee Brewers (1978–1992), Toronto Blue Jays (1993–1995), and Minnesota Twins (1996–1998). He was known for his exceptional hitting and speed. He made seven All-Star Game appearances, and was the World Series Most Valuable Player in 1993. Molitor ranks tenth on the all-time MLB career hits list with 3,319. (Entering the 2025 season, the next active player on that list is Freddie Freeman, 154 spots and more than 1000 hits behind Molitor, making Molitor&#x27;s #10 position safe for the foresseable future.) He is one of only five players in history with 3,000+ hits, a lifetime .300+ batting average, and 500+ career stolen bases.

Molitor grew up in Minnesota and attended the University of Minnesota before beginning his MLB career. After his retirement as a player, he served as a coach for the Seattle Mariners and the Twins. In 2004, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility, becoming one of the first players enshrined after spending a significant portion of his career as a designated hitter. He was a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. On November 3, 2014, Molitor was announced as the 13th manager of the Twins. He managed the team for four seasons, from 2015 to 2018.

==Early life==
Molitor was born in Saint Paul, Minnesota. After graduating from Cretin High School, he was selected in the 28th round of the 1974 MLB draft as a pitcher by the St. Louis Cardinals. He opted instead to attend college at the University of Minnesota, where he was a three-year starter for the Minnesota Golden Gophers. Molitor earned All-American honors as a shortstop for his sophomore year. Between his sophomore and junior seasons, Molitor suffered a broken jaw. With his jaw wired shut for eight weeks, Molitor lost .

After his junior year in college, the Milwaukee Brewers selected Molitor in the first round, with the third overall selection, in the 1977 Major League Baseball draft. He signed with the Brewers and began his professional career with the Class A Burlington Bees of the Midwest League. In 64 games with Burlington, Molitor hit for a .346 batting average, eight home runs, 50 runs batted in (RBI) and 14 stolen bases.

==Playing career==
===Milwaukee Brewers (1978–1992)===

Molitor began as a shortstop, then moved to second base when Robin Yount returned from a brief injury. He made his MLB debut in 1978, playing in 125 games and hitting .273 with six home runs, 45 RBIs and 30 stolen bases. In 1981, he spent time at center field and right field to avoid the injuries associated with infield play. Molitor was moved to third base before the 1982 season. Molitor was part of a young Milwaukee Brewers team that lost the 1982 World Series in seven games to the St. Louis Cardinals. Molitor batted .355 during the series. In Game 1, he had five hits, a World Series record. During the 1982 season, he hit .302 and led the American League (AL) with 136 runs scored. On May 12, he hit three home runs against the Royals in a 9-7 loss.

Molitor struggled with injuries for much of his early career, being placed on the disabled list six times between 1980 and 1986. In 1984, Molitor struggled with elbow problems, played in only 13 games and ultimately underwent Tommy John surgery (becoming the first position player to undergo the surgery) in an attempt to salvage his career. He played in 140 games in 1985, hitting .297 with 10 home runs and 48 RBIs. He followed that with a .281 average, 9 home runs and 55 RBI in 1986. That year he suffered a hamstring injury, returned for a few days, then reinjured it. He played in 105 games that season.

Molitor attracted national media attention in 1987 during his 39-game hitting streak. Near the end of the streak, columnist Mike Downey wrote that &quot;the amazing thing about Paul Molitor&#x27;s recent bat-o-rama is not that he has hit in 33 straight games but that he has played in 33 straight games.&quot; The streak ended with Molitor in the on-deck circle when Rick Manning got a game-ending hit to beat the Cleveland Indians on August 26, 1987. Fans booed Manning for driving in the winning run and thus depriving Molitor of one last chance to reach 40 games. The streak stands as the fifth-longest in modern-day baseball history, and remains the longest since Pete Rose&#x27;s 44-game hit streak in 1978.

===Toronto Blue Jays (1993–1995)===

Although Molitor wanted to remain with Milwaukee when he became a free agent after the 1992 season, the franchise offered him a one-year contract with a $900,000 pay cut (to $2.5 million), while the Toronto Blue Jays offered a three-year, $13 million deal (equivalent to $ million in ), leading to his signing with the Blue Jays. Agent Ron Simon said, &quot;I was also talking with Milwaukee, but it became clear to us that Milwaukee didn&#x27;t have the same kind of interest in signing Molitor, perhaps because of their financial situation.&quot;

Molitor quickly became an offensive juggernaut. In 1993, Molitor led the AL in plate appearances (725) and hits (211) and hit .332 with 22 home runs and 111 RBI. Returning to the playoffs for the first time since 1982, he was a key part of the Blue Jays&#x27; second World Championship. Molitor hit 2 doubles, 2 triples, and 2 home runs in the Series, earning the World Series MVP Award and tied a World Series record by batting .500 (12-for-24) in the six-game series. In addition, after serving as a DH all season, Molitor played Game 3 of the World Series at first base and Games 4 and 5 at third base in the games played at Philadelphia.

In 1994, a strike-shortened season, Molitor hit .341 and led the AL in games played (115) and singles (107). He also stole 20 bases that season without ever being caught, one short of Kevin McReynolds&#x27; 1988 major league record of 21. Molitor&#x27;s average dropped to .270 in 1995, his lowest mark in more than ten years.

===Minnesota Twins (1996–1998)===
He left the Blue Jays after the season, and joined his hometown Minnesota Twins for the final three seasons of his career, where he acquired his 3,000th hit. He was the first player to reach the 3,000 hits plateau with a triple. Molitor was relishing the opportunity to play with Twins superstar Kirby Puckett, but Puckett developed career-ending glaucoma during spring training in 1996 and never played again. In 1996, Molitor became the second 40-year-old, after Hall of Famer Sam Rice, to have a 200-hit season, leading the league with 225, while also leading the league in singles with 167. Molitor also remains the last MLB player to drive in 100 or more runs in a season while hitting fewer than 10 home runs (nine HR, 113 RBIs).

Molitor hit .305 in 1997, his twelfth season to finish with a batting average higher than .300. In 1998, he hit .281 with four home runs, 69 RBI and nine stolen bases. Other than his very brief 1984 season, the 1998 season was the first in Molitor&#x27;s career in which he did not reach double-digit stolen base totals. He retired in December, saying, &quot;My heart tells me I&#x27;ve done what I can do on the field and in this game,&quot; Molitor said. &quot;I&#x27;m happy to leave it playing my last season in a Twins uniform... Now I&#x27;m going to redirect my efforts to find out what else the future holds.&quot;

==Coaching and managerial career==
===Early career===
After retiring as a player, Molitor remained with the Twins as a bench coach for three seasons. He was considered a leading candidate to manage the team when Tom Kelly retired after 2001, but he declined in part because the Twins were still being targeted for potential contraction. Molitor was a hitting coach with the Mariners in 2004. He then spent the 2005 to 2013 seasons in the Twins organization as a minor league baserunning and fielding instructor. Molitor joined the Twins coaching staff in 2014 to oversee baserunning, bunting, infield instruction, and positioning.

===Minnesota Twins===
The Twins hired Molitor to fill their manager vacancy for the 2015 season, and introduced him in a press conference on November 4, 2014.
At the end of the 2017 season, the Twins announced that Molitor would receive a three-year contract extension through 2020. Molitor was rewarded for his efforts in leading the Twins back to the postseason after losing 103 games the season prior, the first team in history to achieve this feat, by being named American League Manager of the Year in November 2017. He became only the second person to be elected to the Hall of Fame as a player and win the Manager of the Year Award behind Frank Robinson, who was named AL Manager of the Year in 1989 while managing the Baltimore Orioles.
On October 2, 2018, the Twins fired Molitor as manager, but expressed that they had interest in having him continue to maintain a role with the team in some capacity. He finished with a record of 305 wins and 343 losses in 648 games. Molitor later rejoined the Twins as a special assistant, with roving instructor duties for the team&#x27;s minor league affiliates.

===Managerial record===

==Accomplishments==

Molitor&#x27;s lifetime statistics include 2,683 games played, 1,782 runs scored, 3,319 hits, 605 doubles, 114 triples, 234 home runs, 1,307 runs batted in, 1,094 walks, a .306 batting average, and 504 stolen bases. His 3,319 hits rank him ninth all-time. In addition, he batted .368 in five postseason series, and was an all-star seven times. Molitor recorded these statistics while missing nearly 500 games due to various injuries throughout his career. In 1999, Molitor ranked No. 99 on &quot;The Sporting News&quot;&#x27; list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and he was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. Molitor was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1999.

On June 11, 1999, the Brewers retired Molitor&#x27;s uniform number 4. During the ceremony at Milwaukee County Stadium, Molitor announced that if he went into the Hall of Fame, he would do so as a Brewer. On January 6, 2004, he was elected to the Hall in his first year of eligibility, with 85.2% of the votes. True to his word, he joined Robin Yount as the only Hall of Famers to be depicted on their plaques with Brewers caps. At the time of his induction, Molitor was the hitting coach for the Seattle Mariners.

Molitor is one of five players in major league history with at least 3,000 hits, a .300 lifetime batting average, and 500 stolen bases. The other four are Ty Cobb, Honus Wagner, Eddie Collins and Ichiro Suzuki. Only Ichiro and Molitor played beyond 1930. Molitor is the only player ever to accomplish those feats and hit at least 200 home runs. Molitor is also the first player in World Series history to have at least two home runs, two doubles, and two triples in one series (1993). He is a member of an exclusive club, hitting .300 or better in full seasons across three decades (1970s, 80s, and 90s). He hit better than .300 a dozen times in his career. Including Game 1 of the 1982 World Series, he recorded eight 5-hit games and four 200+ hit seasons in his 21 year major league career. Molitor also compiled 56 4-hit games in his MLB career.

As of 2021, Molitor is the last Major League player to execute the rare feat of stealing home plate at least ten times over the course of a career.

==Personal life==
During the early years of his career, Molitor began using cocaine and marijuana. During the trial of a drug dealer in 1984, Molitor admitted that he had used drugs. Many years later, he said, &quot;There are things you&#x27;re not so proud of — failures, mistakes, dabbling in drugs, a young ballplayer in the party scene. Part of it was peer pressure. I was young and single, and hung around with the wrong people. ... You learn from it. You find a positive in it. It makes you appreciate the things that are good.&quot; He claims to have stopped using drugs in 1981, and has since visited schools to lecture about the dangers of drug use.

Molitor married Linda Kaplan in 1981, and had a daughter, Blaire. Before their 2003 divorce, it was revealed that he had fathered a son, Joshua, in an extramarital affair with Joanna Andreou, and was paying child support. During his legal separation from Linda, he fathered another child, daughter Julia, with the woman who would become his second wife, Destini. Molitor and Destini married in 2014, and went on to have another child, son Benjamin.

During his Hall of Fame induction speech, Molitor mentioned his difficult family relationships; the divorce from Linda caused such hard feelings that his ex-wife and their daughter almost did not attend his induction ceremony.

Molitor&#x27;s nephew is professional disc golfer Cale Leiviska.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball hit records
* List of Major League Baseball doubles records
* List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career triples leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders
* 3,000 hit club
* List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1972377" start="0" end="16" title="Paul Molitor" label="Paul Leo Molitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972377" start="57" end="62" title="Paul Molitor" label="Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972377" start="79" end="90" title="Paul Molitor" label="the Ignitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="133" end="141" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="199" end="220" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="246" end="263" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="277" end="294" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="312" end="327" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="407" end="420" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372040" start="446" end="479" title="World Series Most Valuable Player" label="World Series Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016370" start="516" end="545" title="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders" label="all-time MLB career hits list"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087003" start="624" end="639" title="Freddie Freeman" label="Freddie Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="814" end="818" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q784426" start="837" end="852" title="batting average" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="870" end="881" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="931" end="954" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="1051" end="1067" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866523" start="1086" end="1090" title="2004 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="1114" end="1135" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="1270" end="1287" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857867" start="1315" end="1353" title="Major League Baseball All-Century Team" label="Major League Baseball All-Century Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="1525" end="1546" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184735" start="1570" end="1588" title="Cretin High School" label="Cretin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881599" start="1631" end="1645" title="1974 Major League Baseball draft" label="1974 MLB draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="1651" end="1658" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="1666" end="1685" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="1729" end="1752" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="1796" end="1820" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers" label="Minnesota Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1837" end="1848" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="1862" end="1871" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="2064" end="2081" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424508" start="2160" end="2192" title="1977 Major League Baseball draft" label="1977 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999206" start="2272" end="2287" title="Burlington Bees" label="Burlington Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135495" start="2295" end="2309" title="Midwest League" label="Midwest League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="2363" end="2378" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="2386" end="2394" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="2400" end="2414" title="run batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="2428" end="2439" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="2518" end="2527" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="2543" end="2554" title="second base" label="second base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437143" start="2560" end="2571" title="Robin Yount" label="Robin Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059480" start="2746" end="2758" title="Center fielder" label="center field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149560" start="2763" end="2774" title="right field" label="right field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="2848" end="2858" title="third base" label="third base"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="2911" end="2928" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984672" start="2948" end="2965" title="1982 World Series" label="1982 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="2988" end="3007" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="3127" end="3130" title="hit (baseball)" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="3148" end="3163" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="3178" end="3182" title="run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="3342" end="3355" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q948562" start="3486" end="3504" title="Tommy John surgery" label="Tommy John surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511267" start="3941" end="3955" title="hitting streak" label="hitting streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431576" start="4238" end="4250" title="Rick Manning" label="Rick Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="4285" end="4302" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="4539" end="4548" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q892766" start="5439" end="5457" title="World Series Trophy" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372040" start="5536" end="5558" title="World Series MVP Award" label="World Series MVP Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062194" start="5634" end="5640" title="1993 World Series" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396983" start="5999" end="6015" title="Kevin McReynolds" label="Kevin McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="6241" end="6256" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q581390" start="6398" end="6404" title="Triple (baseball)" label="triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q955278" start="6473" end="6486" title="Kirby Puckett" label="Kirby Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="6524" end="6532" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="6540" end="6555" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470538" start="6656" end="6664" title="Sam Rice" label="Sam Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816426" start="7750" end="7759" title="Tom Kelly (baseball)" label="Tom Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q74126907" start="7862" end="7873" title="2001 Major League Baseball contraction plan" label="contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149052" start="8254" end="8265" title="2015 Minnesota Twins season" label="2015 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28044839" start="8347" end="8358" title="2017 Minnesota Twins season" label="2017 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q800048" start="8638" end="8673" title="Major League Baseball Manager of the Year Award" label="American League Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="8746" end="8758" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317158" start="8816" end="8830" title="Frank Robinson" label="Frank Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="8896" end="8913" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="9452" end="9460" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="9469" end="9483" title="run batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="9530" end="9541" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q868291" start="9620" end="9630" title="playoff" label="postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654577" start="9650" end="9658" title="all-star" label="all-star"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="9824" end="9841" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857867" start="9940" end="9978" title="Major League Baseball All-Century Team" label="Major League Baseball All-Century Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027114" start="10007" end="10038" title="Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame" label="Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314569" start="10143" end="10167" title="Milwaukee County Stadium" label="Milwaukee County Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866523" start="10335" end="10358" title="Baseball Hall of Fame balloting, 2004" label="with 85.2% of the votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437143" start="10388" end="10399" title="Robin Yount" label="Robin Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="10546" end="10562" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="10720" end="10727" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="10729" end="10741" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282739" start="10743" end="10756" title="Eddie Collins" label="Eddie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q600" start="10761" end="10774" title="Ichiro Suzuki" label="Ichiro Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="11640" end="11647" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="11652" end="11661" title="Marijuana (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="12983" end="13036" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q648100" start="13039" end="13080" title="List of Major League Baseball hit records" label="List of Major League Baseball hit records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577598" start="13083" end="13128" title="List of Major League Baseball doubles records" label="List of Major League Baseball doubles records"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016370" start="13131" end="13180" title="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244083" start="13183" end="13235" title="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589015" start="13238" end="13290" title="List of Major League Baseball career triples leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career triples leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="13293" end="13349" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244087" start="13352" end="13409" title="List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q861247" start="13412" end="13426" title="3,000 hit club" label="3,000 hit club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589008" start="13429" end="13487" title="List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle" label="List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589039" start="13490" end="13546" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577595" start="13549" end="13601" title="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589058" start="13604" end="13656" title="List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244087" start="13659" end="13716" title="List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37463" wikidata="Q3817811" url="?curid=37463" title="Miller's knot">
<text>A miller&#x27;s knot (also sack knot or bag knot) is a binding knot used to secure the opening of a sack or bag. Historically, large sacks often contained grains; thus the association of these knots with the miller&#x27;s trade. Several knots are known interchangeably by these three names.

Constrictor makes a fiercer binding knot, but Miller&#x27;s/Bag is suitable for most applications, and is easier to tie/untie. Miller&#x27;s/Bag makes a great hitch, like the similar Ground-Line. Binding usage has force emanating from inside rope ring evenly, hitch usage has force input from one side, then reducing around.

==Variations==
As noted above, several other distinct knots have historically been known as miller&#x27;s, sack, or bag knots; namely ABOK-1241, ABOK-1242, ABOK-1243 (Ground line hitch), ABOK-1674, ABOK-11 and their slipped versions. These fit the short description &quot;two crossing turns – ends tucked under&quot;.

The following 3 knots do not fit the simple &quot;two crossing turns – ends tucked under&quot; definition but are very secure:
* A slipped constrictor knot where the ends are passed through the opposing slips for security is quite secure as a bag knot. Unslipped, it is even more secure, but it may have to be cut at the bridge to open the bag.
* A slipped strangle knot where the ends are passed through the opposing slips for security is also quite secure as a bag knot. 
* A bottle sling around a swirled and folded neck of the bag (elbow of the neck) is also a very solid and reliable bag knot. The fold provides the slight bulge a bottle sling needs for a secure hold. The bag may be hanged fully loaded by the ends of the Bottle sling tied together.

==Tying==
The common aspects of the most common bag knots are two crossing turns, and both ends tucked under some turns near the crossing point. Two ends, and two turns one can tuck under, gives a limited number of alternatives. All of these knots can also be made in a slipped form by starting with a bight and/or by completing the final tuck with a bight instead of the end.

To avoid ambiguity, versions of these knots that are not slipped are pictured below with the reference numbers found in &quot;The Ashley Book of Knots&quot;.
This is to tie a Constrictor knot version of the miller&#x27;s knot:
# Grip the neck of the bag with the left hand,
# Fix / immobilize one end of the rope tucked upwards over the left hand long finger and under the index finger (option 1 : double folded as a bight to prepare a start-side-slip for the final knot)
# Make two crossing turns around the neck of the bag. Detailed steps:
## Cross over the hand downwards and take one turn around (front, then back) the neck of the bag at the sack side of the hand (under the hand)
## Cross over the hand upwards as well as over the immobilized other end,
## Take a second turn around the neck of the bag at the opening side of the hand (over the hand)
# Cross over the immobilized other end of the rope, then cross back tucking under the crossing point of step 3.2 (of the immobilized other end, and the part between the two turns), (option 2 : this last tuck with a bight instead of the end as an end-side-slip for the final knot).

To tie the other variants:
# If at the last step one chooses not to cross the immobilized other end and tuck only inwards under the part between the two turns, the knot will be an ABoK #11 or Clove hitch. 
# If at the last step one chooses to cross the immobilized other end and tuck only under the part between the two turns, the knot will be an ABoK #1242 (tuck inwards) 
# or a ground-line hitch (ABoK #1243 - tuck outwards) pictured. It should be tightened by pulling the end first. It is also called Spar hitch
# If at the last step one chooses to cross over the crossing point, and then tuck outwards under the first turn, the knot will be an ABoK #1241 pictured.
# If at the last step one chooses to cross over the crossing point, and then tuck inwards under the first turn, the knot will be an ABoK #1674 pictured. Shown in a slipped form at entry #1244, this variation is noted by Ashley as having better binding characteristics than the others.

Tying other knots that also may function very well as a bag knot but are slightly different from above descriptions:
# Strangle knot (two non crossing turns with one end crossing over both and tucked under both)
## Grip the neck of the bag with the left hand,
## Fix / immobilize one end of the rope tucked upwards over the left hand long and under the index finger (option 1 : double folded as a bight to prepare a start-side-slip for the final knot)
## Make two parallel turns around the neck of the bag. Detailed steps:
### Cross over the hand downwards and take one turn around (front, then back) the neck of the bag first at the sack side of the hand (under the hand), then over the hand and behind the immobilized other end.
### Take another turn crossing over the immobilized other end, crossing downwards over the hand around (front, then back) the neck of the bag parallel to the first turn 
## Cross over the immobilized other end of the rope, then cross back tucking under both turns, (option 2 : this last tuck with a bight instead of the end as an end-side-slip for the final knot). 
# Bottle sling (sides of a bight form one turn each, pleat between all 4 enter and exit points inside of two turns)
==See also==
*List of binding knots
*List of knots

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3817811" start="2" end="20" title="Miller&amp;#x27;s knot" label="miller&amp;#x27;s knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817811" start="27" end="36" title="Miller&amp;#x27;s knot" label="sack knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817811" start="40" end="48" title="Miller&amp;#x27;s knot" label="bag knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607558" start="55" end="67" title="binding knot" label="binding knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="155" end="161" title="Cereal" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q694116" start="208" end="221" title="Miller" label="miller&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="672" end="676" title="knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749239" start="1076" end="1092" title="constrictor knot" label="constrictor knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534897" start="1294" end="1307" title="strangle knot" label="strangle knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q893188" start="1415" end="1427" title="bottle sling" label="bottle sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q893188" start="1665" end="1677" title="Bottle sling" label="Bottle sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="2198" end="2222" title="The Ashley Book of Knots" label="The Ashley Book of Knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749239" start="2247" end="2263" title="Constrictor knot" label="Constrictor knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="2489" end="2494" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="3143" end="3148" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="3390" end="3394" title="ABoK" label="ABoK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="3402" end="3413" title="Clove hitch" label="Clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="3557" end="3561" title="ABoK" label="ABoK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362580" start="3591" end="3608" title="ground-line hitch" label="ground-line hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="3610" end="3614" title="ABoK" label="ABoK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3715" end="3725" title="Spar hitch" label="Spar hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="3859" end="3863" title="ABoK" label="ABoK"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="4012" end="4016" title="ABoK" label="ABoK"/>
<link wikidata="Q166721" start="4100" end="4106" title="Clifford Ashley" label="Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534897" start="4285" end="4298" title="Strangle knot" label="Strangle knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="4563" end="4568" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="5196" end="5201" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q893188" start="5265" end="5277" title="Bottle sling" label="Bottle sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607558" start="5393" end="5414" title="List of binding knots" label="List of binding knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854739" start="5416" end="5429" title="List of knots" label="List of knots"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37466" wikidata="Q1503006" url="?curid=37466" title="Butterfly loop">
<text>The butterfly loop, also known as lineman&#x27;s loop, butterfly knot, alpine butterfly knot and lineman&#x27;s rider, is a knot used to form a fixed loop in the middle of a rope. Tied in the bight, it can be made in a rope without access to either of the ends; this is a distinct advantage when working with long climbing ropes. The butterfly loop is an excellent mid-line rigging knot; it handles multi-directional loading well and has a symmetrical shape that makes it easy to inspect. In a climbing context it is also useful for traverse lines, some anchors, shortening rope slings, and for isolating damaged sections of rope.

==History==

The earliest known presentation of the knot was in A.A. Burger&#x27;s 1914 work &quot;Rope and Its Uses&quot;, included in an agricultural extension bulletin from what is now Iowa State University. Burger called the knot a lineman&#x27;s rider stating it was often used by &quot;linemen and especially telephone men&quot;. The knot&#x27;s security and ability to withstand tension in any direction are both discussed.

The knot&#x27;s association with mountaineering—and with butterflies—originates from a 1928 article in &quot;Alpine Journal&quot; by C.E.I. Wright and J.E. Magowan. The authors claim to have developed the butterfly noose themselves while attempting to improve the selection of knots available to climbers. The name is &quot;so styled on the basis of a more or less fanciful resemblance imagined in the form of the knot.&quot; In the second part of the article they express dissatisfaction regarding their earlier use of the word &quot;noose,&quot; since the knot is non-collapsing, and refer to the knot as butterfly loop or simply butterfly. Wright and Magowan call the butterfly loop &quot;new,&quot; along with several other of their knots, in the sense they were unable to identify any earlier record of them. However, they prudently added that it &quot;might be rash to claim they have never been used before.&quot;

Clifford Ashley presented the knot in 1944 (text &amp; image #1053), calling it the lineman&#x27;s loop; he attributed its first publication to J.M. Drew, but made no specific reference as to the source of this claim. A 1912 article called &quot;Some Knots and Splices&quot; by Drew appears in the bibliography of &quot;The Ashley Book of Knots&quot;. A 1913 reprint of this Drew article does not mention the butterfly loop. Nor does Drew&#x27;s 1942 book Ropework : Knots, Hitches, Splices, Halters --and presumably earlier edition 1936 (but which has 66pp vs. 58 for 1942?!)-- own book on knots present this knot. But in his contributed &quot;Chapter 12 Rope Work&quot;, pp.202 .. 252 to Lester Griswold&#x27;s Handicraft does present the knot. (Curiously, Ashley gives no hint that this book which he twice praises contains a full knots chapter written by Drew!)

==Use==
The loop is typically attached to a climbing harness by 2 carabiners together with gates to opposite sides from each other.

It can also be used to isolate a worn section of rope, where the knot is tied such that the worn section is isolated in the loop (which of course does not receive a carabiner nor bear any loads in this case). The loop portion is isolated when the other two legs are loaded, and in fact the butterfly can be tied as a bend with the ends emerging where the loop would be.

Errors in tying the butterfly loop can produce a similar looking but inferior knot, the so-called &quot;false butterfly&quot;, which is prone to slipping. However, some sources suggest this behavior can be exploited purposely for shock absorption. Wright and Magowan called this less secure loop knot the &quot;half-hitch noose&quot;.

==Advantages==
* Forms stable, secure loop after initial setting
* Allows for the knot to be loaded three ways; by each end of the main line and the loop
* Relatively easy to untie after loading (more difficult if wet)
* Size of loop can be adjusted more easily than with bulkier or more complex loop knots
* Easy to inspect
* Can easily be tied with gloves on
* Can easily be tied one-handed

==Disadvantages==
* Difficult to tie around a solid ring or similar object, as when a rethreaded figure eight is needed
* Improper tying can result in similar looking but inferior &quot;false butterfly&quot; knot
* Works best with softer ropes

==Variations==
The double butterfly loop has two non-collapsing loops, allowing for two clip in points, both of which have the same advantages and disadvantages of a single-loop butterfly.

==See also==
*List of knots

== Notes and references ==
==External links==
* Alpine Butterfly Knot
* Butterfly Loop animation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="4" end="18" title="Butterfly loop" label="butterfly loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="34" end="53" title="Butterfly loop" label="lineman&amp;#x27;s loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="55" end="69" title="Butterfly loop" label="butterfly knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="71" end="92" title="Butterfly loop" label="alpine butterfly knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="97" end="117" title="Butterfly loop" label="lineman&amp;#x27;s rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="124" end="128" title="knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624682" start="150" end="154" title="List of loop knots" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="174" end="178" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="185" end="197" title="in the bight" label="in the bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="314" end="322" title="climbing" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314410" start="533" end="541" title="Traverse (climbing)" label="traverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422055" start="554" end="561" title="Anchor (climbing)" label="anchors"/>
<link wikidata="Q200636" start="574" end="585" title="Sling (climbing equipment)" label="rope slings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693964" start="771" end="793" title="agricultural extension" label="agricultural extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="820" end="841" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q691225" start="924" end="931" title="Lineman (technician)" label="linemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="1097" end="1111" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="1121" end="1132" title="butterflies" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262672" start="1173" end="1187" title="Alpine Journal" label="Alpine Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166721" start="1986" end="2001" title="Clifford Warren Ashley" label="Clifford Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="2306" end="2330" title="The Ashley Book of Knots" label="The Ashley Book of Knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q588395" start="2919" end="2928" title="carabiner" label="carabiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854739" start="4536" end="4549" title="List of knots" label="List of knots"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37469" wikidata="Q1749239" url="?curid=37469" title="Constrictor knot">
<text>The constrictor knot is one of the most effective binding knots. Simple and secure, it is a harsh knot that can be difficult or impossible to untie once tightened. It is made similarly to a clove hitch but with one end passed under the other, forming an overhand knot under a riding turn. The double constrictor knot is an even more robust variation that features two riding turns.

==History==

First called &quot;constrictor knot&quot; in Clifford Ashley&#x27;s 1944 work &quot;The Ashley Book of Knots&quot;, this knot likely dates back much further. Although Ashley seemed to imply that he had invented the constrictor knot over 25 years before publishing &quot;The Ashley Book of Knots&quot;, research indicates that he was not its only originator, but his Book of Knots does seem to be the source of subsequent knowledge and awareness of the knot.

Although the description is not entirely without ambiguity, the constrictor knot is thought to have appeared under the name &quot;gunner&#x27;s knot&quot; in the 1866 work &quot;The Book of Knots&quot;, written under the pseudonym Tom Bowling. The knot is described in relation to the clove hitch, which he illustrated and called the &quot;builder&#x27;s knot&quot;. He wrote, &quot;The Gunner&#x27;s knot (of which we do not give a diagram) only differs from the builder&#x27;s knot, by the ends of the cords being simply knotted before being brought from under the loop which crosses them.&quot; But Bowling is simply an extraction and translation of the knotting work contained in the huge French &quot;, first published in 1841, which says &quot; When J. T. Burgess copied from Bowling, he changed this text to merely state &quot;when the ends are knotted, the builder&#x27;s knot becomes the gunner&#x27;s Knot.&quot; Although a clove hitch with knotted ends &quot;is&quot; a workable binding knot, Burgess was not actually describing the constrictor knot. In 1917, A. Hyatt Verrill illustrated Burgess&#x27;s clove hitch variation in &quot;Knots, Splices and Rope Work&quot;.

The constrictor knot was clearly described but not pictured as the &quot;&quot; (&quot;timber knot&quot;) in the 1916 (2nd) edition of the Swedish book &#x27; (&quot;On Knots&quot;) by Hjalmar Öhrvall. Finnish scout leader Martta Ropponen presented the knot in her 1931 scouting handbook &#x27; (&quot;Knot Book&quot;), one of the first published works known to contain an illustration of the constrictor knot. Cyrus L. Day relates that, &quot;she had never seen it in Finland, she wrote to me in 1954, but had learned about it from a Spaniard named Raphael Gaston, who called it &#x27;whip knot&#x27;, and told her it was used in the mountains of Spain by muleteers and herdsmen.&quot; The Finnish name &quot;&quot; (&quot;whip knot&quot;) was a translation from Esperanto, the language Ropponen used to correspond with Gaston. But even this explicit occurrence of the constrictor remains in doubt, as the name &quot;whip knot&quot; is not applied to the constrictor in other works, and otherwise is used for the strangle knot, tied in the ends of whip tails. Also in 1931 – and so of essentially same date as for Ropponen – James Drew presented the constrictor (as a strangle knot that can be tied in the bight) in Lester Griswold&#x27;s book, &quot;Handicraft&quot;; but Drew did not show it in his on book of knots later published. (As Drew knew Clifford Ashley, it is suspected that he might have learned the knot from him; Ashley does praise Handicraft in his Book of Knots.)

==Tying method==
The method shown below is the most basic way to tie the knot around a post (that is, using a working end).

#Make a turn around the object and bring the working end back over the standing part.
#Continue around behind the object.
#Pass the working end over the standing part and then under the riding turn and standing part, forming an overhand knot under a riding turn.
#Be sure the ends emerge between the two turns as shown. Pull firmly on the ends to tighten.

There are also at least three methods to tie the constrictor knot in the bight and slip it over the end of an object to be bound.

===Twisting method=== 
Using both hands when the end of the object to tie to is available:

If one or both of the ends are folded in between the two loops and lead in the opposite direction, the knot becomes slipped.

===Folding method=== 
Using one hand when the end of the object to tie to is available:

If the rope is to be stretched in tension, the grabbing at stage 2 may first tighten the top side rope, the bottom side rope may be pulled to tighten the knot itself, and the bottom rope side may be tightened by the knot at the next pole. If one or both of the ends are folded and led in the opposite direction before the last loop is folded over the objects end, the knot becomes slipped and therefore easier to untie: It also makes it possible to stretch either side rope tight by pulling at the slip loops.

==Variations==

===Double constrictor knot===
If a stronger and even more secure knot is required an extra riding turn can be added to the basic knot to form a double constrictor knot. It is particularly useful when tying the knot with very slippery twine, especially when waxed. Adding more than one extra riding turn does not add to its security and makes the knot more difficult to tighten evenly.


#Make a turn around the object and bring the working end back over the standing part.
#Make a second turn following the same path as the first
#Pass the working end over the standing part, then thread it back under the standing part and &quot;both&quot; riding turns, forming an overhand knot under two riding turns.
#Be sure the ends emerge between the turns as shown. The double constrictor may require more careful dressing to distribute the tension throughout the knot. After working up fairly tight, pull firmly on the ends to finish.

===Slipped constrictor knot===
This variation is useful if it is known beforehand that the constrictor will need to be released. Depending on the knotting material and how tightly it is cinched, the slipped form can still be very difficult to release.

#Make a turn around the object and bring the working end back over the standing part.
#Continue around behind the object, and then again over the standing part back to the side of the first turn.
#Pass a bight of the working end under the point where the first riding pass and the standing part cross to form a slip loop.
#Be sure the slip loop bight and both ends emerge from in between the two turns as shown.
#To release, tug on the working end so that the bight passes back through the knot.

The slipped constrictor can also be tied in the bight and slipped over the object to constrict. Despite its advertised advantage (quick release), the slipped constrictor knot can also be hard to release when worked extremely tight in certain rope materials.

===Cross constrictor knot===
This variation is similar to the double constrictor knot but has the two riding turns crossing each other rather than riding along. It is unclear whether it is more secure than the double constrictor, and has the unhelpful aspect of being thicker at the bridge of the knot, with three rope diameters. 

There are two types depending on which direction the two riding turns cross. When the bottom riding turn is along the grove of the ends wrapping around each other on their way out, it gives a slightly lower knot height and may be seen as a strangle knot with an extra riding turn across.

==Usage==
The constrictor knot is appropriate for situations where secure temporary or semi-permanent binding is needed. Made with small-stuff it is especially effective, as the binding force is concentrated over a smaller area. When tying over soft material such as the neck of a bag, take care to keep the wraps of the knot together. The constrictor knot can damage or disfigure items it is tied around. To exert extreme tension on the knot without injuring the hands, one can fashion handles using marlinespike hitches made around two rods.

Constrictor knots can be used for temporarily binding the fibres of a rope (or strand ends) together while splicing, or when cutting to length and before properly whipping the ends. Constrictor knots can also be quite effective as improvised hose clamps or cable ties. The knot has also been recommended as a surgical knot for ligatures in human and veterinary surgery, where it has been shown to be far superior to any of the knots commonly used for ligation. Noted master-rigger Brion Toss says of the constrictor: &quot;To know the knot is to constantly find uses for it...&quot;

For spearguns, the constrictor knot is the usual knot used to secure modern, toggled, Dyneema, cord wishbones into the hollow, bulk-rubber loops, which are used to power the spear. Usually tied with braid, Kevlar or Dyneema cord of approximately 1.4-2mm diameter.

==Releasing==

A heavily tightened constrictor knot will likely jam. If the ends are long enough, one can sometimes untie it by pulling one end generally parallel to the bound object and a bit up away from it, and prying it into the opposite end&#x27;s part to open the knot. Tools that can be forced between parts of the knot (such as picks and marlinespikes) may help.

If the ends have been trimmed short, or the knot is otherwise hopelessly jammed, it can be easily released by cutting the riding turn with a sharp knife. The knot will spring apart as soon as the riding turn is cut. If care is taken not to cut too deeply, the underlying wraps will protect the bound object from being damaged by the knife.

==Security==

The constrictor and double constrictor are both extremely secure when tied tightly around objects with cord scaled for the task at hand. If binding around a not fully convex, or square-edged object, arrange the knot so the overhand knot portion is stretched across a convex portion, or a corner, with the riding turn directly atop it. In situations where the object leaves gaps under the knot and there are no corners, it is possible to finish the constrictor knot off with an additional overhand knot, in the fashion of a reef knot, to help stabilize it. Those recommendations aside, constrictor knots do function best on fully convex objects.

If the constricted object (such as a temporarily whipped rope) ends very close to where a constrictor binds it, a boa knot may prove a more stable solution.

==Notes==
==External links==
*Constrictor Knot animated and illustrated


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1749239" start="4" end="20" title="Constrictor knot" label="constrictor knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607558" start="50" end="63" title="Binding (knot)" label="binding knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="98" end="102" title="knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="190" end="201" title="clove hitch" label="clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q332491" start="254" end="267" title="overhand knot" label="overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631207" start="276" end="287" title="riding turn" label="riding turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749239" start="293" end="316" title="Constrictor knot" label="double constrictor knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q166721" start="441" end="456" title="Clifford Ashley" label="Clifford Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="480" end="504" title="The Ashley Book of Knots" label="The Ashley Book of Knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="1140" end="1151" title="clove hitch" label="clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960928" start="1926" end="1942" title="Alpheus Hyatt Verrill" label="A. Hyatt Verrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="2308" end="2316" title="scouting" label="scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2729" end="2736" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="2802" end="2811" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3238" end="3250" title="Bight (knot)#In the bight" label="in the bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="4069" end="4081" title="in the bight" label="in the bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q833167" start="6353" end="6358" title="Bight (knot)" label="bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534897" start="7477" end="7490" title="strangle knot" label="strangle knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624682" start="7657" end="7668" title="small-stuff" label="small-stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365906" start="8027" end="8045" title="marlinespike hitch" label="marlinespike hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515065" start="8178" end="8186" title="Rope splicing" label="splicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930493" start="8234" end="8242" title="whipping knot" label="whipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758340" start="8313" end="8323" title="hose clamp" label="hose clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500589" start="8328" end="8337" title="cable tie" label="cable tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164498" start="8380" end="8393" title="surgical knot" label="surgical knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q942890" start="8545" end="8551" title="rigging" label="rigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013008" start="9266" end="9278" title="marlinespike" label="marlinespike"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="9439" end="9444" title="knife" label="knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q332491" start="10135" end="10148" title="overhand knot" label="overhand knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q378077" start="10170" end="10179" title="reef knot" label="reef knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524727" start="10407" end="10415" title="boa knot" label="boa knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37472" wikidata="Q25804" url="?curid=37472" title="Trondheim">
<text>Trondheim ( , , ; ), historically Kaupangen, [[Nidaros]], and Trondhjem (), is a city and municipality in Trøndelag county, Norway. As of 2022, it had a population of 212,660. Trondheim is the third most populous municipality in Norway, and is the fourth largest urban area. Trondheim lies on the south shore of Trondheim Fjord at the mouth of the River Nidelva. Among the significant technology-oriented institutions headquartered in Trondheim are the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), the Foundation for Scientific and Industrial Research (SINTEF), the Geological Survey of Norway (NGU), and St. Olavs University Hospital.

The settlement was founded in 997 as a trading post and served as the capital of Norway from the Viking Age until 1217. From 1152 to 1537, the city was the seat of the Catholic Archdiocese of Nidaros; it then became, and has remained, the seat of the Lutheran Diocese of Nidaros and the site of the Nidaros Cathedral. It was incorporated in 1838. The current municipality was formed in 1964, when Trondheim merged with Byneset Municipality, Leinstrand Municipality, Strinda Municipality, and Tiller Municipality, and further expanded on 1 January 2020, when Trondheim merged with Klæbu Municipality.

Trondheim has a mild climate for its northerly latitude, resulting in moderate summers and winters that often remain above the freezing point in seaside areas. At higher elevations, though, the microclimate is colder and snowier.

The city functions as the seat of the County Mayor of Trøndelag county but not as its administrative centre (which is Steinkjer). This is designed to avoid making the county administration too centralized.

Trondheim is home to football club Rosenborg, Norway&#x27;s most successful football club, and Granåsen Ski Centre, which has hosted the World Championship in Nordic Skiing.

==Names and etymology==
The city was established in 997 by Olav Tryggvason and it was originally named (). The first element of the name was the local river Nid. The last element of the name was which meant &quot;the mouth of a river&quot;. Thus the name meant &quot;the outlet of the river Nid&quot;. Although the formal name was Nidaros, the city was commonly known as , which means &quot;city&quot; or &quot;marketplace&quot;, or more specifically which means &quot;the city in Trondheim&quot;. Trondheim () was the historic name for the whole district which is now known as Trøndelag. This is the area where the people were known as Trønder (). This district name Trondheim meant &quot;the home of the Trønder people&quot; (literally &quot;Trønder-home&quot;) and Trøndelag () originally meant the &quot;law area of the Trønder people&quot; (literally &quot;Trønder-law&quot;). The name of the Trønder people derives from the Old Norse word which is an old present participle of the verb which means &quot;to grow&quot; or &quot;to thrive&quot;.

During the late Middle Ages, the city name was commonly shortened to &quot;&quot;, dropping the &quot;kaupanger&quot; part, and over time the name became , using the Dano-Norwegian spelling rather than the Old Norse spelling since the city was part of the Kingdom of Denmark-Norway for centuries.

On 21 December 1917, a royal resolution enacted the 1917 Norwegian language reforms. Around the time, many municipalities and cities had their names changed to &quot;Norwegianize&quot; the spelling and make them look less Danish. On 1 January 1919, the name of the local Church of Norway diocese was changed from &#x27; to &#x27; (). In 1924, the name of the Norwegian capital city was changed from to Oslo, removing the name referencing a Danish King in favor of the very old name Oslo. In 1928, a referendum in Trondhjem was held on whether to keep the current name or to bring back the original name of &quot;Nidaros&quot;. The vote resulted in 17,163 votes in favour of and only 1,508 votes in favour of Nidaros. Despite this result, the Storting voted in 1929 to make some changes. The Trondhjem Cathedral would be changed to Nidaros Cathedral effective on 1 July 1929 and the name of the city would change to &quot;Nidaros&quot; starting on 1 January 1930. This change caused public outrage and even riots during 1930. This forced the Storting to reconsider this change. On 6 March 1931, the name was formally changed to &quot;Trondheim&quot;, using the medieval Norwegian spelling instead of the Danish version &quot;Trondhjem&quot;. The name of the diocese and cathedral, however, continued using the name Nidaros.

Trondheim was briefly named &quot;&quot; during the Second World War as a German exonym.

== History ==

Trondheim was named Kaupangen () by Viking King Olav Tryggvason in 997 CE. Shortly after that, it came to be called &quot;Nidaros&quot;. Initially, it was frequently used as a military retainer (Old Norse: &quot;hird&quot;-man) of King Olav I. It was also frequently used as the king&#x27;s seat and was Norway&#x27;s capital until 1217.

People have lived in the region for thousands of years, as evidenced by the rock carvings in central Norway, the Nøstvet and Lihult cultures, and the Corded Ware culture. In ancient times, the kings of Norway were hailed in Trondheim at Øretinget, the place for the assembly of all free men by the mouth of the River Nidelva. Harald Fairhair (865–933) was hailed as the king here, as was his son, Haakon I, called &#x27;the Good.&#x27; The battle of &quot;Kalvskinnet&quot; took place in Trondheim in 1179: King Sverre Sigurdsson and his &quot;Birkebeiner&quot; warriors were victorious against Erling Skakke (a rival to the throne). Some scholars believe that the famous Lewis chessmen, 12th-century chess pieces carved from walrus ivory that were found in the Hebrides and are now at the British Museum, may have been made in Trondheim.

From 1152, Trondheim was the seat of the Archbishop of Nidaros for Norway, which operated from the Archbishop&#x27;s Palace. Due to the introduction of Lutheran Protestantism in 1537, the last archbishop, Olav Engelbrektsson, had to flee from the city to the Netherlands; he died in what today is Lier, Belgium.

From the 16th through the 19th centuries, the city was repeatedly ravaged by fires that caused widespread damage since many of its buildings were made of wood. The worst occurred in 1598, 1651, 1681, 1708, 1717 (twice), 1742, 1788, 1841 and 1842. The 1651 fire destroyed 90% of all buildings within the city limits. After the &quot;Horneman Fire&quot; in 1681, there was an almost total reconstruction of the city, overseen by General Johan Caspar von Cicignon, originally from Luxembourg. Broad avenues, such as Munkegata, were created, without regard for private property rights, to limit the damage from future fires. At the time, the city had a population of under 10,000 inhabitants, with most living in the downtown area.

After the Treaty of Roskilde on 26 February 1658, Trondheim and the rest of Trøndelag became Swedish territory briefly. However, after a three-month long siege, the area was reconquered 10 months later. The conflict was finally settled by the Treaty of Copenhagen on 27 May 1660.
During the Second World War, Trondheim was occupied by Nazi Germany from 9 April 1940, the first day of the invasion of Norway, until the end of the war in Europe, 8 May 1945. The German invasion force consisted of the German cruiser Admiral Hipper, 4 destroyers and 1700 Austrian Mountain troops. Except for a coastal battery that opened fire, there was no resistance to the invasion, which began on 9 April at 5 AM. On 14 and 17 April, British and French forces landed near Trondheim in a failed attempt to liberate Trondheim, as part of the Namsos Campaign. During the occupation, Trondheim was the home of the notorious Norwegian Gestapo agent, Henry Rinnan, who operated from a nearby villa and infiltrated Norwegian resistance groups. The city and its citizens were subjected to harsh treatment by the occupying power, including the imposition of martial law in October 1942. During this time, the Germans turned the city and its environs into a major base for submarines (which included building the large submarine base and bunker DORA I), and contemplated a scheme to build a new city for 300,000 inhabitants, &quot;Nordstern&quot; (&quot;Northern Star&quot;), centred southwest of Trondheim, near the wetlands of Øysand on the outskirts of Melhus municipality. This new metropolis was to be accompanied by a massively expanded version of the already existing naval base, which was intended to become the future primary stronghold of the German Kriegsmarine. A start was made on this enormous construction project, but it was far from completed when the war ended, and today, there are few physical remains of it.

===Municipal history===
The city of Trondheim was established on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). On 1 January 1864, part of Strinda Municipality (population: 1,229) was amalgamated with Trondheim. Then, on 1 January 1893, another part of Strinda Municipality (population: 4,097) was transferred to Trondheim Municipality. On 1 January 1952, the Lade area of Strinda Municipality (population: 2,230) was transferred to Trondheim Municipality. On 1 January 1964, a major municipal merger took place: Leinstrand Municipality (population: 4,193), Byneset Municipality (population: 2,049), Strinda Municipality (population: 44,600), and Tiller Municipality (population: 3,595) were all merged with the city of Trondheim (population: 56,982), which nearly doubled the population of the municipality. On 1 January 2020, the neighboring Klæbu Municipality (population: 6,050) was merged with Trondheim Municipality.

===Coat of arms and seal===

The coat of arms dates back to the 13th century. To the left, there is an archbishop with his staff and mitre in a church archway. On the right, a crowned king holding scales in a castle archway. These two pictures rest on a base which forms an arch. Underneath that arch, are three male heads which symbolise the city&#x27;s rank as Norway&#x27;s first capital and the archbishop&#x27;s place of residence. The scales symbolise justice and the motif is based on the political philosophy of the 13th century, where the balance of power between king and church was an important issue. The three heads at the bottom may symbolise the city council. The motif is unique in Norwegian municipal heraldry, but similar motifs are found in bishopric cities on the continent. The design of the coat-of-arms that was adopted in 1897, and is still used today, was made by Håkon Thorsen.

== Geography ==

Trondheim is situated where the River Nidelva meets Trondheim Fjord with an excellent harbour and sheltered condition. In the Middle Ages the river was deep enough to be navigable by most boats. However, in the mid–17th century, an avalanche of mud and stones made it less navigable, and partly ruined the harbour. The municipality&#x27;s highest elevation is the Storheia hill, above sea level. At the summer solstice, the sun rises at 03:00 and sets at 23:40, and then stays just below the horizon. Between 23 May and 19 July, when the sky is cloud-free, it remains light enough at night that no artificial lighting is needed outdoors. At the winter solstice, the sun rises at 10:01, stays very low above the horizon (at midday its altitude is slightly more than 3 degrees over the horizon), and sets at 14:31.

=== Climate ===

Trondheim city has an oceanic climate (Cfb) or humid continental climate (Dfb), depending on the winter threshold used (−3 °C or 0 °C). The part of the municipality further away from the fjord has slightly colder winters, while the part close to the fjord has the mildest winters. Trondheim is mostly sheltered from the strong south and southwesterly winds which can occur along the outer seaboard but is more exposed to northwesterly winds. As with the rest of Norway, the weather is dependent on the weather pattern. High pressure over Central Norway or to the east gives sunny weather which can last for weeks. Conversely, Atlantic Lows can also dominate for weeks, and both patterns can happen all year. In 2020 May saw northwesterlies with cold air from northwest lasting weeks and even bringing snowfall, while June 2020 recorded 345 sun hours and new record high , Norway&#x27;s warmest high in 2020. The sunniest month on record is May 2024 with 366 sunhours. 
Trondheim experiences moderate snowfall from November to March, but mixed with mild weather and rainfall. There are on average 14 days each winter with at least of snow cover on the ground and 22 days with a daily minimum temperature of or less (1971–2000, airport). There is often more snow and later snowmelt in suburban areas at a higher elevation, with good skiing conditions in Bymarka. All the monthly record lows are from 1955 or older, with half of them from before 1920. The last overnight frost in June was in 1958. The all-time low was recorded February 1899. The all-time high was recorded 22 July 1901. The warmest month on record is July 2014 with mean and average daily high (airport). The coldest month on record is February 1966 with mean and average daily low (airport). The average date for the last overnight freeze (low below ) in spring is 1 May and average date for first freeze in autumn is 9 October giving a frost-free season of 160 days (Trondheim Airport Værnes 1981-2010 average). 
The earliest weather stations were located closer to the city centre, from 1945 onwards the weather station has been located at a higher elevation (Voll, 127 m and Tyholt, 113 m), therefore being slightly colder.
A new sunrecorder was established in the city by met.no at Gløshaugen (NTNU campus) December 2015, recording more sunhours than the earlier sunrecorder, which had terrain blocking issues. There are on average 229 sunhours in July (based 2016–2020). Trondheim recorded 197 sunhours in October 2016 beating the previous national record for October. In April 2019, Trondheim recorded 308 sunhours, setting a new national record for April. In contrast, December 2016 only recorded 10 sunhours.



===Fauna===
The city has various wetland habitats. among which there is the &quot;Gaulosen.&quot; The observation tower accommodates for birdwatching and providing information about birdlife.

Though Trondheim is Norway&#x27;s third largest city, wild animals are regularly seen. Otters and beavers thrive in Nidelva and Bymarka. Badgers and red foxes are not uncommon sights. Moose and deer are common in the hills surrounding the city, and might wander into the city, especially in May when the one-year-olds are chased away by their mothers, or in late winter when food grows scarce in the snow-covered higher regions. From 2002 until 2017, a wolverine lived in Bymarka.

== Cityscape and sites ==

Most of Trondheim city centre is scattered with small speciality shops. However, the main shopping area is concentrated around the pedestrianised streets &quot;Nordre gate&quot; (), &quot;Olav Tryggvasons gate&quot; and &quot;Thomas Angells gate&quot; even though the rest of the city centre is provided with everything from old, well-established companies to new, hip and trendy shops.


In the mid-to-late 1990s, the area surrounding the old drydock and ship construction buildings of the defunct Trondhjems mekaniske Værksted shipbuilding company at the Nedre Elvehavn was renovated and old industrial buildings were torn down to make way for condominiums. A shopping centre was also built, known as Solsiden (The Sunny Side). This is a popular residential and shopping area, especially for young people.

DORA 1 is a German submarine base that housed the 13th U-boat Flotilla during the Second World War occupation of Norway. Today the bunker houses various archives, among them the city archives, the university and state archives. More recently, DORA has been used as a concert venue.

Kristiansten Fortress, built 1681–1684, is located on a hill east of Trondheim. It repelled the invading Swedes in 1718, but was decommissioned in 1816 by Crown Prince Regent Charles John.

A statue of Olav Tryggvason, the founder of Trondheim, is located in the city&#x27;s central square, mounted on top of an obelisk. The statue base is also a sun dial, but it is calibrated to UTC+1 so that the reading is inaccurate by one hour in the summer.

The islet Munkholmen is a popular tourist attraction and recreation site. The islet has served as a place of execution, a monastery, a fortress, prison, and a Second World War anti-aircraft gun station.

Stiftsgården is the royal residence in Trondheim, originally constructed in 1774 by Cecilie Christine Schøller. At 140 rooms constituting , it is possibly the largest wooden building in Northern Europe and has been used by royals and their guests since 1800.

A statue of Leif Ericson is located at the seaside, close to the old Customs Building, the cruise ship facilities and the new swimming hall. The statue is a replica, the original being located at a Seattle marina.

=== Nidaros Cathedral ===
The Nidaros Cathedral and the Archbishop&#x27;s Palace are located side by side in the middle of the city centre. The cathedral, built from 1070 on, is the most important Gothic monument in Norway and was Northern Europe&#x27;s most important Christian pilgrimage site during the Middle Ages, with pilgrimage routes leading to it from Oslo in southern Norway and from the Jämtland and Värmland regions of Sweden. Today, it is the northernmost medieval cathedral in the world, and the second-largest in Scandinavia.

During the Middle Ages, and again after independence was restored in 1814, the Nidaros Cathedral was the coronation church of the Norwegian kings. King Haakon VII was the last monarch to be crowned there, in 1906. Starting with King Olav V in 1957, coronation was replaced by consecration. In 1991, the present King Harald V and Queen Sonja were consecrated in the cathedral. On 24 May 2002, their daughter Princess Märtha Louise married the writer Ari Behn in the cathedral.

The Pilgrim&#x27;s Route (&quot;Pilegrimsleden&quot;) to the site of Saint Olufs&#x27;s tomb at Nidaros Cathedral, has recently been re-instated. Also known as St. Olav&#x27;s Way, (&quot;Sankt Olavs vei&quot;), the main route, which is approximately long, starts in Oslo and heads North, along Lake Mjøsa, up the valley Gudbrandsdalen, over the mountain range Dovrefjell and down the Oppdal valley to end at Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim. There is a Pilgrim&#x27;s Office in Oslo which gives advice to pilgrims and a Pilgrim Centre in Trondheim, under the aegis of the cathedral, which awards certificates to successful pilgrims upon the completion of their journey.

=== Other churches ===
The Lutheran Church of Norway has 21 churches within the municipality of Trondheim. They are all a part of the Diocese of Nidaros, which is based in Trondheim at the Nidaros Cathedral. Many of the churches are several hundred years old, with a couple which were built almost 1,000 years ago.

The Roman Catholic Sankt Olav domkirke is the cathedral episcopal see of the exempt Territorial Prelature of Trondheim. Being located across the street from the Nidaros Cathedral, the two of them form an unofficial religious quarter along with a synagogue, a Baptist church, a Salvation Army office, and the 8-auditorium cinema &quot;Prinsen kinosenter&quot;.

=== Museums ===
Sverresborg, also named Zion after King David&#x27;s castle in Jerusalem, was a fortification built by Sverre Sigurdsson. It is now an open-air museum, consisting of more than 60 buildings. The castle was originally built in 1182–1183, but did not last for long as it was burned down in 1188. However, the Sverresaga indicates it had been restored by 1197.

The Trondheim Science Center () is a scientific hands-on experience center. The NTNU University Museum (Norwegian: NTNU Vitenskapsmuseet) is part of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. There are also a variety of small history, science and natural history museums, such as the Trondheim Maritime Museum, the &quot;Armoury&quot;, adjacent to the Archbishops&#x27;s Palace, Kristiansten Fortress, the music and musical instrument museum Ringve National Museum, Ringve Botanical Garden, the Trondheim Tramway Museum, and the Jewish Museum, co-located with the city&#x27;s synagogue, which is among the northernmost in the world.

Rockheim (, The National Discovery Center for Pop and Rock) opened at the Pier in August 2010. It is located inside an old warehouse, but characterised by an easily recognisable roof in the shape of a box. &quot;The box&quot; is decorated by thousands of tiny lights that change in a variety of colours and patterns, and is a landmark in the cityscape – especially on dark winter evenings.

=== Prison ===
Vollan District Jail (Norwegian: &quot;Vollan kretsfengsel&quot;) was a jail during the nazi occupation of Norway and was used to imprison both prisoners of war and criminals. Vollan was not considered a concentration camp. In a summary of prisoners of war in Norway, numerous prisoners were registered at Vollan. One of its roles was as a transit camp for political prisoners. Many prisoners were taken from Vollan to Kristiansten Fortress and shot. The prisoners at Vollan were interrogated at the Mission Hotel in Trondheim. Some were also interrogated by Henry Rinnan and his gang. It was closed in 1971 after the opening of Trondheim Prison at Tunga.

Trondheim Prison (Norwegian: &quot;Trondheim fengsel&quot;) is a prison that belongs to the Northern Region of the Norwegian Correctional Services. The prison can house 184 inmates.

It consists of four main departments: 
*Nermarka (&quot;Tunga&quot;) – closed department
*Detention department (no: &quot;Forvaringsavdelingen&quot;) at Nermarka
*Leira – open division. Through joint positive activities, the individual inmate on certain conditions teaches to be responsible with other people.
*division Kongens gt. – halfway house, located in downtown Trondheim.
===Wider urban area===
Trondheim forms the centre of the Trondheim Region, and is a common commuting point for work, shopping, and healthcare. Although the official list of metropolitan regions of Norway defines the region very broadly, the area of two-way commuting where Trondheim residents too would head outwards for transport, shopping, and upper secondary schools, consists roughly of Trondheim, Malvik, downtown Stjørdal (incl. Værnes), downtown Melhus, Skaun, and the lower sections of Vanvikan in Indre Fosen.

==Government==
Trondheim Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Trøndelag District Court and the Frostating Court of Appeal.

On 1 January 2005, the city was reorganized from five boroughs into four, with each of these having separate social services offices. The current boroughs are Midtbyen (44,967 inhabitants), Østbyen (42,707 inhabitants), Lerkendal (46,603 inhabitants) and Heimdal (30,744) inhabitants. The Population statistics listed are as of 1 January 2008. Prior to 2005, Trondheim was divided into the boroughs &quot;Sentrum&quot;, &quot;Strinda&quot;, &quot;Nardo&quot;, &quot;Byåsen&quot; and &quot;Heimdal&quot;.

===Municipal council===
The city council of Trondheim is made up of 67 representatives that are elected to four year terms. Prior to 2011, there were 85 city council members, but this number was reduced to 67 in 2011. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.











== Education and research ==

:&quot;See also the list of primary schools in Trondheim&quot;.

Trondheim is home to both the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) with its many technical lab facilities and disciplines, and BI-Trondheim, a satellite campus for the Norwegian Business School (BI). Both universities welcome a number of international students on a yearly basis and offer various scholarships.

St. Olav&#x27;s University Hospital, a regional hospital for Central Norway, is located in downtown Trondheim. St. Olav&#x27;s is a teaching hospital and cooperates closely with the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) on both research and medical education.

SINTEF, a large independent research organisation in Scandinavia, has 1,800 employees with 1,300 of these located in Trondheim. The Air Force Academy of the Royal Norwegian Air Force is located at Kuhaugen in Trondheim.

The Geological Survey of Norway is located at Lade in Trondheim and is a major geoscientific institution with 220 employees of which 70% are scientists.

There are 11 high schools in the city. Trondheim katedralskole (&quot;Trondheim Cathedral School&quot;) was founded in 1152 and is the oldest upper secondary school (gymnasium) in Norway, while Charlottenlund videregående skole is the largest in Sør-Trøndelag with its 1,100 students and 275 employees. Brundalen Skole, has big festivals each year, and is building out to increase space.

Ila skole was founded in 1770 and is the oldest primary school in Trondheim.

== Media ==
Adresseavisen is the largest regional newspaper and the oldest active newspaper in Norway, having been established in 1767. The two headquarters of the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) are located at Tyholt in Trondheim, and in Oslo. On 31 December 2019 the fully digital and local newspaper Nidaros was launched as a competitor to Adresseavisen. The student press of Trondheim features three types of media. Under Dusken is the student paper, Radio Revolt is the student radio, and Student-TV broadcasts videos online.

Radio stations established in Trondheim include Trøndelag-focused opt-out feeds of NRK P1 and NRK P1+, local versions of NRK Trafikk and P5 Hits, Radio Trondheim, and Radio 247. Along with Norway&#x27;s national radio stations, they can be listened to on DAB+ across most of Trøndelag, as well as on internet radio.

== Culture ==
===Visual arts===
The Trondheim Art Museum has Norway&#x27;s third largest public art collection, mainly Norwegian art from the last 150 years.

The boasts a large collection of decorative arts and design, including a great number of tapestries from the Norwegian tapestry artist Hannah Ryggen, as well as Norway&#x27;s only permanent exhibibition of Japanese arts and crafts.

Trøndelag senter for samtidskunst (, TSSK) was established in 1976.

There are two artist-run spaces, , that was founded by students of the Trondheim Academy of Fine Art in 2002, and Babel, that was founded by Lademoen Kunstnerverksteder (, LKV) in 2006.

Kunsthall Trondheim was inaugurated at its permanent premises on Kongens gate in October 2016.

The , dedicated to modern and contemporary art, opened on Dronningens gate in February 2025.

===Stage===
The main regional theatre, Trøndelag Teater, is situated in Trondheim. Built in 1816, the theatre is the oldest theatre still in use in Scandinavia. The city also features an alternative theatre house Teaterhuset Avant Garden, and the theatre company Teater Fusentast.

===Music===

Trondheim has a broad music scene, and is known for its strong communities committed to rock, jazz and classical music. The city&#x27;s interest in Jazz and classical music are spearheaded by the music conservatory at NTNU which has been called one of the most innovative in the world, and the municipal music school, &quot;Trondheim Kommunale Musikk- og Kulturskole&quot;. The Trondheim Symphony Orchestra and the Trondheim Soloists are well-known. The city hosts a yearly Jazz festival, and is home to Trondheim Jazz Orchestra. The Fjordgata Records label is also hosted in Trondheim.

Classical artists hailing from Trondheim include violinist Arve Tellefsen, Elise Båtnes and Marianne Thorsen. Also the Nidaros Cathedral Boys&#x27; Choir.

Thomas Bergersen, a Norwegian self-taught composer, multi-instrumentalist, and the co-founder of the production music company Two Steps From Hell, was born in Trondheim.

Pop/rock artists and bands associated with Trondheim include Åge Aleksandersen, Margaret Berger, DumDum Boys, Lasse Marhaug, Gåte, Keep Of Kalessin, Lumsk, Motorpsycho, Kari Rueslåtten, the 3rd and the Mortal, TNT, Tre Små Kinesere, the Kids, Bokassa, Casino Steel (of the Boys), Atrox, Bloodthorn, Manes, child prodigy Malin Reitan and Aleksander With. The most popular punk scene is UFFA.

Georg Kajanus, creator of the bands Eclection, Sailor and DATA, was born in Trondheim. The music production team Stargate started out in Trondheim.

Trondheim is also home to Rockheim, the national museum of popular music, which is responsible for collecting, preserving and sharing Norwegian popular music from the 1950s to the present day.

===Film===
Trondheim features a lively film scene, including three filmfests: Minimalen Short Film Fest and Kosmorama International Film Fest in March, and Trondheim Documentarfestival in November. Trondheim has two cinemas in the center of the city, Prinsen Kino and Nova kino Prinsen Kinosenter, Nova Kinosenter

===Student culture===

With students comprising almost a fifth of the population, the city of Trondheim is heavily influenced by student culture. Most noticeable is Studentersamfundet i Trondhjem, the city&#x27;s student society. Its characteristic round, red building from 1929 sits at the head of the bridge crossing the river southwards from the city centre. As the largest university in Norway, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) is the host of some 36,000 students.

Student culture in Trondheim is characterised by a long-standing tradition of volunteer work. The student society is for example run by more than 1,200 volunteers. NTNUI, Norway&#x27;s largest sports club, is among the other volunteer organisations that dominate student culture in Trondheim. Students in Trondheim are also behind two major Norwegian culture festivals, UKA and The International Student Festival in Trondheim (ISFiT). NTNU lists over 200 student organisations with registered web pages on its servers alone.

===In popular culture===
Trondheim culture is parodied on the Monty Python album &quot;Another Monty Python Record&quot; in the form of the fictitious Trondheim Hammer Dance.

Trondheim is also a key location in the &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun&quot; universe, as it is a critical battleground for both factions.

Trondheim was the name of a planet in the Hundred Worlds of the &quot;Ender&#x27;s Game&quot; novel series.

Trondheim likely serves as an inspiration for the fictional city Tronjheim in The Inheritance Cycle.

==Sports and recreation==
Granåsen Ski Centre, a Nordic skiing venue located in Byåsen, regularly hosts World Cup competitions in ski jumping, biathlon and cross-country skiing, as well as the 1997 FIS Nordic World Ski Championships. Trondheim attempted but failed to become the Norwegian candidate for the 2018 Winter Olympics. Hiking and recreational skiing is available around the city, particularly in Bymarka, which can be reached by the tramway. Trondheim Golfklubb, one of the oldest golf clubs in Norway, has a nine-hole golf course in Byåsen. Byneset Golfklubb has a full 18 hole par 72 course, which has hosted the Norwegian Challenge of the Challenge Tour in 2012, as well as a short and easy 9 hole course, located at Spongdal. Klæbu Golfklubb in Klæbu has another 9 hole course, albeit with artificial greens. There&#x27;s also a public (no golf experience of course required) 9 hole par 3 course with a nice view overlooking the city centre at Byåsen.

Rosenborg BK is the city&#x27;s only top flight football club. They play their home matches at Lerkendal Stadion. They have won the Norwegian Premier League 26 times between 1967 and 2018, have reached the UEFA Champions League group stage 12 times, and made it to the last 8 on one occasion. Ranheim Fotball was promoted from the Norwegian First Division to join Eliteserien in 2018. They finished seventh in their first season in the top flight, but fished last the following season and was relegated. They have played in the first division since the 2020 season. Ranheim&#x27;s home ground is the EXTRA Arena. Byåsen IL plays in the women&#x27;s handball league, and is a regular in the EHF Women&#x27;s Champions League, playing their home games at Trondheim Spektrum.

Trondheim and Trøndelag is also regarded as the home of the basse game, a game played using a ball made from tightly bound rubber bands.

===Major sports teams===
===Major championships hosted===
== Transportation ==


Trondheim has an international airport, Trondheim Airport, Værnes, situated in Stjørdal, which is Norway&#x27;s fourth largest airport in terms of passenger traffic. Værnes has non-stop connections to cities such as London, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, and Stockholm, among others. The domestic route Trondheim – Oslo is among the busiest air routes in Europe with around 2 million passengers annually.
Major railway connections are the northbound Nordland Line, the eastbound Meråker Line to Åre and Östersund in Sweden, and two southbound connections to Oslo, the Røros Line and Dovre Line.

The Coastal Express ships (Hurtigruten: Covering the Bergen–Kirkenes stretch of the coast) call at Trondheim, as do many cruise ships during the summer season. Since 1994 there is also a fast commuter boat service to Kristiansund, the closest coastal city to the southwest. Every morning the Hurtigruten ships have one southbound and one northbound arrival and departure in Trondheim.

A car ferry route from the port of Flakk in the northwest of the municipality, connects Trondheim with Fosen. Various bridge projects over the Trondheim Fjord to replace the ferry have been planned, but none have begun construction.

Trondheim also boasts the northernmost (since closure of Arkhangelsk tram in 2004) tramway line in the world: the Gråkallen Line, the last remaining segment of the Trondheim Tramway, is an route (which is mostly single-track outside the innermost parts of the city; except the stretch between Breidablikk and Nordre Hoem stations) which runs from the city centre, through the Byåsen district, and up to Lian, in the large recreation area Bymarka. Trondheim boasts the world&#x27;s only bicycle lift, &quot;Trampe&quot;.

The bus network, operated by AtB, runs throughout most of the city and its suburbs. A new metro line system went public 3 August 2019. The new transportation system covers the Trondheim area (Trondheim, Malvik, and Melhus). The three metro lines and the city lines that link the city across. The new public transport system becomes flexible, with buses running more often and accommodating more passengers. Fewer travelers must take a detour through the center of Trondheim.

In addition, the Nattbuss (Night Bus) service ensures cheap and effective transport for those enjoying nightlife in the city centre during the weekends. The Nattbus has other prices than ordinary buses. The European route E6 highway passes through the city centre of Trondheim in addition to a motorway bypass along the eastern rim of the city.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Trondheim is twinned with:

* Darmstadt, Germany (1968)
* Dunfermline, Scotland, United Kingdom (1945)
* Graz, Austria (1968)
* Klaksvík, Faroe Islands (1987)
* Kópavogur, Iceland (1946)
* Norrköping, Sweden (1946)
* Odense, Denmark (1946)
* Petah Tikva, Israel (1975)
* Ramallah, Palestine (2004)
* Split, Croatia (1956)
* Tampere, Finland (1946)
* Tiraspol, Moldova (1987)
* Vallejo, United States (1960)
==Business==
*Lilleby smelteverk (1927–2002)

==Notable people==
=== Public Service &amp; public thinking ===
* Lisbet Nypan (–1670) an executed alleged Norwegian witch
* Ove Bjelke (1611–1674) nobleman, feudal lord and Chancellor of Norway
* Albert Angell (1660–1705) landowner, businessman and Mayor of Trondheim
* Peter Tordenskiold (1691–1720) a Dano-Norwegian nobleman and flag officer
* Hilchen Sommerschild (1756–1831) pioneer educator
* Frederik Due (1796–1873) Norwegian prime minister in Stockholm, 1841–1858
* Johan Thoning Owesen (1804–1881), shipowner, landowner and philanthropist
* Hans Gerhard Colbjørnsen Meldahl (1815–1877) politician and sixth Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway, 1874–1877
* John Gunder North (1826–1872) ship builder in San Francisco
* Fritz Jenssen (1886–1966) banker and politician for Nasjonal Samling
* Olaus Dons Schmidt (1895-1969) genealogist, fellow, Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters
* Bernt Ingvaldsen (1902–1985) politician, President of the Storting 1965–1972
* David Abrahamsen (1903–2002) forensic psychiatrist, psychoanalyst and author in the USA
* John Lyng (1905–1978) a politician, briefly Prime Minister of Norway in 1963
* Anne Margrethe Strømsheim (1914–2008) nurse and Norwegian resistance member 
* Henry Thingstad (1916–1942) sports official, communist politician, and Norwegian resistance member 
* Henrik Rogstad (1916–1945) a politician with Nasjonal Samling
* Cissi Klein (1929–1943 in Auschwitz) a Jewish girl, victim of the Holocaust
* Kaare Langlete (1931–2009) military officer and Lord Chamberlain
* Idun Reiten (born 1942) mathematician 
* Per Arne Watle (born 1948) politician and CEO of Widerøe 1997–2008
* Georg Müller (1951-2015) RC Bishop of Trondheim until resignation following child sexual abuse, 2009
* Erik Varden (born 1974) RC Bishop of Trondheim

=== The Arts ===
* Carl Lorck (1829–1882) a Norwegian painter
* Anna Munch (1856–1932), novelist, playwright 
* Knut Glomsaas (1863–1935) a military musician
* Tupsy Clement (1871–1959) a Skagen painter of landscapes 
* Emmy Worm-Müller (1875–1950) silent film actress 
* Arne Eggen (1881–1955) a classical composer and organist
* Bjarne Amdahl (1903–1968) pianist, composer and orchestra conductor 
* Erling Viksjø (1910–1971) architect, exponent of architectural modernism
* Agnar Mykle (1915–1994) author, controversial figure in Norwegian literature
* Arve Tellefsen (born 1936) classical violinist
* Liv Ullmann (born 1938) actress and director 
* Jan Erik Kongshaug (1944–2019) sound engineer, jazz guitarist and composer 
* Sidsel Endresen (born 1952) singer, composer and actress
* Trond Halstein Moe (born 1954), operatic baritone
* Brit Dyrnes (born 1955), ceramist
* Geir Lysne (born 1965) a jazz musician and Big Band leader
* Øystein Baadsvik (born 1966) tuba soloist and chamber musician
* Merethe Trøan (born 1970) singer at the 1992 Eurovision Song Contest
* Elise Båtnes (born 1971) violinist, leader of the Oslo Philharmonic orchestra since 2006
* Ingrid Lorentzen (born 1972) ballet dancer, artistic director of the Norwegian National Ballet
* Thomas Bergersen (born 1980) composer and multi-instrumentalist
* Georg Kajanus (born 1946) singer-songwriter, composer. Known from UK bands Sailor, Data and Noir.
* Casino Steel (born 1952) keyboardist, singer and songwriter. Known from UK band The Boys.
* Bernt Østhus (born 1970), lawyer, investor and photographer

=== Sports ===
* Nils Uhlin Hansen (1919–1945) long jumper and Norwegian resistance member in WWII. 
* Hjalmar Andersen (1923–2013) speed skater, triple gold medalist at the 1952 Winter Olympics
* Arnfinn Bergmann (1928–2011) ski jumper, gold medallist at the 1952 Winter Olympics
* Odd Iversen (1945–2014) a footballer with 282 club appearances and 45 caps for Norway
* Martin Schanche (born 1945), racing driver and politician
* Jan Egil Storholt (born 1949) speed skater, gold medallist at the 1976 Winter Olympics
* Ingrid Kristiansen (born 1956) former long-distance runner
* Frode Rønning (born 1959) speed skater, bronze medallist at the 1980 Winter Olympics
* Rune Bratseth (born 1961) former footballer with 313 club appearances and 60 caps for Norway
* Atle Kvålsvoll (born 1962) cyclist and coach
* Roar Strand (born 1970) footballer with 464 club caps and 42 for Norway
* Bjørn Otto Bragstad (born 1971) footballer with 251 club appearances and 15 caps for Norway
* Gøril Kringen (born 1972) former footballer and coach
* Vegard Heggem (born 1975) former footballer with 20 caps for Norway
* Fredrik Winsnes (born 1975) former footballer with 353 club appearances and 19 caps for Norway
* Øystein Kvaal Østerbø (born 1981) orienteering and ski-orienteering competitor
* Trine Rønning (born 1982) a former captain of the Norway women&#x27;s national football team
* Emil Hegle Svendsen (born 1985) biathlete, eight medals at Winter Olympics (four gold)
* Torstein Horgmo (born 1987) snowboarder
* Emil Weber Meek (born 1988) mixed martial artist
* Jørgen Gråbak (born 1991) Nordic combined skier, double gold at the 2014 Winter Olympics
* Sander Sagosen (born 1995) handball player
* Alexander Sørloth (born 1995) footballer
* Johannes Høsflot Klæbo (born 1996) a cross-country skier, triple gold medallist at the 2018 Winter Olympics

== See also ==

*Estenstadmarka
*List of mayors of Trondheim
*Norwegian Society for Photobiology and Photomedicine (1983)
*Tyholt Tower

== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* Municipality website 
* Trondheim.no, Trondheim&#x27;s official website in Norwegian 
** and Trondheim.com, Trondheim&#x27;s official website in English 
* Trondheim in Spanish 
* Visit Trondheim</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="0" end="9" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="34" end="43" title="Trondheim" label="Kaupangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="45" end="56" title="Trondheim" label="[[Nidaros]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="62" end="71" title="Trondheim" label="Trondhjem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="90" end="102" title="List of municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q127676" start="106" end="115" title="Trøndelag" label="Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="124" end="130" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785774" start="248" end="262" title="List of continuously built-up areas in Norway by population" label="fourth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="263" end="273" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q279579" start="312" end="327" title="Trondheim Fjord" label="Trondheim Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q499668" start="354" end="361" title="Nidelva" label="Nidelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="453" end="499" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041255" start="512" end="570" title="SINTEF" label="Foundation for Scientific and Industrial Research (SINTEF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770198" start="576" end="603" title="Geological Survey of Norway" label="Geological Survey of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446347" start="615" end="644" title="St. Olavs University Hospital" label="St. Olavs University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="744" end="754" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q659423" start="824" end="846" title="Archdiocese of Nidaros" label="Archdiocese of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028607" start="907" end="925" title="Diocese of Nidaros" label="Diocese of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="946" end="963" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560616" start="1066" end="1086" title="Byneset Municipality" label="Byneset Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559189" start="1088" end="1111" title="Leinstrand Municipality" label="Leinstrand Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278345" start="1113" end="1133" title="Strinda Municipality" label="Strinda Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006463" start="1139" end="1158" title="Tiller Municipality" label="Tiller Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q484106" start="1227" end="1245" title="Klæbu Municipality" label="Klæbu Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="1442" end="1454" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127676" start="1533" end="1542" title="Trøndelag" label="Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606901" start="1597" end="1606" title="Steinkjer (town)" label="Steinkjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="1672" end="1683" title="centralized" label="centralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1707" end="1715" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="1721" end="1730" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118113" start="1781" end="1800" title="Granåsen Ski Centre" label="Granåsen Ski Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="1845" end="1858" title="Nordic Skiing" label="Nordic Skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="1920" end="1935" title="Olav Tryggvason" label="Olav Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q499668" start="2018" end="2021" title="Nidelva" label="Nid"/>
<link wikidata="Q499668" start="2152" end="2155" title="Nidelva" label="Nid"/>
<link wikidata="Q127676" start="2439" end="2448" title="Trøndelag" label="Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2791" end="2800" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2928" end="2939" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015340" start="3078" end="3092" title="Dano-Norwegian" label="Dano-Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3118" end="3127" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="3179" end="3193" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="3233" end="3249" title="royal decree" label="royal resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331996" start="3262" end="3293" title="Norwegian language conflict" label="1917 Norwegian language reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="3432" end="3438" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="3481" end="3497" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3612" end="3616" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="3709" end="3719" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="3952" end="3960" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="4001" end="4020" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Trondhjem Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="4041" end="4058" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="4216" end="4220" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="4251" end="4259" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4586" end="4602" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846025" start="4608" end="4621" title="German exonyms" label="German exonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="4675" end="4681" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="4682" end="4686" title="King of Norway" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="4687" end="4702" title="Olav Tryggvason" label="Olav Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q897446" start="4761" end="4768" title="Nidaros" label="Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="4834" end="4843" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354788" start="5054" end="5085" title="Rock carvings in Central Norway" label="rock carvings in central Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660530" start="5091" end="5118" title="Nøstvet and Lihult cultures" label="Nøstvet and Lihult cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q933996" start="5128" end="5147" title="Corded Ware culture" label="Corded Ware culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189955" start="5171" end="5186" title="List of Norwegian monarchs" label="kings of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358438" start="5215" end="5224" title="Øretinget" label="Øretinget"/>
<link wikidata="Q499668" start="5295" end="5302" title="Nidelva" label="Nidelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="5304" end="5319" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q314477" start="5375" end="5383" title="Haakon I of Norway" label="Haakon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583716" start="5434" end="5445" title="Kalvskinnet" label="Kalvskinnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q331755" start="5490" end="5507" title="Sverre Sigurdsson" label="Sverre Sigurdsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q865489" start="5522" end="5533" title="Birkebeiner" label="Birkebeiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q725219" start="5573" end="5586" title="Erling Skakke" label="Erling Skakke"/>
<link wikidata="Q217796" start="5650" end="5664" title="Lewis chessmen" label="Lewis chessmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="5740" end="5748" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="5768" end="5782" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q659423" start="5859" end="5880" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Nidaros" label="Archbishop of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q599602" start="5917" end="5941" title="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace, Trondheim" label="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5970" end="5978" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007127" start="6023" end="6042" title="Olav Engelbrektsson" label="Olav Engelbrektsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="6077" end="6088" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460" start="6115" end="6128" title="Lier, Belgium" label="Lier, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103598" start="6463" end="6476" title="1681 Trondheim fire" label="Horneman Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585876" start="6566" end="6591" title="Johan Caspar von Cicignon" label="Johan Caspar von Cicignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="6609" end="6619" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212234" start="6870" end="6888" title="Treaty of Roskilde" label="Treaty of Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q127676" start="6936" end="6945" title="Trøndelag" label="Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q130633189" start="6980" end="7019" title="Siege of Trondheim" label="However, after a three-month long siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q829702" start="7103" end="7123" title="Treaty of Copenhagen (1660)" label="Treaty of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7151" end="7167" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7195" end="7207" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="7248" end="7266" title="Operation Weserübung" label="invasion of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="7304" end="7314" title="VE Day" label="8 May 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q27454" start="7359" end="7388" title="German cruiser Admiral Hipper" label="German cruiser Admiral Hipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533492" start="7684" end="7699" title="Namsos Campaign" label="Namsos Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132543" start="7789" end="7801" title="Henry Rinnan" label="Henry Rinnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774718" start="7993" end="8004" title="Martial law in Trondheim in 1942" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q469924" start="8179" end="8185" title="Dora I" label="DORA I"/>
<link wikidata="Q873257" start="8265" end="8274" title="Nordstern (city)" label="Nordstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033329" start="8363" end="8369" title="Øysand" label="Øysand"/>
<link wikidata="Q488762" start="8390" end="8396" title="Melhus Municipality" label="Melhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="8594" end="8606" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899491" start="8849" end="8869" title="formannskapsdistrikt" label="formannskapsdistrikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278345" start="8903" end="8923" title="Strinda Municipality" label="Strinda Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020895" start="9124" end="9128" title="Lade, Trondheim" label="Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559189" start="9277" end="9300" title="Leinstrand Municipality" label="Leinstrand Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560616" start="9322" end="9342" title="Byneset Municipality" label="Byneset Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006463" start="9411" end="9430" title="Tiller Municipality" label="Tiller Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q484106" start="9608" end="9626" title="Klæbu Municipality" label="Klæbu Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="9721" end="9733" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="9791" end="9801" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q193888" start="9821" end="9826" title="mitre" label="mitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="10162" end="10167" title="motif (visual arts)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q279579" start="10662" end="10677" title="Trondheim Fjord" label="Trondheim Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q595510" start="10974" end="10982" title="Storheia" label="Storheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="10989" end="11004" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="11020" end="11028" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="11463" end="11478" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11480" end="11483" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="11488" end="11513" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929169" start="12793" end="12800" title="Bymarka" label="Bymarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363298" start="13693" end="13703" title="Gløshaugen" label="Gløshaugen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="14168" end="14175" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="14407" end="14412" title="European otter" label="Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="14418" end="14424" title="European beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="14457" end="14463" title="Eurasian badger" label="Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="14469" end="14476" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="14504" end="14509" title="Moose" label="Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="14514" end="14518" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="14773" end="14782" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="15273" end="15280" title="drydock" label="drydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q845144" start="15328" end="15357" title="Trondhjems mekaniske Værksted" label="Trondhjems mekaniske Værksted"/>
<link wikidata="Q173828" start="15386" end="15400" title="Nedre Elvehavn" label="Nedre Elvehavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q469924" start="15638" end="15644" title="DORA 1" label="DORA 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="15650" end="15666" title="U-boat" label="German submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231201" start="15688" end="15708" title="13th U-boat Flotilla" label="13th U-boat Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705932" start="15921" end="15942" title="Kristiansten Fortress" label="Kristiansten Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="16026" end="16032" title="Sweden" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="16096" end="16108" title="Charles XIV John of Sweden" label="Charles John"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037602" start="16113" end="16138" title="Olav Tryggvason (statue)" label="statue of Olav Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="16268" end="16276" title="sun dial" label="sun dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="16492" end="16501" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="16505" end="16513" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="16515" end="16521" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="16546" end="16559" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536981" start="16574" end="16586" title="Stiftsgården" label="Stiftsgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719953" start="16658" end="16684" title="Cecilie Christine Schøller" label="Cecilie Christine Schøller"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="16760" end="16775" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42838" start="16846" end="16858" title="Leif Ericson" label="Leif Ericson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="17040" end="17046" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="17079" end="17096" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="17246" end="17252" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="17328" end="17338" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="17410" end="17414" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211661" start="17447" end="17455" title="Jämtland" label="Jämtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211638" start="17460" end="17468" title="Värmland" label="Värmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="17577" end="17588" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="17696" end="17706" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="17738" end="17753" title="Haakon VII of Norway" label="King Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154912" start="17819" end="17830" title="Olav V of Norway" label="King Olav V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="17867" end="17879" title="consecration" label="consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="17902" end="17915" title="Harald V of Norway" label="King Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131045" start="17920" end="17931" title="Queen Sonja of Norway" label="Queen Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q165096" start="17998" end="18020" title="Princess Märtha Louise of Norway" label="Princess Märtha Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q472623" start="18040" end="18048" title="Ari Behn" label="Ari Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095033" start="18072" end="18092" title="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Route" label="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q897446" start="18164" end="18171" title="Nidaros" label="Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="18335" end="18339" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212209" start="18368" end="18373" title="Mjøsa" label="Mjøsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292655" start="18389" end="18403" title="Gudbrandsdalen" label="Gudbrandsdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100974" start="18429" end="18439" title="Dovrefjell" label="Dovrefjell"/>
<link wikidata="Q113595" start="18453" end="18459" title="Oppdal Municipality" label="Oppdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="18477" end="18494" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q190662" start="18626" end="18631" title="aegis" label="aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="18690" end="18698" title="pilgrims" label="pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="18774" end="18790" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028607" start="18872" end="18890" title="Diocese of Nidaros" label="Diocese of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="18927" end="18944" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19058" end="19072" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28718453" start="19073" end="19092" title="St. Olav&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Trondheim" label="Sankt Olav domkirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="19100" end="19109" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537614" start="19138" end="19172" title="Territorial Prelature of Trondheim" label="Territorial Prelature of Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="19300" end="19309" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="19331" end="19345" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="19375" end="19381" title="Movie theater" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342461" start="19431" end="19442" title="Sverresborg" label="Sverresborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="19455" end="19459" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="19466" end="19476" title="King David" label="King David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="19494" end="19503" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q331755" start="19534" end="19551" title="Sverre Sigurdsson" label="Sverre Sigurdsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q581662" start="19737" end="19747" title="Sverresaga" label="Sverresaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770886" start="19869" end="19891" title="NTNU University Museum" label="NTNU University Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="19942" end="19988" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="20045" end="20060" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20082" end="20107" title="Trondheim Maritime Museum" label="Trondheim Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q960829" start="20240" end="20262" title="Ringve National Museum" label="Ringve National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20264" end="20287" title="Ringve Botanical Garden" label="Ringve Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615024" start="20293" end="20317" title="Trondheim Tramway Museum" label="Trondheim Tramway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20327" end="20340" title="Jewish Museum of Trondheim" label="Jewish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15689742" start="20432" end="20440" title="Rockheim" label="Rockheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="20860" end="20869" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="20910" end="20914" title="jail" label="jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="20926" end="20951" title="nazi occupation of Norway" label="nazi occupation of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="21042" end="21060" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="21178" end="21190" title="Internment" label="transit camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="21195" end="21214" title="political prisoners" label="political prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705932" start="21257" end="21278" title="Kristiansten Fortress" label="Kristiansten Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132543" start="21397" end="21409" title="Henry Rinnan" label="Henry Rinnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772352" start="21610" end="21641" title="Norwegian Correctional Services" label="Norwegian Correctional Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862087" start="21668" end="21675" title="inmates" label="inmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845474" start="22115" end="22131" title="Trondheim Region" label="Trondheim Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q11962746" start="22231" end="22261" title="metropolitan regions of Norway" label="metropolitan regions of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="22404" end="22426" title="upper secondary school" label="upper secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q493988" start="22460" end="22466" title="Malvik Municipality" label="Malvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q217802" start="22477" end="22485" title="Stjørdal" label="Stjørdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729886" start="22493" end="22499" title="Værnes" label="Værnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q488762" start="22511" end="22517" title="Melhus Municipality" label="Melhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q500186" start="22519" end="22524" title="Skaun Municipality" label="Skaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776865" start="22552" end="22560" title="Vanvikan" label="Vanvikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428806" start="22564" end="22575" title="Indre Fosen" label="Indre Fosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="22635" end="22652" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="22686" end="22701" title="Health care" label="health services"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="22703" end="22717" title="old age" label="senior citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="22728" end="22735" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="22746" end="22761" title="Social work" label="social services"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="22763" end="22769" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="22771" end="22791" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="22807" end="22811" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="22862" end="22879" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="22883" end="22899" title="Direct election" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="22921" end="22926" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q877353" start="22930" end="22948" title="Indirect election" label="indirectly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112598" start="23035" end="23059" title="Trøndelag District Court" label="Trøndelag District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249343" start="23068" end="23094" title="Frostating Court of Appeal" label="Frostating Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="23151" end="23158" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515928" start="23256" end="23264" title="Midtbyen, Trondheim" label="Midtbyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079241" start="23287" end="23294" title="Østbyen" label="Østbyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11983779" start="23317" end="23326" title="Lerkendal, Trondheim" label="Lerkendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q636798" start="23352" end="23359" title="Heimdal" label="Heimdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608101" start="23441" end="23454" title="List of boroughs in Trondheim prior to 2005" label="Prior to 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="23630" end="23642" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="23909" end="23914" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637684" start="23977" end="24013" title="Okstad School" label="list of primary schools in Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="24052" end="24098" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446347" start="24351" end="24386" title="St. Olavs University Hospital" label="St. Olav&amp;#x27;s University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041255" start="24628" end="24634" title="SINTEF" label="SINTEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="24681" end="24692" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137453" start="24785" end="24810" title="Royal Norwegian Air Force" label="Royal Norwegian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770198" start="24853" end="24880" title="Geological Survey of Norway" label="Geological Survey of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516622" start="25042" end="25065" title="Trondheim katedralskole" label="Trondheim katedralskole"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="25169" end="25178" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25197" end="25230" title="Charlottenlund videregående skole" label="Charlottenlund videregående skole"/>
<link wikidata="Q367105" start="25482" end="25495" title="Adresseavisen" label="Adresseavisen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25690" end="25696" title=":no:NRK Tyholt" label="Tyholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883092" start="25899" end="25911" title="Under Dusken" label="Under Dusken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281000" start="25934" end="25946" title="Radio Revolt" label="Radio Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815524" start="26094" end="26100" title="NRK P1" label="NRK P1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106158" start="26105" end="26112" title="NRK P1+" label="NRK P1+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="26266" end="26270" title="Digital audio broadcasting" label="DAB+"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="26311" end="26325" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12007630" start="26364" end="26384" title="Trondheim Art Museum" label="Trondheim Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q631931" start="26520" end="26535" title="decorative arts" label="decorative arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976177" start="26622" end="26635" title="Hannah Ryggen" label="Hannah Ryggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="26702" end="26717" title="handicraft" label="arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26720" end="26753" title="Trøndelag senter for samtidskunst" label="Trøndelag senter for samtidskunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590700" start="26860" end="26889" title="Trondheim Academy of Fine Art" label="Trondheim Academy of Fine Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26903" end="26908" title="Babel visningsrom for kunst" label="Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56405485" start="26976" end="26995" title="Kunsthall Trondheim" label="Kunsthall Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="27091" end="27097" title="Modern art" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="27102" end="27118" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q565377" start="27205" end="27221" title="Trøndelag Teater" label="Trøndelag Teater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27379" end="27403" title="Teaterhuset Avant Garden" label="Teaterhuset Avant Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="27555" end="27559" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="27564" end="27579" title="European classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="27657" end="27675" title="music conservatory" label="music conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="27679" end="27683" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="NTNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q10704941" start="27839" end="27867" title="Trondheim Symphony Orchestra" label="Trondheim Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845475" start="27876" end="27894" title="Trondheim Soloists" label="Trondheim Soloists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845472" start="27965" end="27989" title="Trondheim Jazz Orchestra" label="Trondheim Jazz Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125635669" start="27995" end="28012" title="Fjordgata Records" label="Fjordgata Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866057" start="28108" end="28122" title="Arve Tellefsen" label="Arve Tellefsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16183077" start="28124" end="28136" title="Elise Båtnes" label="Elise Båtnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762278" start="28141" end="28157" title="Marianne Thorsen" label="Marianne Thorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030801" start="28168" end="28202" title="Nidaros Cathedral Boys&amp;#x27; Choir" label="Nidaros Cathedral Boys&amp;#x27; Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071956" start="28205" end="28221" title="Thomas Bergersen" label="Thomas Bergersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357371" start="28437" end="28454" title="Åge Aleksandersen" label="Åge Aleksandersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167768" start="28456" end="28471" title="Margaret Berger" label="Margaret Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769893" start="28473" end="28484" title="DumDum Boys" label="DumDum Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493913" start="28486" end="28499" title="Lasse Marhaug" label="Lasse Marhaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q636058" start="28501" end="28505" title="Gåte" label="Gåte"/>
<link wikidata="Q534083" start="28507" end="28523" title="Keep Of Kalessin" label="Keep Of Kalessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482136" start="28525" end="28530" title="Lumsk" label="Lumsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949910" start="28532" end="28543" title="Motorpsycho (band)" label="Motorpsycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q436915" start="28545" end="28560" title="Kari Rueslåtten" label="Kari Rueslåtten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116606" start="28562" end="28584" title="the 3rd and the Mortal" label="the 3rd and the Mortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335168" start="28586" end="28589" title="TNT (Norwegian band)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836525" start="28591" end="28607" title="Tre Små Kinesere" label="Tre Små Kinesere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771496" start="28609" end="28617" title="The Kids (Norwegian band)" label="the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050692" start="28619" end="28626" title="Bokassa (band)" label="Bokassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402077" start="28645" end="28653" title="The Boys (UK band)" label="the Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186624" start="28696" end="28708" title="Malin Reitan" label="Malin Reitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006904" start="28713" end="28728" title="Aleksander With" label="Aleksander With"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588280" start="28761" end="28765" title="UFFA" label="UFFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535736" start="28768" end="28781" title="Georg Kajanus" label="Georg Kajanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332962" start="28804" end="28813" title="Eclection" label="Eclection"/>
<link wikidata="Q354427" start="28815" end="28821" title="Sailor (band)" label="Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204333" start="28826" end="28830" title="DATA (band)" label="DATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417412" start="28881" end="28889" title="Stargate (production team)" label="Stargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433262" start="29219" end="29252" title="Kosmorama" label="Kosmorama International Film Fest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29267" end="29295" title="Trondheim Documentarfestival" label="Trondheim Documentarfestival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29389" end="29407" title="Prinsen Kinosenter" label="Prinsen Kinosenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064061" start="29409" end="29424" title="Nova Kinosenter" label="Nova Kinosenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500918" start="29591" end="29621" title="Studentersamfundet i Trondhjem" label="Studentersamfundet i Trondhjem"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="29829" end="29875" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517321" start="30085" end="30090" title="NTNUI" label="NTNUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547217" start="30291" end="30294" title="UKA (festival)" label="UKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070830" start="30299" end="30346" title="Isfit" label="The International Student Festival in Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="30509" end="30521" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q771401" start="30534" end="30561" title="Another Monty Python Record" label="Another Monty Python Record"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30669" end="30704" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642928" start="30838" end="30880" title="Ender&amp;#x27;s Game (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Ender&amp;#x27;s Game&amp;quot; novel series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699024" start="30961" end="30982" title="The Inheritance Cycle" label="The Inheritance Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118113" start="31011" end="31030" title="Granåsen Ski Centre" label="Granåsen Ski Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="31034" end="31047" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="31115" end="31126" title="ski jumping" label="ski jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="31128" end="31136" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="31141" end="31161" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426015" start="31178" end="31217" title="1997 FIS Nordic World Ski Championships" label="1997 FIS Nordic World Ski Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845482" start="31229" end="31249" title="Trondheim bid for the 2018 Winter Olympics" label="attempted but failed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="31292" end="31312" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929169" start="31391" end="31398" title="Bymarka" label="Bymarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702069" start="31610" end="31629" title="Norwegian Challenge" label="Norwegian Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q432160" start="31637" end="31651" title="Challenge Tour" label="Challenge Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="31952" end="31964" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg BK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132011" start="32047" end="32064" title="Lerkendal Stadion" label="Lerkendal Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="32084" end="32108" title="Norwegian Premier League" label="Norwegian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="32158" end="32179" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="32228" end="32243" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="on one occasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112784" start="32245" end="32260" title="Ranheim Fotball" label="Ranheim Fotball"/>
<link wikidata="Q353508" start="32283" end="32307" title="Norwegian First Division" label="Norwegian First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="32316" end="32327" title="Eliteserien" label="Eliteserien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205780" start="32552" end="32563" title="EXTRA Arena" label="EXTRA Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018784" start="32565" end="32574" title="Byåsen IL" label="Byåsen IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q849046" start="32584" end="32616" title="Eliteserien (women&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="the women&amp;#x27;s handball league"/>
<link wikidata="Q652498" start="32642" end="32675" title="EHF Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League" label="EHF Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12007634" start="32705" end="32723" title="Trondheim Spektrum" label="Trondheim Spektrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781445" start="32786" end="32791" title="Basse (game)" label="basse"/>
<link wikidata="Q729886" start="32985" end="33010" title="Trondheim Airport, Værnes" label="Trondheim Airport, Værnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217802" start="33024" end="33032" title="Stjørdal" label="Stjørdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="33161" end="33167" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="33169" end="33178" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="33180" end="33190" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="33196" end="33205" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445460" start="33270" end="33288" title="List of busiest passenger air routes" label="busiest air routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634815" start="33387" end="33400" title="Nordland Line" label="Nordland Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q512662" start="33416" end="33428" title="Meråker Line" label="Meråker Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q271138" start="33432" end="33435" title="Åre" label="Åre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26515" start="33440" end="33449" title="Östersund" label="Östersund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968118" start="33505" end="33515" title="Røros Line" label="Røros Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253001" start="33520" end="33530" title="Dovre Line" label="Dovre Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165613" start="33560" end="33571" title="Hurtigruten" label="Hurtigruten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="33586" end="33592" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q209423" start="33593" end="33601" title="Kirkenes" label="Kirkenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="33654" end="33665" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q109483" start="33750" end="33762" title="Kristiansund" label="Kristiansund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457090" start="33921" end="33936" title="Flakk–Rørvik Ferry" label="car ferry route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439374" start="34022" end="34027" title="Fosen" label="Fosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="34210" end="34221" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="34236" end="34240" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222207" start="34267" end="34281" title="Gråkallen Line" label="Gråkallen Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753643" start="34317" end="34334" title="Trondheim Tramway" label="Trondheim Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929223" start="34529" end="34535" title="Byåsen" label="Byåsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929169" start="34591" end="34598" title="Bymarka" label="Bymarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392572" start="34659" end="34665" title="Trampe bicycle lift" label="Trampe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11686899" start="34703" end="34706" title="AtB" label="AtB"/>
<link wikidata="Q921422" start="35357" end="35374" title="European route E6" label="European route E6"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="35541" end="35548" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973" start="35558" end="35567" title="Darmstadt" label="Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="35586" end="35597" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="35633" end="35637" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189361" start="35656" end="35664" title="Klaksvík" label="Klaksvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q163852" start="35689" end="35698" title="Kópavogur" label="Kópavogur"/>
<link wikidata="Q504676" start="35717" end="35727" title="Norrköping Municipality" label="Norrköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q21146" start="35745" end="35751" title="Odense Municipality" label="Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q190828" start="35770" end="35781" title="Petah Tikva" label="Petah Tikva"/>
<link wikidata="Q158119" start="35799" end="35807" title="Ramallah" label="Ramallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="35828" end="35833" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="35852" end="35859" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="35878" end="35886" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="35905" end="35912" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548004" start="35949" end="35967" title="Lilleby smelteverk" label="Lilleby smelteverk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558587" start="36047" end="36059" title="Lisbet Nypan" label="Lisbet Nypan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777514" start="36106" end="36116" title="Ove Bjelke" label="Ove Bjelke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070791" start="36155" end="36175" title="Chancellor of Norway" label="Chancellor of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709640" start="36178" end="36191" title="Albert Angell" label="Albert Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q699748" start="36252" end="36270" title="Peter Tordenskiold" label="Peter Tordenskiold"/>
<link wikidata="Q15950644" start="36328" end="36348" title="Hilchen Sommerschild" label="Hilchen Sommerschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q949599" start="36380" end="36392" title="Frederik Due" label="Frederik Due"/>
<link wikidata="Q63295281" start="36456" end="36476" title="Thoning Owesen" label="Johan Thoning Owesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577232" start="36532" end="36564" title="Hans Gerhard Colbjørnsen Meldahl" label="Hans Gerhard Colbjørnsen Meldahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772291" start="36598" end="36642" title="Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway" label="Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321932" start="36656" end="36673" title="John Gunder North" label="John Gunder North"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119810" start="36718" end="36731" title="Fritz Jenssen" label="Fritz Jenssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="36770" end="36786" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="Nasjonal Samling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083139" start="36789" end="36807" title="Olaus Dons Schmidt" label="Olaus Dons Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201052" start="36841" end="36888" title="Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters" label="Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216414" start="36891" end="36907" title="Bernt Ingvaldsen" label="Bernt Ingvaldsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="36932" end="36957" title="President of the Storting" label="President of the Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230583" start="36970" end="36986" title="David Abrahamsen" label="David Abrahamsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q337301" start="37060" end="37069" title="John Lyng" label="John Lyng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="37104" end="37128" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566520" start="37139" end="37164" title="Anne Margrethe Strømsheim" label="Anne Margrethe Strømsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="37187" end="37207" title="Norwegian resistance" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729115" start="37218" end="37233" title="Henry Thingstad" label="Henry Thingstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="37263" end="37272" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="37289" end="37309" title="Norwegian resistance" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975087" start="37320" end="37334" title="Henrik Rogstad" label="Henrik Rogstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="37365" end="37381" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="Nasjonal Samling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326763" start="37384" end="37395" title="Cissi Klein" label="Cissi Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343487" start="37462" end="37476" title="Kaare Langlete" label="Kaare Langlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931219" start="37510" end="37526" title="Lord Chamberlain (Norway)" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789785" start="37529" end="37540" title="Idun Reiten" label="Idun Reiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166638" start="37570" end="37584" title="Per Arne Watle" label="Per Arne Watle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28344" start="37619" end="37626" title="Widerøe" label="Widerøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71510" start="37639" end="37651" title="Georg Müller (Catholic bishop)" label="Georg Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537614" start="37664" end="37686" title="Roman Catholic Territorial Prelature of Trondheim" label="RC Bishop of Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q69386753" start="37742" end="37753" title="Erik Varden" label="Erik Varden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537614" start="37766" end="37788" title="Roman Catholic Territorial Prelature of Trondheim" label="RC Bishop of Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040494" start="37809" end="37819" title="Carl Lorck" label="Carl Lorck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968347" start="37854" end="37864" title="Anna Munch" label="Anna Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423895" start="37902" end="37915" title="Knut Glomsaas" label="Knut Glomsaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15376289" start="37950" end="37963" title="Tupsy Clement" label="Tupsy Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q726483" start="37978" end="37992" title="Skagen Painters" label="Skagen painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710617" start="38010" end="38026" title="Emmy Worm-Müller" label="Emmy Worm-Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627768" start="38062" end="38072" title="Arne Eggen" label="Arne Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548663" start="38121" end="38134" title="Bjarne Amdahl" label="Bjarne Amdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781537" start="38192" end="38205" title="Erling Viksjø" label="Erling Viksjø"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="38241" end="38264" title="architectural modernism" label="architectural modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q394358" start="38267" end="38278" title="Agnar Mykle" label="Agnar Mykle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866057" start="38346" end="38360" title="Arve Tellefsen" label="Arve Tellefsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191064" start="38395" end="38406" title="Liv Ullmann" label="Liv Ullmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q723429" start="38443" end="38461" title="Jan Erik Kongshaug" label="Jan Erik Kongshaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q470107" start="38521" end="38536" title="Sidsel Endresen" label="Sidsel Endresen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12007587" start="38580" end="38598" title="Trond Halstein Moe" label="Trond Halstein Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83556748" start="38632" end="38643" title="Brit Dyrnes" label="Brit Dyrnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485333" start="38668" end="38678" title="Geir Lysne" label="Geir Lysne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="38711" end="38719" title="Big Band" label="Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q317329" start="38729" end="38745" title="Øystein Baadsvik" label="Øystein Baadsvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q453435" start="38794" end="38807" title="Merethe Trøan" label="Merethe Trøan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211487" start="38834" end="38862" title="1992 Eurovision Song Contest" label="1992 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16183077" start="38865" end="38877" title="Elise Båtnes" label="Elise Båtnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063440" start="38915" end="38932" title="Oslo Philharmonic" label="Oslo Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725641" start="38956" end="38972" title="Ingrid Lorentzen" label="Ingrid Lorentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186798" start="39025" end="39050" title="Norwegian National Ballet" label="Norwegian National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071956" start="39053" end="39069" title="Thomas Bergersen" label="Thomas Bergersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535736" start="39119" end="39132" title="Georg Kajanus" label="Georg Kajanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11963256" start="39219" end="39231" title="Stein Groven" label="Casino Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402077" start="39299" end="39307" title="The Boys (English band)" label="The Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q20177263" start="39311" end="39323" title="Bernt Østhus" label="Bernt Østhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569801" start="39389" end="39406" title="Nils Uhlin Hansen" label="Nils Uhlin Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="39435" end="39455" title="Norwegian resistance" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q464753" start="39475" end="39491" title="Hjalmar Andersen" label="Hjalmar Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9623" start="39546" end="39566" title="1952 Winter Olympics" label="1952 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q472135" start="39569" end="39585" title="Arnfinn Bergmann" label="Arnfinn Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9623" start="39632" end="39652" title="1952 Winter Olympics" label="1952 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003369" start="39655" end="39666" title="Odd Iversen" label="Odd Iversen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="39734" end="39740" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367634" start="39743" end="39758" title="Martin Schanche" label="Martin Schanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q494685" start="39803" end="39820" title="Jan Egil Storholt" label="Jan Egil Storholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9651" start="39869" end="39889" title="1976 Winter Olympics" label="1976 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q256770" start="39892" end="39910" title="Ingrid Kristiansen" label="Ingrid Kristiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q651649" start="39953" end="39966" title="Frode Rønning" label="Frode Rønning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9652" start="40017" end="40037" title="1980 Winter Olympics" label="1980 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q453318" start="40040" end="40053" title="Rune Bratseth" label="Rune Bratseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40126" end="40132" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q733022" start="40135" end="40149" title="Atle Kvålsvoll" label="Atle Kvålsvoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q706452" start="40182" end="40193" title="Roar Strand" label="Roar Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40247" end="40253" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q879841" start="40256" end="40275" title="Bjørn Otto Bragstad" label="Bjørn Otto Bragstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40341" end="40347" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780369" start="40350" end="40363" title="Gøril Kringen" label="Gøril Kringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q719749" start="40406" end="40419" title="Vegard Heggem" label="Vegard Heggem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40467" end="40473" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601483" start="40476" end="40491" title="Fredrik Winsnes" label="Fredrik Winsnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40564" end="40570" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q329804" start="40573" end="40594" title="Øystein Kvaal Østerbø" label="Øystein Kvaal Østerbø"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054654" start="40654" end="40667" title="Trine Rønning" label="Trine Rønning"/>
<link wikidata="Q751994" start="40704" end="40746" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q315034" start="40749" end="40768" title="Emil Hegle Svendsen" label="Emil Hegle Svendsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571406" start="40838" end="40853" title="Torstein Horgmo" label="Torstein Horgmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104474" start="40880" end="40895" title="Emil Weber Meek" label="Emil Weber Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615861" start="40931" end="40944" title="Jørgen Gråbak" label="Jørgen Gråbak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="40999" end="41019" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322523" start="41022" end="41036" title="Sander Sagosen" label="Sander Sagosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13784739" start="41067" end="41084" title="Alexander Sørloth" label="Alexander Sørloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19376368" start="41110" end="41132" title="Johannes Høsflot Klæbo" label="Johannes Høsflot Klæbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="41197" end="41217" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400955" start="41236" end="41250" title="Estenstadmarka" label="Estenstadmarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627756" start="41252" end="41279" title="List of mayors of Trondheim" label="List of mayors of Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061262" start="41281" end="41333" title="Norwegian Society for Photobiology and Photomedicine" label="Norwegian Society for Photobiology and Photomedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935277" start="41342" end="41354" title="Tyholttårnet" label="Tyholt Tower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37476" wikidata="Q29556" url="?curid=37476" title="Civil liberties">
<text>Civil liberties are guarantees and freedoms that governments commit not to abridge, either by constitution, legislation, or judicial interpretation, without due process. Though the scope of the term differs between countries, civil liberties often include the freedom of conscience, freedom of press, freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, the right to security and liberty, freedom of speech, the right to privacy, the right to equal treatment under the law and due process, the right to a fair trial, and the right to life. Other civil liberties include the right to own property, the right to defend oneself, and the right to bodily integrity. Within the distinctions between civil liberties and other types of liberty, distinctions exist between positive liberty/positive rights and negative liberty/negative rights.

Libertarians advocate for the negative liberty aspect of civil liberties, emphasizing minimal government intervention in both personal and economic affairs. Influential advocates of this interpretation include John Stuart Mill, whose work &quot;On Liberty&quot; argues for the protection of individual freedoms from government encroachment, and Friedrich Hayek, whose &quot;The Road to Serfdom&quot; warns against the dangers of expanding state power. Ayn Rand&#x27;s &quot;Atlas Shrugged&quot; and Ron Paul&#x27;s &quot;The Revolution: A Manifesto&quot; further emphasize the importance of safeguarding personal autonomy and limiting government authority. These contributions have played a significant role in shaping the discourse on civil liberties and the appropriate scope of government.

==Overview==

Many contemporary nations have a constitution, a bill of rights, or similar constitutional documents that enumerate and seek to guarantee civil liberties. Other nations have enacted similar laws through a variety of legal means, including signing and ratifying or otherwise giving effect to key conventions such as the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The existence of some claimed civil liberties is a matter of dispute, as are the extent of most civil rights. Controversial examples include property rights, reproductive rights, and civil marriage. In authoritarian regimes in which government censorship impedes on perceived civil liberties, some civil liberty advocates argue for the use of anonymity tools to allow for free speech, privacy, and anonymity. The degree to which societies acknowledge civil liberties is affected by the influence of terrorism and war. 
Whether the existence of victimless crimes infringes upon civil liberties is also a matter of dispute. Another matter of debate is the suspension or alteration of certain civil liberties in times of war or state of emergency, including whether and to what extent this should occur.

The formal concept of civil liberties is often dated back to Magna Carta, an English legal charter agreed in 1215 which in turn was based on pre-existing documents, namely the Charter of Liberties.

==Asia==

===China===

The Constitution of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (which applies only to mainland China, not to Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan) especially its Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens, claims to protect many civil liberties. Taiwan, which is separated from mainland China, has its own Constitution.

Although the 1982 constitution guarantees civil liberties, the Chinese government usually uses the &quot;subversion of state power&quot; and &quot;protection of state secrets&quot; clauses in their law system to imprison those who criticize the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the state leaders.

===India===


The Fundamental Rightsembodied in Part III of the constitutionguarantee liberties such that all Indians can lead their lives in peace as citizens of India. The six fundamental rights are right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights and the right to constitutional remedies.

These include individual rights common to most liberal democracies, incorporated in the fundamental law of the land and are enforceable in a court of law. Violations of these rights result in punishments as prescribed in the Indian Penal Code, subject to the discretion of the judiciary. These rights are neither absolute nor immune from constitutional amendments. They have been aimed at overturning the inequalities of pre-independence social practices. Specifically, they resulted in the abolishment of untouchability and prohibited discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. They forbid human trafficking and unfree labour. They protect the cultural and educational rights of ethnic and religious minorities by allowing them to preserve their languages and administer their own educational institutions.

All people, irrespective of race, religion, caste or sex, have the right to approach the High Courts or the Supreme Court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights. It is not necessary that the aggrieved party has to be the one to do so. In the public interest, anyone can initiate litigation in the court on their behalf. This is known as &quot;public interest litigation&quot;. High Court and Supreme Court judges can also act on their own on the basis of media reports.

The Fundamental Rights emphasize equality by guaranteeing all citizens access to and use of public institutions and protections, irrespective of their background. The rights to life and personal liberty apply to persons of any nationality, while others, such as the freedom of speech and expression apply only to the citizens of India (including non-resident Indian citizens). The right to equality in matters of public employment cannot be conferred to overseas citizens of India.

Fundamental Rights primarily protect individuals from any arbitrary State actions, but some rights are enforceable against private individuals too. For instance, the constitution abolishes untouchability and prohibits &quot;begar&quot;. These provisions act as a check both on State actions and the actions of private individuals. Fundamental Rights are not absolute and are subject to reasonable restrictions as necessary for the protection of national interest. In the &quot;Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala&quot; case, the Supreme Court ruled that all provisions of the constitution, including Fundamental Rights can be amended. However, the Parliament cannot alter the basic structure of the constitution like secularism, democracy, federalism, and separation of powers. Often called the &quot;Basic structure doctrine&quot;, this decision is widely regarded as an important part of Indian history. In the 1978 &quot;Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India&quot; case, the Supreme Court extended the doctrine&#x27;s importance as superior to any parliamentary legislation. According to the verdict, no act of parliament can be considered a law if it violates the basic structure of the constitution. This landmark guarantee of Fundamental Rights was regarded as a unique example of judicial independence in preserving the sanctity of Fundamental Rights.
The Fundamental Rights can only be altered by a constitutional amendment, hence their inclusion is a check not only on the executive branch but also on the Parliament and state legislatures. The imposition of a state of emergency may lead to a temporary suspension of the rights conferred by Article 19 (including freedoms of speech, assembly and movement, etc.) to preserve national security and public order. The President can, by order, suspend the constitutional written remedies as well.

===Japan===

Since 1947, Japan, a country with a constitutional monarchy and known for its socially &quot;conservative society where change is gradual,&quot; has a constitution with a seemingly strong bill of rights at its core (Chapter III. Rights and Duties of the People). In many ways, it resembles the U.S. Constitution prior to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and that is because it came into life during the Allied occupation of Japan. This constitution may have felt like a foreign imposition to the governing elites, but not to the ordinary people &quot;who lacked faith in their discredited leaders and supported meaningful change.&quot; In the abstract, the constitution strives to secure fundamental individual liberties and rights, which are covered pointedly in articles 10 to 40. Most salient of the human dignity articles is article 25, section 1, which guarantees that all &quot;People shall have the right to maintain the minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living.&quot;

Despite the adoption of this liberal constitution, often referred as the &quot;Postwar Constitution&quot; (戦後憲法, Sengo-Kenpō) or the &quot;Peace Constitution&quot; (平和憲法, Heiwa-Kenpō), the Japanese governing elites have struggled to usher in an inclusive, open and Pluralist society. Even after the end of World War II and the departure of the Allied government of occupation in 1952, Japan has been the target of international criticism for failing to admit to war crimes, institutional religious discrimination and maintaining a weak freedom of the press, the treatment of children, minorities, foreigners, and women, its punitive criminal justice system, and more recently, the systematic bias against LGBT people.

The first Japanese attempt to a bill of rights was in the 19th century Meiji constitution (1890), which took both the Prussian (1850) and British constitutions as basic models. However, it had but a meagre influence in the practice of the rule of law as well as in people&#x27;s daily lives. So, the short and deliberately gradual history of struggles for personal rights and protection against government/society&#x27;s impositions has yet to transform Japan into a champion of universal and individual freedom. According to constitutional scholar, Shigenori Matsui,

Despite the divergences between Japan&#x27;s social culture and the Liberal Constitutionalism that it purports to have adopted, the country has moved toward closing the gap between the notion and the practice of the law. The trend is more evident in the long term. Among several examples, the Diet (bicameral legislature) ratified the International Bill of Human Rights in 1979 and then it passed the Law for Equal Opportunity in Employment for Men and Women in 1985, measures that were heralded as major steps toward a democratic and participatory society. In 2015, moreover, it reached an agreement with Korea to compensate for abuses related to the so-called &quot;women of comfort&quot; that took place during the Japanese occupation of the peninsula. However, human rights group, and families of the survivors condemned the agreement as patronizing and insulting.

On its official site, the Japanese government has identified various human rights problems. Among these are child abuses (e.g., bullying, corporal punishment, child sexual abuse, child prostitution, and child pornography), frequent neglect and ill-treatment of elderly persons and individuals with disabilities, Dowa claims (discrimination against the Burakumin), Ainu people (indigenous people in Japan), foreign nationals, HIV/AIDS carriers, Hansen&#x27;s disease patients, persons released from prison after serving their sentence, crime victims, people whose human rights are violated using the Internet, the homeless, individuals with gender identity disorders, and women. Also, the government lists systematic problems with gender biases and the standard reference to sexual preferences for jobs and other functions in society.

Human rights organizations, national and foreign, expand the list to include human rights violations that relate to government policies, as in the case of daiyo kangoku system (substitute prison) and the methods of interrogating crime suspects. The effort of these agencies and ordinary people seem to pay off. In 2016, the U.S. Department of State released a report stating that Japan&#x27;s human right record is showing signs of improvement.

==Australia==
Whilst Australia does not have an enshrined Bill of Rights or similar binding legal document, civil liberties are assumed as protected through a series of rules and conventions. Australia had primary involvement in and was a key signatory to the UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights (1948)

The Constitution of Australia (1900) does offer very limited protection of rights:
* the right to freedom of religion and;
* the right to freedom from discrimination based on out-of-state residence (historical prejudice based upon residence within one state affecting treatment within another)
Certain High Court interpretations of the Constitution have allowed for implied rights such as freedom of political communication (which is construed broadly) and the right to vote to be established, however, others such as freedom of assembly and freedom of association are yet to be identified.

Refugee issues

Within the past decade, Australia has experienced increasing contention regarding its treatment of those seeking asylum. Although Australia is a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention (1951), successive governments have demonstrated an increasing tightening of borders; particularly against those who seek passage via small water vessels.

The Abbott Government (2013) like its predecessors (the Gillard and Howard Governments) has encountered particular difficulty curbing asylum seekers via sea, increasingly identified as &quot;illegal immigration&quot;. The recent involvement of the Australian Navy in refugee rescue operations has many human rights groups such as Amnesty International concerned over the &quot;militarisation&quot; of the treatment of refugees and the issue of their human rights in Australia. The current &quot;turn-back&quot; policy is particularly divisive, as it involves placing refugees in government lifeboats and turning them towards Indonesia. Despite opposition however, the Abbott government&#x27;s response has so far seen a reduction in the number of potential refugees undertaking the hazardous cross to Australia, which is argued by the government as an indicator of its policy success.

==Europe==

===European Convention on Human Rights===
The European Convention on Human Rights, to which almost all European countries belong (apart from Belarus), enumerates a number of civil liberties and is of varying constitutional force in different European states.

===Czech Republic===
Following the Velvet Revolution, a constitutional overhaul took place in Czechoslovakia. In 1991, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms was adopted, having the same legal standing as the Constitution. The Czech Republic has kept the Charter in its entirety following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia as Act No. 2/1993 Coll. (Constitution being No. 1).

===France===
France&#x27;s 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen listed many civil liberties and is of constitutional force.

===Germany===
The German constitution, the &quot;Grundgesetz&quot; (lit. &quot;Base Law&quot;), starts with an elaborate listing of civil liberties and states in sec. 1 &quot;The dignity of man is inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all public authority.&quot; Following the &quot;Austrian System&quot;, the people have the right to appeal to the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany (&quot;Bundesverfassungsgericht&quot;) if they feel their civil rights are being violated. This procedure has shaped German law considerably over the years.

===United Kingdom===

Civil liberties in the United Kingdom date back to Magna Carta in 1215 and 17th century common law and statute law, such as the 1628 Petition of Right, the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 and the Bill of Rights 1689. Parts of these laws remain in statute today and are supplemented by other legislation and conventions that collectively form the uncodified Constitution of the United Kingdom. In addition, the United Kingdom is a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights which covers both human rights and civil liberties. The Human Rights Act 1998 incorporates the great majority of Convention rights directly into UK law.

In June 2008 the then Shadow Home Secretary David Davis resigned his parliamentary seat over what he described as the &quot;erosion of civil liberties&quot; by the then Labour government, and was re-elected on a civil liberties platform (although he was not opposed by candidates of other major parties). This was in reference to anti-terrorism laws and in particular the extension to pre-trial detention, that is perceived by many to be an infringement of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; established in Magna Carta.

===Russia===
The Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees in theory many of the same rights and civil liberties as the U.S. except to bear arms, i.e.: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of association and assembly, freedom to choose language, to due process, to a fair trial, privacy, freedom to vote, right for education, etc. However, human rights groups like Amnesty International have warned that Vladimir Putin has seriously curtailed freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association amidst growing authoritarianism.

==North America==

===Canada===
The Constitution of Canada includes the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which guarantees many of the same rights as the U.S. Constitution. The Charter omits any mention of, or protection for, property.

===Mexico===
The Constitution of Mexico was ratified on February 5, 1917. Similar to the U.S. Constitution, the United Mexican States provides all citizens the right to freedom of expression, but this right is not absolute (for example, child pornography, death threats, and defamation are exceptions to freedom of speech, and offenders can be subject to penalties). However, unlike the United States and Canada, Mexico has stricter limits on citizenship. For example, only people born in Mexico may take roles in law enforcement, legislating, or enlist in the armed forces. It also states each person born in Mexico cannot be deprived of their citizenship status.

===United States===

The United States Constitution, especially its Bill of Rights, protects civil liberties. The passage of the Fourteenth Amendment further protected civil liberties by introducing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, Due Process Clause, and Equal Protection Clause. Human rights within the United States are often called civil rights, which are those rights, privileges, and immunities held by all people, in distinction to &quot;political&quot; rights, which are the rights that inhere to those who are entitled to participate in elections, as candidates or voters. Before universal suffrage, this distinction was important, since many people were ineligible to vote but still were considered to have the fundamental freedoms derived from the rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. This distinction is less important now that Americans enjoy near universal suffrage, and civil rights are now taken to include the political rights to vote and participate in elections, being furthermore classified with civil liberties in general as either positive rights or negative rights. Because Native American tribal governments retain sovereignty over tribal members, the U.S. Congress in 1968 enacted a law that essentially applies most of the protections of the Bill of Rights to tribal members, to be enforced mainly by tribal courts.

The Civil Liberties Act of 1988 was signed into effect by President Ronald Reagan on August 10, 1988. The act was passed by Congress to issue a public apology for those of Japanese ancestry who lost their property and liberty due to discriminatory actions by the United States Government during the internment period. This act also provided many other benefits within various sectors of the government. Within the treasury, it established a civil liberties public education fund. It directed the Attorney General to identify and locate each individual affected by this act and to pay them $20,000 from the Civil Liberties public education fund. It also established a board of directors who is responsible for making disbursements from this fund. Finally, it required that all documents and records that are created or received by the commission be kept by the Archivist of the United States.

==See also==
* American Civil Liberties Union
* Canadian Civil Liberties Association
* Civil and political rights
* Civil libertarianism
* Drug liberalization
* Equality and Human Rights Commission
* Fundamental freedoms
* Human rights
* Libertarianism
* Liberalism
* Liberty (pressure group)
* List of civil rights leaders
* Privacy
* Proactive policing
* Rule according to higher law
* Rutherford Institute
* State of World Liberty Index
* Statewatch
* Teaching for social justice
==Notes and references==
==Further reading==

* Dershowitz, Alan. &quot;Preserving Civil Liberties.&quot; &quot;Reflections on the Fractured Landscape&quot;, spec. sec. of &quot;Chronicle of Higher Education&quot;, &quot;Chronicle Review&quot;, September 28, 2001. Accessed August 11, 2006.
* Smith, Jean Edward, and Herbert M. Levine. &quot;Civil Liberties and Civil Rights Debated&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988.
==External links==

* Court cases involving Civil Liberties held at the National Archives at Atlanta
* Leading Civil Liberties Organizations in the United States
* Rights, Civil Liberties and Freedoms in Russia
* The Cato Institute: Civil Liberties (archived 29 December 2006)
* USDOJ: Privacy and Civil Liberties Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="0" end="15" title="Civil liberties" label="Civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="94" end="106" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="108" end="119" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331848" start="124" end="147" title="judicial interpretation" label="judicial interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="157" end="168" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="260" end="281" title="Freedom of thought" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="283" end="299" title="Freedom of the press" label="freedom of press"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="301" end="320" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="322" end="343" title="Freedom of speech" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="345" end="364" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="392" end="399" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="401" end="418" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="424" end="440" title="right to privacy" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316254" start="455" end="484" title="Equality before the law" label="equal treatment under the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="506" end="527" title="right to a fair trial" label="right to a fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25822" start="537" end="550" title="right to life" label="right to life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="586" end="607" title="Right to property" label="right to own property"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="613" end="636" title="Self-defense" label="right to defend oneself"/>
<link wikidata="Q25915498" start="655" end="671" title="bodily integrity" label="bodily integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q831359" start="776" end="792" title="positive liberty" label="positive liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="793" end="808" title="Negative and positive rights" label="positive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q536814" start="813" end="829" title="negative liberty" label="negative liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="830" end="845" title="Negative and positive rights" label="negative rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="848" end="860" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="934" end="965" title="Small-government" label="minimal government intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="1058" end="1074" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055881" start="1093" end="1103" title="On Liberty" label="On Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="1193" end="1208" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638194" start="1222" end="1241" title="The Road to Serfdom" label="The Road to Serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="1300" end="1315" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q374098" start="1322" end="1336" title="Atlas Shrugged" label="Atlas Shrugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="1347" end="1362" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1369" end="1396" title="The Revolution: A Manifesto" label="The Revolution: A Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1689" end="1701" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="1705" end="1719" title="bill of rights" label="bill of rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="1975" end="2010" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="2019" end="2071" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="2169" end="2181" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="2214" end="2229" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="2231" end="2250" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="2256" end="2270" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026760" start="2617" end="2633" title="victimless crime" label="victimless crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="2791" end="2794" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="2798" end="2816" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="2936" end="2947" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="2966" end="2973" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067837" start="3051" end="3071" title="Charter of Liberties" label="Charter of Liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="3101" end="3152" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="3176" end="3190" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3199" end="3208" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="3210" end="3215" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3221" end="3227" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="3465" end="3483" title="Government of China" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922149" start="3507" end="3532" title="Inciting subversion of state power" label="subversion of state power"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="3563" end="3575" title="Classified information" label="state secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="3647" end="3670" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224366" start="3685" end="3698" title="List of national leaders of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="state leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="4119" end="4138" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519479" start="4297" end="4314" title="Indian Penal Code" label="Indian Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="4349" end="4358" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="4608" end="4622" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="4700" end="4717" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="4722" end="4735" title="Forced labour" label="unfree labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="4810" end="4820" title="minorities" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="5007" end="5018" title="High courts of India" label="High Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="5026" end="5039" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345563" start="5270" end="5296" title="Public interest law" label="public interest litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723752" start="5715" end="5732" title="Indian nationality law" label="citizens of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="5744" end="5763" title="Indian diaspora" label="non-resident Indian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5852" end="5878" title="Indian nationality law#Overseas citizenship" label="overseas citizens of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="6105" end="6110" title="Forced labour" label="begar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394902" start="6352" end="6408" title="Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala" label="&amp;quot;Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala&amp;quot; case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739159" start="6809" end="6822" title="Maneka Gandhi" label="Maneka Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603742" start="7449" end="7467" title="States of emergency in India" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="7653" end="7662" title="President (government title)" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="7757" end="7762" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="7781" end="7804" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237082" start="7896" end="7908" title="Constitution of Japan" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7961" end="8005" title=":wikisource: Constitution of Japan#CHAPTER III. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PEOPLE" label="Chapter III. Rights and Duties of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="8039" end="8056" title="United States Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="8070" end="8094" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="8145" end="8151" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="8152" end="8171" title="occupation of Japan" label="occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8620" end="8727" title=":wikisource: Constitution of Japan#CHAPTER III. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PEOPLE" label="&amp;quot;People shall have the right to maintain the minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="8994" end="9011" title="Pluralist society" label="Pluralist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9035" end="9047" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9073" end="9104" title="Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers#End of SCAP" label="Allied government of occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="9191" end="9201" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="9203" end="9241" title="Freedom of religion" label="institutional religious discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="9265" end="9285" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="9434" end="9438" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q122804" start="9519" end="9537" title="Meiji constitution" label="Meiji constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q667025" start="9566" end="9574" title="Constitution of Prussia (1850)" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="9586" end="9593" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9998" end="10014" title="Shigenori Matsui" label="Shigenori Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007647" start="10085" end="10110" title="Constitutional liberalism" label="Liberal Constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="10310" end="10314" title="National Diet" label="Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328552" start="10352" end="10386" title="International Bill of Human Rights" label="International Bill of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="10623" end="10628" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q713540" start="10685" end="10701" title="Comfort women" label="women of comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="10735" end="10754" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="10762" end="10771" title="Korean Peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="11015" end="11023" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="11025" end="11044" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="11046" end="11064" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="11066" end="11084" title="child prostitution" label="child prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="11090" end="11107" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q427883" start="11148" end="11163" title="Elder abuse" label="elderly persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281181" start="11185" end="11197" title="Disability abuse" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11199" end="11210" title="Burakumin#Discrimination in access to services" label="Dowa claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q548787" start="11239" end="11248" title="Burakumin" label="Burakumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="11251" end="11262" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629855" start="11312" end="11329" title="HIV/AIDS in Japan" label="HIV/AIDS carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="11331" end="11352" title="Hansen&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hansen&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925605" start="11422" end="11435" title="Victims&amp;#x27; rights" label="crime victims"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11450" end="11494" title="Human rights#Information and communication technologies" label="human rights are violated using the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049021" start="11527" end="11552" title="Gender dysphoria" label="gender identity disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="11558" end="11563" title="Misogyny" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591841" start="11877" end="11890" title="daiyo kangoku" label="daiyo kangoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="12481" end="12506" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354793" start="13875" end="13900" title="human rights in Australia" label="human rights in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="14369" end="14404" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="14464" end="14471" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="14618" end="14635" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998866" start="14677" end="14691" title="Czech and Slovak Federal Republic" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="14706" end="14754" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948382" start="14806" end="14818" title="Constitution of the Czech Republic" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="14890" end="14919" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="15005" end="15056" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="15136" end="15155" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="15422" end="15437" title="Austrian System" label="Austrian System"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="15488" end="15527" title="Federal Constitutional Court of Germany" label="Federal Constitutional Court of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="15731" end="15745" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="15759" end="15770" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="15796" end="15806" title="English common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="15811" end="15822" title="statute law" label="statute law"/>
<link wikidata="Q584063" start="15841" end="15858" title="Petition of Right" label="Petition of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q492004" start="15864" end="15886" title="Habeas Corpus Act 1679" label="Habeas Corpus Act 1679"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="15895" end="15914" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="16056" end="16090" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="Constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="16146" end="16181" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="16200" end="16212" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q477072" start="16238" end="16259" title="Human Rights Act 1998" label="Human Rights Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q300023" start="16380" end="16391" title="David Davis (British politician)" label="David Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232868" start="16392" end="16423" title="David Davis by-election campaign, 2008" label="resigned his parliamentary seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="16799" end="16812" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="16865" end="16903" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="16991" end="17000" title="bear arms" label="bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="17232" end="17253" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="17271" end="17285" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="17310" end="17331" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="17333" end="17352" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="17357" end="17379" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="17395" end="17411" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="17450" end="17472" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="17486" end="17525" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="17674" end="17696" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Constitution of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="17894" end="17911" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915360" start="17913" end="17926" title="death threats" label="death threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="17932" end="17942" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="18146" end="18152" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="18348" end="18374" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="18391" end="18405" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="18452" end="18472" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246326" start="18526" end="18557" title="Privileges or Immunities Clause" label="Privileges or Immunities Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="18559" end="18577" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="18583" end="18606" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="18663" end="18675" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="19205" end="19223" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="19397" end="19431" title="Negative and positive rights" label="positive rights or negative rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q124022891" start="19671" end="19683" title="tribal court" label="tribal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124499" start="19691" end="19718" title="Civil Liberties Act of 1988" label="Civil Liberties Act of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="19755" end="19768" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19881" end="19912" title="Internment of Japanese Americans#Hardship and material loss" label="lost their property and liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="19982" end="20003" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="the internment period"/>
<link wikidata="Q635713" start="20547" end="20577" title="Archivist of the United States" label="Archivist of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="20595" end="20625" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029859" start="20628" end="20664" title="Canadian Civil Liberties Association" label="Canadian Civil Liberties Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="20667" end="20693" title="Civil and political rights" label="Civil and political rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876201" start="20696" end="20716" title="Civil libertarianism" label="Civil libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638361" start="20719" end="20738" title="Drug liberalization" label="Drug liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001063" start="20741" end="20777" title="Equality and Human Rights Commission" label="Equality and Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="20780" end="20800" title="Fundamental freedoms" label="Fundamental freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="20803" end="20815" title="Human rights" label="Human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="20818" end="20832" title="Libertarianism" label="Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="20835" end="20845" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="20848" end="20872" title="Liberty (pressure group)" label="Liberty (pressure group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722345" start="20875" end="20903" title="List of civil rights leaders" label="List of civil rights leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="20906" end="20913" title="Privacy" label="Privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246815" start="20916" end="20934" title="Proactive policing" label="Proactive policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q113161979" start="20937" end="20965" title="Rule according to higher law" label="Rule according to higher law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383344" start="20968" end="20988" title="Rutherford Institute" label="Rutherford Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603809" start="20991" end="21019" title="State of World Liberty Index" label="State of World Liberty Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333735" start="21022" end="21032" title="Statewatch" label="Statewatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="21035" end="21062" title="Teaching for social justice" label="Teaching for social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183058" start="21111" end="21127" title="Alan Dershowitz" label="Dershowitz, Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617" start="21241" end="21270" title="Chronicle of Higher Education" label="Chronicle of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="21356" end="21374" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Smith, Jean Edward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37479" wikidata="Q92958" url="?curid=37479" title="Jamie Zawinski">
<text>Jamie Werner Zawinski (born November 3, 1968), commonly known as jwz, is an American computer programmer, blogger, and impresario. He is best known for his role in the creation of Netscape Navigator, Netscape Mail, Lucid Emacs, Mozilla.org, and XScreenSaver. He is also the proprietor of DNA Lounge, a nightclub and live music venue in San Francisco.

==Biography==
Zawinski&#x27;s programming career began at age 16 with Scott Fahlman&#x27;s Spice Lisp project at Carnegie Mellon University. He then worked at AI startup Expert Technologies, Inc. followed by Robert Wilensky and Peter Norvig&#x27;s AI research group at UC Berkeley, working on natural language processing.

In 1990 he began working at Lucid Inc., first working on Lucid Common Lisp, and then on Lucid&#x27;s Energize C++ IDE. Lucid decided to use GNU Emacs as the text editor for their IDE due to its free license, popularity, and extensibility, and Zawinski led that project. As Zawinski and the other programmers made fundamental changes to GNU Emacs to add new functionality, tensions over how to merge these patches into the main tree eventually led to the fork of the project into GNU Emacs and Lucid Emacs (now XEmacs).

In 1992 he released the first version of XScreenSaver, a free and open-source collection now containing more than 240
screensavers. Initially released for Unix, it now supports macOS, iOS, and Android as well. On Unix systems, it also provides the framework for blanking and locking the screen. He still maintains it, with new releases coming out several times a year.

===Netscape and Mozilla===
Following Lucid&#x27;s bankruptcy in 1994, Zawinski was one of the initial employees of Mosaic Communications, later known as Netscape. At Netscape, he developed the Unix release of Netscape Navigator 1.0,
and later, Netscape Mail, the first mail reader (or Usenet reader) to natively support HTML.

Zawinski came up with the name &quot;Mozilla&quot; (originally the internal code-name of the web browser) during a staff meeting, as a reference to Godzilla and a portmanteau of &quot;Mosaic killer&quot;.

An easter egg he coded in the Netscape browser became quite well known during the early days of the World Wide Web: typing &quot;about:jwz&quot; into the address box would take the user to his home page, and would change the browser&#x27;s logo animation to a fire-breathing dragon.

Through his long-time support and advocacy for free software both inside and outside the company, Zawinski is credited with having been the inspiration for Netscape&#x27;s decision to open-source the source code of the browser in 1998.
He was a founder of Mozilla.org, personally registering its domain name on the day of Netscape&#x27;s open source announcement and helping design and run the organization through its first year.

When Netscape was acquired by AOL in 1999, he wrote a bulletin explaining that Mozilla&#x27;s work would continue with or without Netscape. And a year after the initial source code release, he resigned from Netscape and Mozilla, citing his disappointment that others involved in the project had decided to rewrite the code instead of incrementally improving it.

===DNA Lounge===
Shortly after leaving Mozilla, he announced his purchase of DNA Lounge, a nightclub in San Francisco. Zawinski purchased the nightclub in 1999 for approximately 5 million dollars and it was re-opened in July 2001, a process which he documented extensively in a blog named &quot;DNA Sequencing&quot;.

In 2016, he explored alternative funding ideas to keep the venue afloat during a downturn in attendance.

==Interviews and appearances==
In 2000, Zawinski starred in the 60-minute-long PBS documentary &quot;Code Rush&quot;, which chronicles the creation of Mozilla.org and the release of the browser source code over the course of 1998.

Zawinski features extensively in Josh Quittner&#x27;s 1998 book &quot;Speeding the Net: The Inside Story of Netscape and How It Challenged Microsoft&quot;,
and in Glyn Moody&#x27;s 2001 book, &quot;Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution&quot;.
There is a chapter on Zawinski in Peter Seibel&#x27;s 2009 book, &quot;Coders at Work: Reflections on the Craft of Programming&quot;.
And in 2001, he was featured in &quot;California Dreamin&#x27;: The Gold Rush&quot;, a documentary for German public television.
Zawinski appears in several video installations at the Computer History Museum&#x27;s exhibit, &quot;Revolution: The First 2000 Years of Computing&quot;.

He was also featured in &quot;Sleep Mode: The Art of the Screensaver&quot;, a gallery exhibition curated by Rafaël Rozendaal at Rotterdam&#x27;s Het Nieuwe Instituut in 2017.

==Zawinski&#x27;s Law==

&quot;Zawinski&#x27;s Law of Software Envelopment&quot;, also known as &quot;Zawinski&#x27;s Law&quot;, states:

Some have interpreted this as commenting on the phenomenon of software bloating with popular features.
Zawinski stated, in 2020: 

==Principles==
Zawinski first attained prominence as a Lisp programmer, but most of his larger projects are written in C. Despite that, he has long been critical of languages lacking memory safety and automatic memory management. He has particularly proselytized against C++. In Peter Seibel&#x27;s book &quot;Coders at Work: Reflections on the Craft of Programming&quot;, Zawinski calls C++ an &quot;abomination... the PDP-11 assembler that thinks it&#x27;s an object system&quot;.

Though he has written and published many utilities in Perl, he is not without his criticisms, characterizing Perl as &quot;combining all the worst aspects of C and Lisp: a billion different sublanguages in one monolithic executable. It combines the power of C with the readability of PostScript.&quot;

He has criticized several language and library deficiencies he encountered while programming in Java, specifically the overhead of certain fundamental classes but especially the marketing and politics behind it that led Sun to conflate the language, the class library, the virtual machine, and the security model all under the same name, &quot;Java&quot; – to, he says, the detriment of them all. Despite the positive aspects, ultimately Zawinski returned to programming in C &quot;since it&#x27;s still the only way to ship portable programs&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92958" start="0" end="21" title="Jamie Zawinski" label="Jamie Werner Zawinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q92958" start="65" end="68" title="Jamie Zawinski" label="jwz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="85" end="104" title="computer programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="106" end="110" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="119" end="129" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q235419" start="180" end="198" title="Netscape Navigator" label="Netscape Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000318" start="200" end="213" title="Netscape Mail &amp;amp; Newsgroups" label="Netscape Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164944" start="215" end="226" title="XEmacs" label="Lucid Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55672" start="228" end="239" title="Mozilla Foundation" label="Mozilla.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597609" start="245" end="257" title="XScreenSaver" label="XScreenSaver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="274" end="284" title="ownership#In person" label="proprietor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205728" start="288" end="298" title="DNA Lounge" label="DNA Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="302" end="311" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719053" start="316" end="332" title="Music venue" label="live music venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="336" end="349" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q92769" start="422" end="435" title="Scott Fahlman" label="Scott Fahlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493421" start="443" end="453" title="Spice Lisp" label="Spice Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="465" end="491" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15480023" start="560" end="575" title="Robert Wilensky" label="Robert Wilensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q92832" start="580" end="592" title="Peter Norvig" label="Peter Norvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="621" end="632" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="645" end="672" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696915" start="703" end="713" title="Lucid Inc." label="Lucid Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="732" end="749" title="Lucid Common Lisp" label="Lucid Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="785" end="788" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="789" end="792" title="Integrated development environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="815" end="824" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="1129" end="1133" title="Fork (software development)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164944" start="1185" end="1191" title="XEmacs" label="XEmacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597609" start="1236" end="1248" title="XScreenSaver" label="XScreenSaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="1252" end="1272" title="free and open-source" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q753486" start="1313" end="1324" title="screensaver" label="screensaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="1350" end="1354" title="Unix-like" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1372" end="1377" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1379" end="1382" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="1388" end="1395" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="1615" end="1623" title="bankrupt" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="1680" end="1701" title="Mosaic Communications" label="Mosaic Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="1718" end="1726" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1758" end="1762" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q235419" start="1774" end="1792" title="Netscape Navigator" label="Netscape Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000318" start="1809" end="1822" title="Netscape Mail &amp;amp; Newsgroups" label="Netscape Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="1850" end="1856" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1885" end="1889" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="1929" end="1936" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="2040" end="2048" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="2055" end="2066" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q381047" start="2076" end="2082" title="Mosaic (web browser)" label="Mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q330574" start="2101" end="2111" title="easter egg (virtual)" label="easter egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="2198" end="2212" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="2429" end="2442" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="2566" end="2577" title="open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="2582" end="2593" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q55672" start="2638" end="2649" title="Mozilla Foundation" label="Mozilla.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2844" end="2847" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205728" start="3254" end="3264" title="DNA Lounge" label="DNA Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="3268" end="3277" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3281" end="3294" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140055" start="3702" end="3711" title="Code Rush" label="Code Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289272" start="3866" end="3879" title="Josh Quittner" label="Josh Quittner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11924372" start="3996" end="4006" title="Glyn Moody" label="Glyn Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866746" start="4031" end="4079" title="Rebel Code" label="Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140161" start="4158" end="4213" title="Coders at Work" label="Coders at Work: Reflections on the Craft of Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="4405" end="4428" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417276" start="4613" end="4629" title="Rafaël Rozendaal" label="Rafaël Rozendaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20888634" start="4650" end="4670" title="Het Nieuwe Instituut" label="Het Nieuwe Instituut"/>
<link wikidata="Q119981" start="4881" end="4895" title="software bloat" label="software bloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="5005" end="5009" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="5069" end="5070" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080983" start="5133" end="5146" title="memory safety" label="memory safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="5151" end="5178" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="automatic memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108581" start="5213" end="5224" title="Criticism of C++" label="against C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="5488" end="5492" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="5718" end="5728" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385632" start="5744" end="5754" title="Criticism of Java" label="criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="5833" end="5837" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="5957" end="5960" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="6010" end="6025" title="Java virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37481" wikidata="Q483426" url="?curid=37481" title="Intranet">
<text>An intranet is a computer network for sharing information, easier communication, collaboration tools, operational systems, and other computing services within an organization, usually to the exclusion of access by outsiders. The term is used in contrast to public networks, such as the Internet, but uses the same technology based on the Internet protocol suite.

An organization-wide intranet can constitute an important focal point of internal communication and collaboration, and provide a single starting point to access internal and external resources. In its simplest form, an intranet is established with the technologies for local area networks (LANs) and wide area networks (WANs). Many modern intranets have search engines, user profiles, blogs, mobile apps with notifications, and events planning within their infrastructure.

An intranet is sometimes contrasted to an extranet. While an intranet is generally restricted to employees of the organization, extranets may also be accessed by customers, suppliers, or other approved parties. Extranets extend a private network onto the Internet with special provisions for authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA protocol).

==Uses==
Intranets are increasingly being used to deliver tools, such as for collaboration (to facilitate working in groups and teleconferencing) or corporate directories, sales and customer relationship management, or project management. Intranets are also used as corporate culture-change platforms. For example, a large number of employees using an intranet forum application to host a discussion about key issues could come up with new ideas related to management, productivity, quality, and other corporate issues. In large intranets, website traffic is often similar to public website traffic and can be better understood by using web metrics software to track overall activity. User surveys also improve intranet website effectiveness.

Larger businesses allow users within their intranet to access public internet through firewall servers. They have the ability to screen incoming and outgoing messages, keeping security intact. When part of an intranet is made accessible to customers and others outside the business, it becomes part of an extranet. Businesses can send private messages through the public network using special encryption/decryption and other security safeguards to connect one part of their intranet to another.

Intranet user-experience, editorial, and technology teams work together to produce in-house sites. Most commonly, intranets are managed by the communications, HR or CIO departments of large organizations, or some combination of these.

Because of the scope and variety of content and the number of system interfaces, the intranets of many organizations are much more complex than their respective public websites. Intranets and the use of intranets are growing rapidly. According to the Intranet Design Annual 2007 from Nielsen Norman Group, the number of pages on participants&#x27; intranets averaged 200,000 over the years 2001 to 2003 and has grown to an average of 6 million pages over 2005–2007.

==Benefits==

Intranets can help users locate and view information faster and use applications relevant to their roles and responsibilities. With a web browser interface, users can access data held in any database the organization wants to make available at any time and — subject to security provisions — from anywhere within company workstations, increasing employees&#x27; ability to perform their jobs faster, more accurately, and with confidence that they have the right information. It also helps improve services provided to users.

Using hypermedia and Web technology, Web publishing allows for the maintenance of and easy access to cumbersome corporate knowledge, such as employee manuals, benefits documents, company policies, business standards, news feeds, and even training, all of which can be accessed throughout a company using common Internet standards (Acrobat files, Flash files, CGI applications). Because each business unit can update the online copy of a document, the most recent version is usually available to employees using the intranet. Intranets are also used as a platform for developing and deploying applications to support business operations and decisions across the internetworked enterprise.

Intranets allow organizations to distribute information to employees on an &quot;as-needed&quot; basis; Employees may link to relevant information at their convenience rather than being distracted indiscriminately by email. The intranet can also be linked to a company&#x27;s management information system, such as a time keeping system.

Information is easily accessible to all authorised users, enabling collaboration. Being able to communicate in real-time through integrated third-party tools, such as an instant messenger, promotes the sharing of ideas and removes blockages to communication to help boost a business&#x27;s productivity.

Intranets can serve as powerful tools for communicating (such as through chat, email and/or blogs) within a given organization about vertically strategic initiatives that have a global reach throughout said organization. The type of information that can easily be conveyed is the purpose of the initiative and what it is aiming to achieve, who is driving it, results achieved to date, and whom to speak to for more information. By providing this information on the intranet, staff can keep up-to-date with the strategic focus of their organization. For example, when Nestlé had a number of food processing plants in Scandinavia, their central support system had to deal with a number of queries every day. When Nestlé decided to invest in an intranet, they quickly realized the savings. Gerry McGovern says that the savings from the reduction in query calls was substantially greater than the investment in the intranet.

Users can view information and data via a web browser rather than maintaining physical documents such as procedure manuals, internal phone list and requisition forms. This can potentially save the business money on printing, duplicating documents, and the environment, as well as document maintenance overhead. For example, the HRM company PeopleSoft &quot;derived significant cost savings by shifting HR processes to the intranet&quot;. McGovern goes on to say the manual cost of enrolling in benefits was found to be US$109.48 per enrollment. &quot;Shifting this process to the intranet reduced the cost per enrollment to $21.79; a saving of 80 percent&quot;. Another company that saved money on expense reports was Cisco. &quot;In 1996, Cisco processed 54,000 reports and the amount of dollars processed was USD19 million&quot;.

Many companies dictate computer specifications which, in turn, may allow Intranet developers to write applications that only have to work on one browser such that there are no cross-browser compatibility issues. Being able to specifically address one&#x27;s &quot;viewer&quot; is a great advantage. Since intranets are user-specific (requiring database/network authentication prior to access), users know exactly who they are interfacing with and can personalize their intranet based on role (job title, department) or individual (&quot;Congratulations Jane, on your 3rd year with our company!&quot;).

Since &quot;involvement in decision making&quot; is one of the main drivers of employee engagement, offering tools (like forums or surveys) that foster peer-to-peer collaboration and employee participation can make employees feel more valued and involved.

==Planning and creation==
Most organizations devote considerable resources into the planning and implementation of their intranet as it is of strategic importance to the organization&#x27;s success. Some of the planning would include topics such as determining the purpose and goals of the intranet, identifying persons or departments responsible for implementation and management and devising functional plans, page layouts and designs.

The appropriate staff would also ensure that implementation schedules and phase-out of existing systems were organized, while defining and implementing security of the intranet and ensuring it lies within legal boundaries and other constraints. In order to produce a high-value end product, systems planners should determine the level of interactivity (e.g. wikis, on-line forms) desired.

Planners may also consider whether the input of new data and updating of existing data is to be centrally controlled or devolve. These decisions sit alongside to the hardware and software considerations (like content management systems), participation issues (like good taste, harassment, confidentiality), and features to be supported.

Intranets are often static sites; they are a shared drive, serving up centrally stored documents alongside internal articles or communications (often one-way communication). By leveraging firms which specialise in &#x27;social&#x27; intranets, organisations are beginning to think of how their intranets can become a &#x27;communication hub&#x27; for their entire team. The actual implementation would include steps such as securing senior management support and funding, conducting a business requirement analysis and identifying users&#x27; information needs.

From the technical perspective, there would need to be a coordinated installation of the web server and user access network, the required user/client applications and the creation of document framework (or template) for the content to be hosted.

The end-user should be involved in testing and promoting use of the company intranet, possibly through a parallel adoption methodology or pilot programme. In the long term, the company should carry out ongoing measurement and evaluation, including through benchmarking against other company services.

==Maintenance==

Some aspects are non-static.

===Staying current===
An intranet structure needs key personnel committed to maintaining the intranet and keeping content current. For feedback on the intranet, social networking can be done through a forum for users to indicate what they want and what they do not like.

===Privacy protection===
The European Union&#x27;s General Data Protection Regulation went into effect May 2018. Since then, the protection of the privacy of employees, customers and other stakeholders (e.g. consultants) has become more and more a significant concern for most companies (at least, all those having an interest in markets and countries where regulations are in place to protect the privacy).

==Enterprise private network==
An enterprise private network is a computer network built by a business to interconnect its various company sites (such as production sites, offices and shops) in order to share computer resources.

Beginning with the digitalisation of telecommunication networks, started in the 1970s in the US by AT&amp;T, and propelled by the growth in computer systems availability and demands, enterprise networks have been built for decades without the need to append the term &quot;private&quot; to them. The networks were operated over telecommunications networks and, as for voice communications, a certain amount of security and secrecy was expected and delivered.

But with the Internet in the 1990s came a new type of network, virtual private networks, built over this public infrastructure, using encryption to protect the data traffic from eaves-dropping. So the enterprise networks are now commonly referred to as &quot;enterprise private networks&quot; in order to clarify that these are private networks, in contrast to public networks.

==See also==
*eGranary Digital Library
*Enterprise portal
*Intranet portal
*Intranet strategies
*Intranet Wiki
*Kwangmyong (intranet)
*Virtual workplace
*Web portal

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="3" end="11" title="Intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="17" end="33" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="286" end="294" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="338" end="361" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="633" end="651" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="664" end="681" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="718" end="732" title="Web search engine" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q373889" start="880" end="888" title="extranet" label="extranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186" start="1068" end="1083" title="private network" label="private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q430140" start="1176" end="1188" title="AAA protocol" label="AAA protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q485643" start="1374" end="1406" title="customer relationship management" label="customer relationship management"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="1411" end="1429" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490295" start="1877" end="1888" title="Survey (human research)" label="User survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q373889" start="2241" end="2249" title="extranet" label="extranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="2329" end="2339" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="2340" end="2350" title="decryption" label="decryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056396" start="2591" end="2593" title="Human Resource Management" label="HR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589465" start="2597" end="2600" title="Chief Information Officer" label="CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058483" start="2919" end="2941" title="Intranet Design Annual" label="Intranet Design Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031613" start="2952" end="2972" title="Nielsen Norman Group" label="Nielsen Norman Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="3283" end="3294" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q837900" start="3681" end="3691" title="hypermedia" label="hypermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="5575" end="5581" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="5624" end="5635" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928814" start="6270" end="6280" title="PeopleSoft" label="PeopleSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="6648" end="6653" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="7393" end="7408" title="decision making" label="decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="8420" end="8424" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="8661" end="8687" title="content management systems" label="content management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134988" start="9705" end="9722" title="parallel adoption" label="parallel adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="10110" end="10127" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10250" end="10264" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="10272" end="10306" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="General Data Protection Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="10696" end="10712" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="11188" end="11214" title="telecommunications network" label="telecommunications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="11383" end="11406" title="virtual private network" label="virtual private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323076" start="11713" end="11737" title="eGranary Digital Library" label="eGranary Digital Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671576" start="11739" end="11756" title="Enterprise portal" label="Enterprise portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058491" start="11758" end="11773" title="Intranet portal" label="Intranet portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058493" start="11775" end="11794" title="Intranet strategies" label="Intranet strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686945" start="11796" end="11809" title="Intranet Wiki" label="Intranet Wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q714008" start="11811" end="11832" title="Kwangmyong (intranet)" label="Kwangmyong (intranet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935187" start="11834" end="11851" title="Virtual workplace" label="Virtual workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q186165" start="11853" end="11863" title="Web portal" label="Web portal"/>
</links>
</doc>
