<doc id="37261" wikidata="Q152030" url="?curid=37261" title="Ion Antonescu">
<text>Ion Antonescu (; ; – 1 June 1946) was a Romanian military officer and marshal who presided over two successive wartime dictatorships as Prime Minister and &quot;Conducător&quot; during most of World War II. Having been responsible for facilitating the Holocaust in Romania, he was tried for war crimes and executed in 1946.

A Romanian Army career officer who made his name during the 1907 peasants&#x27; revolt and the World War I Romanian campaign, the antisemitic Antonescu sympathized with far-right and fascist politics. He was a military attaché to France and later Chief of the General Staff, briefly serving as Defense Minister in the National Christian cabinet of Octavian Goga as well as the subsequent First Cristea cabinet, in which he also served as Air and Marine Minister. During the late 1930s, his political stance brought him into conflict with King Carol II and led to his detainment. Antonescu rose to political prominence during the political crisis of 1940, and established the National Legionary State, an uneasy partnership with Horia Sima of the Iron Guard. After entering Romania into an alliance with Nazi Germany, he eliminated the Guard during the Legionary Rebellion of 1941. In addition to being Prime Minister, he served as his own Foreign Minister and Defense Minister. Soon after Romania joined the Axis in Operation Barbarossa, recovering Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, Antonescu also became Marshal of Romania.

An atypical figure among Holocaust perpetrators, Antonescu enforced policies independently responsible for the deaths of as many as 400,000 people, most of them Bessarabian, Ukrainian and Romanian Jews, as well as Romanian Romani. The regime&#x27;s complicity in the Holocaust combined pogroms and mass murders such as the Odessa massacre with ethnic cleansing, and systematic deportations to occupied Transnistria. The system in place was nevertheless characterized by singular inconsistencies, prioritizing plunder over killing, showing leniency toward most Jews in the Old Kingdom, and ultimately refusing to adopt the Final Solution. This was made possible by the fact that Romania, as a junior ally of Nazi Germany, was not occupied by the Wehrmacht and preserved a degree of political autonomy.

Aerial attacks on Romania by the Allies in 1944 and heavy casualties on the Eastern Front prompted Antonescu to open peace negotiations with the Allies, which were inconclusive. On 23 August 1944, King Michael I led a coup d&#x27;état against Antonescu, who was arrested; after the war he was convicted of war crimes, and executed in June 1946. His involvement in the Holocaust was officially reasserted and condemned following the 2003 Wiesel Commission report.

==Biography==

===Early life and career===
Born in the town of Pitești, north-west of the capital Bucharest, Antonescu was the scion of an upper-middle class Romanian Orthodox family with some military tradition. He was especially close to his mother, Lița Baranga, who survived his death. His father, an army officer, wanted Ion to follow in his footsteps and thus sent him to attend the Infantry and Cavalry School in Craiova. During his childhood, his father divorced his mother to marry a woman who was a Jewish convert to Orthodoxy. The breakup of his parents&#x27; marriage was a traumatic event for the young Antonescu, and he made no secret of his dislike of his stepmother, whom he always depicted as a &quot;femme fatale&quot; who destroyed what he saw as his parents&#x27; happy marriage.

According to one account, Ion Antonescu was briefly a classmate of Wilhelm Filderman, the future Romanian Jewish community activist whose interventions with &quot;Conducător&quot; Antonescu helped save a number of his coreligionists. After graduation, in 1904, Antonescu joined the Romanian Army with the rank of Second Lieutenant. He spent the following two years attending courses at the Special Cavalry Section in Târgoviște. Reportedly, Antonescu was a zealous and goal-setting student, upset by the slow pace of promotions, and compensated for his diminutive stature through toughness. In time, the reputation of being a tough and ruthless commander, together with his reddish hair, earned him the nickname &quot;Câinele Roșu&quot; (&quot;The Red Dog&quot;). Antonescu also developed a reputation for questioning his commanders and for appealing over their heads whenever he felt they were wrong.

During the repression of the 1907 peasants&#x27; revolt, he headed a cavalry unit in Covurlui County. Opinions on his role in the events diverge: while some historians believe Antonescu was a particularly violent participant in quelling the revolt, others equate his participation with that of regular officers or view it as outstandingly tactful. In addition to restricting peasant protests, Antonescu&#x27;s unit subdued socialist activities in Galați port. His handling of the situation earned him praise from King Carol I, who sent Crown Prince (future monarch) Ferdinand to congratulate him in front of the whole garrison. The following year, Antonescu was promoted to Lieutenant, and, between 1911 and 1913, he attended the Advanced War School, receiving the rank of Captain upon graduation. In 1913, during the Second Balkan War against Bulgaria, Antonescu served as a staff officer in the First Cavalry Division in Dobruja.

===World War I===
After 1916, when Romania entered World War I on the Allied side, Ion Antonescu acted as chief of staff for General Constantin Prezan. When enemy troops crossed the mountains from Transylvania into Wallachia, Antonescu was ordered to design a defense plan for Bucharest.

The Romanian royal court, army, and administration were subsequently forced to retreat into Moldavia. Antonescu took part in an important decision involving defensive efforts, an unusual promotion which probably stoked his ambitions. In December, as Prezan became the Chief of the General Staff, Antonescu, who was by now a major, was named the head of operations, being involved in the defence of Moldavia. He contributed to the tactics used during the Battle of Mărășești (July–August 1917), when Romanians under General Eremia Grigorescu managed to stop the advance of German forces under the command of Field Marshal August von Mackensen. Being described as &quot;a talented if prickly individual&quot;, Antonescu lived in Prezan&#x27;s proximity for the remainder of the war and influenced his decisions. Such was the influence of Antonescu on General Prezan that General Alexandru Averescu used the formula &quot;Prezan (Antonescu)&quot; in his memoirs to denote Prezan&#x27;s plans and actions.

That autumn, Romania&#x27;s main ally, the Russian Provisional Government, left the conflict. Its successor, Bolshevik Russia, made peace with the Central Powers, leaving Romania the only enemy of the Central Powers on the Eastern Front. In these conditions, the Romanian government made its own peace treaty with the Central Powers. Romania broke the treaty later in the year, on the grounds that King Ferdinand I had not signed it. During the interval, Antonescu, who viewed the separate peace as &quot;the most rational solution,&quot; was assigned command over a cavalry regiment. The renewed offensive played a part in ensuring the union of Transylvania with Romania. After the war, Antonescu&#x27;s merits as an operations officer were noticed by, among others, politician Ion G. Duca, who wrote that &quot;his [Antonescu&#x27;s] intelligence, skill and activity, brought credit on himself and invaluable service to the country.&quot; Another event occurring late in the war is also credited with having played a major part in Antonescu&#x27;s life: in 1918, Crown Prince Carol (the future King Carol II) left his army posting to marry a commoner. This outraged Antonescu, who developed enduring contempt for the future king.

===Diplomatic assignments and General Staff positions===

Lieutenant Colonel Ion Antonescu retained his visibility in the public eye during the interwar period. He participated in the political campaign to earn recognition at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 for Romania&#x27;s gains in Transylvania. His nationalist argument about a future state was published as the essay &quot;Românii. Origina, trecutul, sacrificiile și drepturile lor&quot; (&quot;The Romanians. Their Origin, Their Past, Their Sacrifices and Their Rights&quot;). The booklet advocated extension of Romanian rule beyond the confines of Greater Romania, and recommended, at the risk of war with the emerging Kingdom of Yugoslavia, the annexation of all Banat areas and the Timok Valley. Antonescu was known for his frequent and erratic changes of mood, going from being extremely angry to being calm to angry again to being calm again within minutes, behaviour that often disoriented those who had to work with him. The Israeli historian Jean Ancel wrote that Antonescu&#x27;s frequent changes of mood were due to the syphilis he contracted as a young man, a condition he suffered from for the rest of his life.

He became attache in Paris in 1922. He negotiated a credit worth 100 million French francs to purchase French weaponry. He worked together with Romanian diplomat Nicolae Titulescu; the two became personal friends. He was also in contact with the Romanian-born conservative aristocrat and writer Marthe Bibesco, who introduced Antonescu to the ideas of Gustave Le Bon, a researcher of crowd psychology who had an influence on Fascism. Bibesco saw Antonescu as a new version of 19th century nationalist Frenchman Georges Boulanger, introducing him as such to Le Bon. In 1923, he made the acquaintance of lawyer Mihai Antonescu, who was to become his close friend, legal representative and political associate.

After returning to Romania in 1926, Antonescu resumed his teaching in Sibiu, and, in the autumn of 1928, became Secretary-General of the Defense Ministry in the Vintilă Brătianu cabinet. He married Maria Niculescu, for long a resident of France, who had been married twice before: first to a Romanian Police officer, with whom she had a son, Gheorghe (died 1944), and then to a Frenchman of Jewish origin. After a period as Deputy Chief of the General Staff, he was appointed its Chief (1933–1934). These assignments coincided with the rule of Carol&#x27;s underage son Michael I and his regents, and with Carol&#x27;s seizure of power in 1930. During this period Antonescu first grew interested in the Iron Guard, an antisemitic and fascist-related movement headed by Corneliu Zelea Codreanu. In his capacity as Deputy Chief of Staff, he ordered the Army&#x27;s intelligence unit to compile a report on the faction, and made a series of critical notes on Codreanu&#x27;s various statements.

As Chief of Staff, Antonescu reportedly had his first confrontation with the political class and the monarch. His projects for weapon modernization were questioned by Defense Minister Paul Angelescu, leading Antonescu to present his resignation. According to another account, he completed an official report on the embezzlement of Army funds which indirectly implicated Carol and his &quot;camarilla&quot; (&quot;see Škoda Affair&quot;). The king consequently ordered him out of office, provoking indignation among sections of the political mainstream. On Carol&#x27;s orders, Antonescu was placed under surveillance by the &quot;Siguranța Statului&quot; intelligence service, and closely monitored by the Interior Ministry Undersecretary Armand Călinescu. The officer&#x27;s political credentials were on the rise, as he was able to establish and maintain contacts with people on all sides of the political spectrum, while support for Carol plummeted. Among these were contacts with the two main democratic groups, the National Liberal and the National Peasants&#x27;, parties known respectively as PNL and PNȚ. He was also engaged in discussions with the rising far right, antisemitic and fascist movements; although in competition with each other, both the National Christian Party (PNC) of Octavian Goga and the Iron Guard sought to attract Antonescu to their side. In 1936, to the authorities&#x27; alarm, Army General and Iron Guard member Gheorghe Cantacuzino-Grănicerul arranged a meeting between Ion Antonescu and the movement&#x27;s leader, Corneliu Codreanu. Antonescu is reported to have found Codreanu arrogant, but to have welcomed his revolutionizing approach to politics.

===Defense portfolio and the Codreanu trials===
In late 1937, after the December general election came to an inconclusive result, Carol appointed Goga Prime Minister over a far right cabinet that was the first executive to impose racial discrimination in its treatment of the Jewish community. Goga&#x27;s appointment was meant to curb the rise of the more popular and even more radical Codreanu. Initially given the Communications portfolio by his rival, Interior Minister Armand Călinescu, Antonescu repeatedly demanded the office of Defense Minister, which he was eventually granted. His mandate coincided with a troubled period, and saw Romania having to choose between its traditional alliance with France, Britain, the crumbling Little Entente and the League of Nations or moving closer to Nazi Germany and its Anti-Comintern Pact. Antonescu&#x27;s own contribution is disputed by historians, who variously see him as either a supporter of the Anglo-French alliance or, like the PNC itself, more favourable to cooperation with Adolf Hitler&#x27;s Germany. At the time, Antonescu viewed Romania&#x27;s alliance with the Entente as insurance against Hungarian and Soviet revanchism, but, as an anti-communist, he was suspicious of the Franco-Soviet rapprochement. Particularly concerned about Hungarian demands in Transylvania, he ordered the General Staff to prepare for a western attack. However, his major contribution in office was in relation to an internal crisis: as a response to violent clashes between the Iron Guard and the PNC&#x27;s own fascist militia, the &quot;Lăncieri&quot;, Antonescu extended the already imposed martial law.

The Goga cabinet ended when the tentative rapprochement between Goga and Codreanu prompted Carol to overthrow the democratic system and proclaim his own authoritarian regime (&quot;see 1938 Constitution of Romania, National Renaissance Front&quot;). The deposed Premier died in 1938, while Antonescu remained a close friend of his widow, Veturia Goga. By that time, revising his earlier stance, Antonescu had also built a close relationship with Codreanu, and was even said to have become his confidant. On Carol&#x27;s request, he had earlier asked the Guard&#x27;s leader to consider an alliance with the king, which Codreanu promptly refused in favour of negotiations with Goga, coupled with claims that he was not interested in political battles, an attitude supposedly induced by Antonescu himself.

Soon afterward, Călinescu, acting on indications from the monarch, arrested Codreanu and prosecuted him in two successive trials. Antonescu, whose mandate of Defense Minister had been prolonged under the premiership of Miron Cristea, resigned in protest of Codreanu&#x27;s arrest. Antonescu&#x27;s mandate ended on 30 March 1938. He also served as Air and Marine Minister between 2 February and his resignation on 30 March. He was a celebrity defense witness at the latter&#x27;s first and second trials. During the latter, which resulted in Codreanu&#x27;s conviction for treason, Antonescu vouched for his friend&#x27;s honesty while shaking his hand in front of the jury. Upon the conclusion of the trial, the king ordered his former minister interned at Predeal, before assigning him to command the Third Army in the remote eastern region of Bessarabia (and later removing him after Antonescu expressed sympathy for Guardists imprisoned in Chișinău). Attempting to discredit his rival, Carol also ordered Antonescu&#x27;s wife to be tried for bigamy, based on a false claim that her divorce had not been finalized. Defended by Mihai Antonescu, the officer was able to prove his detractors wrong. Codreanu himself was taken into custody and discreetly killed by the Gendarmes acting on Carol&#x27;s orders (November 1938).

Carol&#x27;s regime slowly dissolved into crisis, a dissolution accelerated after the start of World War II, when the military success of the core Axis Powers and the non-aggression pact signed by Germany and the Soviet Union saw Romania isolated and threatened (&quot;see Romania during World War II&quot;). In 1940, two of Romania&#x27;s regions, Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, were lost to a Soviet occupation consented to by the king. This came as Romania, exposed by the Fall of France, was seeking to align its policies with those of Germany. Ion Antonescu himself had come to value a pro-Axis alternative after the 1938 Munich Agreement, when Germany imposed demands on Czechoslovakia with the acquiescence of France and the United Kingdom, leaving locals to fear that, unless reoriented, Romania would follow. Angered by the territorial losses of 1940, General Antonescu sent Carol a general note of protest, and, as a result, was arrested and interned at Bistrița Monastery. While there, he commissioned Mihai Antonescu to establish contacts with Nazi German officials, promising to advance German economic interest, particularly in respect to the local oil industry, in exchange for endorsement. Commenting on Ion Antonescu&#x27;s ambivalent stance, Hitler&#x27;s minister to Romania, Wilhelm Fabricius, wrote to his superiors: &quot;I am not convinced that he is a safe man.&quot;

===Rise to power===
Romania&#x27;s elite had been intensely Francophile ever since Romania had won its independence in the 19th century, indeed so Francophile that the defeat of France in June 1940 had the effect of discrediting the entire elite. Antonescu&#x27;s internment ended in August, during which interval, under Axis pressure, Romania had ceded Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria (&quot;see Treaty of Craiova&quot;) and Northern Transylvania to Hungary (&quot;see Second Vienna Award&quot;). The latter grant caused consternation among large sections of Romania&#x27;s population, causing Carol&#x27;s popularity to fall to a record low and provoking large-scale protests in Bucharest, the capital. These movements were organized competitively by the pro-Allied PNȚ, headed by Iuliu Maniu, and the pro-Nazi Iron Guard. The latter group had been revived under the leadership of Horia Sima, and was organizing a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;. In this troubled context, Antonescu simply left his assigned residence. He may have been secretly helped in this by German intercession, but was more directly aided to escape by socialite Alice Sturdza, who was acting on Maniu&#x27;s request. Antonescu subsequently met with Maniu in Ploiești, where they discussed how best to manage the political situation. While these negotiations were carried out, the monarch himself was being advised by his entourage to recover legitimacy by governing in tandem with the increasingly popular Antonescu, while creating a new political majority from the existing forces. 

On 2 September 1940, Valer Pop, a courtier and an important member of the &quot;camarilla&quot;, first advised Carol to appoint Antonescu as Prime Minister as the solution to the crisis. Pop&#x27;s reasons for advising Carol to appoint Antonescu as Prime Minister were partly because Antonescu, who was known to be friendly with the Iron Guard and who had been imprisoned under Carol, was believed to have enough of an oppositional background to Carol&#x27;s regime to appease the public and partly because Pop knew that Antonescu, for all his Legionary sympathies, was a member of the elite and believed he would never turn against it. When Carol proved reluctant to make Antonescu Prime Minister, Pop visited the German legation to meet with Fabricius on the night of 4 September 1940 to ask that the German minister phone Carol to tell him that the &quot;Reich&quot; wanted Antonescu as Prime Minister, and Fabricius promptly did just that. Carol and Antonescu accepted the proposal, Antonescu being ordered to approach political party leaders Maniu of the PNȚ and Dinu Brătianu of the PNL. They all called for Carol&#x27;s abdication as a preliminary measure, while Sima, another leader sought after for negotiations, could not be found in time to express his opinion. Antonescu partly complied with the request but also asked Carol to bestow upon him the reserve powers for Romanian heads of state. Carol yielded and, on 5 September 1940, the general became Prime Minister, and Carol transferred most of his dictatorial powers to him. The latter&#x27;s first measure was to curtail potential resistance within the Army by relieving Bucharest Garrison chief Gheorghe Argeșanu of his position and replacing him with Dumitru Coroamă. Shortly afterward, Antonescu heard rumours that two of Carol&#x27;s loyalist generals, Gheorghe Mihail and Paul Teodorescu, were planning to have him killed. In reaction, he forced Carol to abdicate, while General Coroamă was refusing to carry out the royal order of shooting down Iron Guardist protesters.

Michael ascended the throne for the second time, while Antonescu&#x27;s dictatorial powers were confirmed and extended. On 6 September, the day Michael formally assumed the throne, he issued a royal decree declaring Antonescu &quot;Conducător&quot; (leader) of the state. The same decree relegated the monarch to a ceremonial role. Among Antonescu&#x27;s subsequent measures was ensuring the safe departure into self-exile of Carol and his mistress Elena Lupescu, granting protection to the royal train when it was attacked by armed members of the Iron Guard. The regime of King Carol had been notorious for being the most corrupt regime in Europe during the 1930s, and when Carol fled Romania, he took with him the better part of the Romanian treasury, leaving the new government with enormous financial problems. Antonescu had expected, perhaps naïvely, that Carol would take with him enough money to provide for a comfortable exile, and was surprised that Carol had cleared out almost the entire national treasury. For the next four years, a major concern of Antonescu&#x27;s government was attempting to have the Swiss banks where Carol had deposited the assets return the money to Romania; this effort did not meet with success. 

Horia Sima&#x27;s subsequent cooperation with Antonescu was endorsed by high-ranking Nazi German officials, many of whom feared the Iron Guard was too weak to rule on its own. Antonescu therefore received the approval of Ambassador Fabricius. Despite early promises, Antonescu abandoned projects for the creation of a national government, and opted instead for a coalition between a military dictatorship lobby and the Iron Guard. He later justified his choice by stating that the Iron Guard &quot;represented the political base of the country at the time.&quot; Right from the outset, Antonescu clashed with Sima over economic questions, with Antonescu&#x27;s main concern being to get the economy growing so as to provide taxes for a treasury looted by Carol, while Sima favored populist economic measures that Antonescu insisted there was no money for.

===Antonescu-Sima partnership===

The resulting regime, deemed the &quot;National Legionary State&quot;, was officially proclaimed on 14 September. On that date, the Iron Guard was remodelled into the only legally permitted party in Romania. Antonescu continued as Premier and &quot;Conducător&quot;, and was named as the Guard&#x27;s honorary commander. Sima became Deputy Premier and leader of the Guard. Antonescu subsequently ordered the Guardists imprisoned by Carol to be set free. On 6 October, he presided over the Iron Guard&#x27;s mass rally in Bucharest, one in a series of major celebratory and commemorative events organized by the movement during the late months of 1940. However, he tolerated the PNȚ and PNL&#x27;s informal existence, allowing them to preserve much of their political support.

There followed a short-lived and always uneasy partnership between Antonescu and Sima. In late September, the new regime denounced all pacts, accords and diplomatic agreements signed under Carol, bringing the country into Germany&#x27;s orbit while subverting its relationship with a former Balkan ally, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Germans troops entered the country in stages, in order to defend the local oil industry and help instruct their Romanian counterparts on &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; tactics. On 23 November, Antonescu was in Berlin, where his signature sealed Romania&#x27;s commitment to the main Axis instrument, the Tripartite Pact. Two days later, the country also adhered to the Nazi-led Anti-Comintern Pact. Other than these generic commitments, Romania had no treaty binding it to Germany, and the Romanian-German alliance functioned informally. Speaking in 1946, Antonescu claimed to have followed the pro-German path in continuation of earlier policies, and for fear of a Nazi protectorate in Romania.

During the National Legionary State period, earlier antisemitic legislation was upheld and strengthened, while the &quot;Romanianization&quot; of Jewish-owned enterprises became standard official practice. Immediately after coming into office, Antonescu himself expanded the anti-Jewish and Nuremberg law-inspired legislation passed by his predecessors Goga and Ion Gigurtu, while tens of new anti-Jewish regulations were passed in 1941–1942. This was done despite his formal pledge to Wilhelm Filderman and the Jewish Communities Federation that, unless engaged in &quot;sabotage,&quot; &quot;the Jewish population will not suffer.&quot; Antonescu did not reject the application of Legionary policies, but was offended by Sima&#x27;s advocacy of paramilitarism and the Guard&#x27;s frequent recourse to street violence. He drew much hostility from his partners by extending some protection to former dignitaries whom the Iron Guard had arrested. One early incident opposed Antonescu to the Guard&#x27;s newspaper &quot;Buna Vestire&quot;, which accused him of leniency and was subsequently forced to change its editorial board. By then, the Legionary press was routinely claiming that he was obstructing revolution and aiming to take control of the Iron Guard, and that he had been transformed into a tool of Freemasonry (&quot;see Anti-Masonry&quot;). The political conflict coincided with major social challenges, including the influx of refugees from areas lost earlier in the year and a large-scale earthquake affecting Bucharest.

Disorder peaked in the last days of November 1940, when, after uncovering the circumstances of Codreanu&#x27;s death, the fascist movement ordered retaliations against political figures previously associated with Carol, carrying out the Jilava Massacre, the assassinations of Nicolae Iorga and Virgil Madgearu, and several other acts of violence. As retaliation for this insubordination, Antonescu ordered the Army to resume control of the streets, unsuccessfully pressured Sima to have the assassins detained, ousted the Iron Guardist prefect of Bucharest Police Ștefan Zăvoianu, and ordered Legionary ministers to swear an oath to the &quot;Conducător&quot;. His condemnation of the killings was nevertheless limited and discreet, and, the same month, he joined Sima at a burial ceremony for Codreanu&#x27;s newly discovered remains. The widening gap between the dictator and Sima&#x27;s party resonated in Berlin. When, in December, Legionary Foreign Minister Mihail R. Sturdza obtained the replacement of Fabricius with Manfred Freiherr von Killinger, perceived as more sympathetic to the Iron Guard, Antonescu promptly took over leadership of the ministry, with the compliant diplomat Constantin Greceanu as his right hand. In Germany, such leaders of the Nazi Party as Heinrich Himmler, Baldur von Schirach and Joseph Goebbels threw their support behind the Legionaries, whereas Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop and the Wehrmacht stood by Antonescu. The latter group was concerned that any internal conflict would threaten Romania&#x27;s oil industry, vital to the German war effort. The German leadership was by then secretly organizing &quot;Operation Barbarossa&quot;, the attack on the Soviet Union.

===Legionary Rebellion and Operation Barbarossa===

Antonescu&#x27;s plan to act against his coalition partners in the event of further disorder hinged on Hitler&#x27;s approval, a vague signal of which had been given during ceremonies confirming Romania&#x27;s adherence to the Tripartite Pact. A decisive turn occurred when Hitler invited Antonescu and Sima both over for discussions: whereas Antonescu agreed, Sima stayed behind in Romania, probably plotting a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;. While Hitler did not produce a clear endorsement for clamping down on Sima&#x27;s party, he made remarks interpreted by their recipient as oblique blessings. On 14 January 1941 during a German-Romanian summit, Hitler informed Antonescu of his plans to invade the Soviet Union later that year and asked Romania to participate. By this time, Hitler had come to the conclusion that while Sima was ideologically closer to him, Antonescu was the more competent leader capable of ensuring stability in Romania while being committed to aligning his country with the Axis.

The Antonescu-Sima dispute erupted into violence in January 1941, when the Iron Guard instigated a series of attacks on public institutions and a pogrom, incidents collectively known as the &quot;Legionary Rebellion.&quot; This came after the mysterious assassination of Major Döring, a German agent in Bucharest, which was used by the Iron Guard as a pretext to accuse the &quot;Conducător&quot; of having a secret anti-German agenda, and made Antonescu oust the Legionary Interior Minister, Constantin Petrovicescu, while closing down all of the Legionary-controlled &quot;Romanianization&quot; offices. Various other clashes prompted him to demand the resignation of all Police commanders who sympathized with the movement. After two days of widespread violence, during which Guardists killed some 120 Bucharest Jews, Antonescu sent in the Army, under the command of General Constantin Sănătescu. German officials acting on Hitler&#x27;s orders, including the new Ambassador Manfred Freiherr von Killinger, helped Antonescu eliminate the Iron Guardists, but several of their lower-level colleagues actively aided Sima&#x27;s subordinates. Goebbels was especially upset by the decision to support Antonescu, believing it to have been advantageous to &quot;the Freemasons.&quot;

After the purge of the Iron Guard, Hitler kept his options open by granting political asylum to Sima—whom Antonescu&#x27;s courts sentenced to death—and to other Legionaries in similar situations. The Guardists were detained in special conditions at Buchenwald and Dachau concentration camps. In parallel, Antonescu publicly obtained the cooperation of &quot;Codreanists&quot;, members of an Iron Guardist wing which had virulently opposed Sima, and whose leader was Codreanu&#x27;s father Ion Zelea Codreanu. Antonescu again sought backing from the PNȚ and PNL to form a national cabinet, but his rejection of parliamentarism made the two groups refuse him.

Antonescu traveled to Germany and met Hitler on eight more occasions between June 1941 and August 1944. Such close contacts helped cement an enduring relationship between the two dictators, and Hitler reportedly came to see Antonescu as the only trustworthy person in Romania, and the only foreigner to consult on military matters. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that Hitler after first meeting Antonescu &quot;...was greatly impressed by him; no other leader Hitler met other than Mussolini ever received such consistently favourable comments from the German dictator. Hitler even mustered the patience to listen to Antonescu&#x27;s lengthy disquisitions on the glorious history of Romania and the perfidy of the Hungarians—a curious reversal for a man who was more accustomed to regaling visitors with tirades of his own.&quot; In later statements, Hitler offered praise to Antonescu&#x27;s &quot;breadth of vision&quot; and &quot;real personality.&quot; A remarkable aspect of the Hitler-Antonescu friendship was neither could speak other&#x27;s language. Hitler only knew German, while the only foreign language Antonescu knew was French, in which he was completely fluent. During their meetings, Antonescu spoke French, which was then translated into German by Hitler&#x27;s interpreter Paul Schmidt and vice versa, since Schmidt did not speak Romanian either. 

The German military presence increased significantly in early 1941, when, using Romania as a base, Hitler invaded the rebellious Kingdom of Yugoslavia and the Kingdom of Greece (&quot;see Balkans Campaign&quot;). In parallel, Romania&#x27;s relationship with the United Kingdom, at the time the only major adversary of Nazi Germany, erupted into conflict: on 10 February 1941, British Premier Winston Churchill recalled His Majesty&#x27;s Ambassador Reginald Hoare, and approved the blockade of Romanian ships in British-controlled ports. On 12 June 1941, during another summit with Hitler, Antonescu first learned of the &quot;special&quot; nature of Operation Barbarossa, namely, that the war against the Soviet Union was to be an ideological war to &quot;annihilate&quot; the forces of &quot;Judeo-Bolshevism,&quot; a &quot;war of extermination&quot; to be fought without any mercy; Hitler even showed Antonescu a copy of the &quot;Guidelines for the Conduct of the Troops in Russia&quot; he had issued to his forces about the &quot;special treatment&quot; to be handed out to Soviet Jews. Antonescu completely accepted Hitler&#x27;s ideas about Operation Barbarossa as a &quot;race war&quot; between the Aryans, represented by the Nordic Germans and Latin Romanians on the Axis side vs. the Slavs and Asians, commanded by the Jews on the Soviet side. Besides anti-Semitism, there was an extremely strong current of anti-Slavic and anti-Asian racism to Antonescu&#x27;s remarks about the &quot;Asiatic hordes&quot; of the Red Army. The Asians Antonescu referred were the various Asian peoples of the Soviet Union, such as the Kazakhs, Kalmyks, Mongols, Uzbeks, Buryats, etc. During his summit with Hitler in June 1941, Antonescu told the &quot;Führer&quot; that he believed it was necessary to &quot;once and for all&quot; eliminate Russia as a power because the Russians were the most powerful Slavic nation and that as a Latin people, the Romanians had an inborn hatred of all Slavs and Jews. Antonescu went on to tell Hitler: &quot;Because of its racial qualities, Romania can continue to play its role as an anti-Slavic buffer for the benefit of Germany.&quot; Ancel wrote that Romanian anti-Slavic racism differed from the German variety in that the Romanians had traditionally feared the Slavic peoples whereas the Germans had traditionally held the Slavic peoples in contempt. In Antonescu&#x27;s mind, the Romanians as a Latin people had attained a level of civilization that the Slavs were nowhere close to, but theoretically the Slavic Russians and Ukrainians might be able to reach under Romanian auspices, although Antonescu&#x27;s remarks to Hitler that &quot;We must fight this race (i.e. the Slavs) resolutely&quot; together, &quot;with the need for &#x27;colonization&#x27; of Transnistria,&quot; suggests that he did think this would happen in his own lifetime. Subsequently, the Romanians assigned to Barbarossa were to learn that as a Latin people, the Germans considered them to be their inferiors, albeit not as inferior as the Slavs, Asians and Jews who were viewed as &quot;untermenschen&quot; (&quot;sub-humans&quot;). Hitler&#x27;s promise to Antonescu that after the war, the Germanic and Latin races would rule the world in a partnership turned out to be meaningless.
In June of that year, Romania joined the attack on the Soviet Union, led by Germany in coalition with Hungary, Finland, the State of Slovakia, the Kingdom of Italy, and the Independent State of Croatia. Antonescu had been made aware of the plan by German envoys, and supported it enthusiastically even before Hitler extended Romania an offer to participate. On 18 June 1941, Antonescu gave orders to his generals about &quot;cleansing the ground&quot; of Jews when Romanian forces entered Bessarabia and Bukovina. Right from the start, Antonescu proclaimed the war against the Soviet Union to be a &quot;holy war&quot;, a &quot;crusade&quot; in the name of Eastern Orthodox faith and the Romanian race against the forces of &quot;Judeo-Bolshevism&quot;. The propaganda of the Antonescu regime demonized everything Jewish as Antonescu believed that Communism was invented by the Jews, and all of the Soviet leaders were really Jews. Reflecting Antonescu&#x27;s anti-Slavic feelings, despite the fact that the war was billed as a &quot;crusade&quot; in defence of Orthodoxy against &quot;Judeo-Bolshevism&quot;, the war was not presented as a struggle to liberate the Orthodox Russians and Ukrainians from Communism; instead rule by &quot;Judeo-Bolshevism&quot; was portrayed as something brought about the innate moral inferiority of the Slavs, who thus needed to be ruled by the Germans and the Romanians. The Romanian force engaged formed a &quot;General Antonescu Army Group&quot; under the effective command of German general Eugen Ritter von Schobert. Romania&#x27;s campaign on the Eastern Front began without a formal declaration of war, and was consecrated by Antonescu&#x27;s statement: &quot;Soldiers, I order you, cross the Prut River&quot; (in reference to the Bessarabian border between Romania and post-1940 Soviet territory). A few days after this, a large-scale pogrom was carried out in Iași with Antonescu&#x27;s agreement; thousands of Jews were killed in the bloody Iași pogrom. Antonescu had followed a generation of younger right-wing Romanian intellectuals led by Corneliu Zelea Codreanu who in the 1920s–30s had rejected the traditional Francophila of the Romanian elites and their adherence to Western notions of universal democratic values and human rights. Antonescu made it clear that his regime rejected the moral principles of the &quot;demo-liberal world&quot; and he saw the war as an ideological struggle between his spiritually pure &quot;national-totalitarian regime&quot; vs. &quot;Jewish morality&quot;. Antonescu believed that the liberal humanist-democratic-capitalist values of the West and Communism were both invented by the Jews to destroy Romania. In a lengthy speech just before the war, Antonescu attacked democracy in the most violent terms as it allowed Jews equal rights and thus to undercut the Romanian &quot;national idea&quot;. As such, Antonescu stated what was needed was a &quot;new man&quot; who would be &quot;tough&quot;, &quot;virile&quot; and willing to fight for an ethnically and religiously &quot;pure&quot; Romania. Despite his quarrel with Sima, much of Antonescu&#x27;s speech clearly reflected the influence of the ideas of the Iron Guard that Antonescu had absorbed in the 1930s. Antonescu&#x27;s anti-Semitism and sexism went so far that he tacitly condoned the rape of Jewish women and girls in Bessarabia and northern Bukovinia by his forces under the grounds that he was going take away all of the property that the Jews had &quot;stolen&quot; from the Romanians, and as far he was concerned, Jewish females were just another piece of property. Since the Jewish women were going to exterminated anyway, Antonescu felt there was nothing wrong about letting his soldiers and gendarmes have &quot;some fun&quot; before shooting them.

After becoming the first Romanian to be granted the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross, which he received from Hitler at their 6 August meeting in the Ukrainian city of Berdychiv, Ion Antonescu was promoted to Marshal of Romania by royal decree on 22 August, in recognition for his role in restoring the eastern frontiers of Greater Romania. In a report to Berlin, a German diplomat wrote that Marshal Antonescu had syphilis and that &quot;among [Romanian] cavalry officers this disease is as widespread as a common cold is among German officers. The Marshal suffers from severe attacks of it every several months.&quot; Antonescu took one of his most debated decisions when, with Bessarabia&#x27;s conquest almost complete, he committed Romania to Hitler&#x27;s war effort beyond the Dniester—that is, beyond territory that had been part of Romania between the wars—and thrust deeper into Soviet territory, thus waging a war of aggression. On 30 August, Romania occupied a territory it deemed &quot;Transnistria&quot;, formerly a part of the Ukrainian SSR (including the entire Moldavian ASSR and further territories). Like the decision to continue the war beyond Bessarabia, this earned Antonescu much criticism from the semi-clandestine PNL and PNȚ. Insofar as the war against the Soviet Union was a war to recover Bessarabia and northern Bukovina – both regions that been a part of Romania until June 1940 and that had Romanian majorities – the conflict had been very popular with the Romanian public opinion. But the idea of conquering Transnistria was not as that region had never been part of Romania, and a minority of the people were ethnic Romanian. Soon after the takeover, the area was assigned to a civil administration apparatus headed by Gheorghe Alexianu and became the site for the main component of the Holocaust in Romania: a mass deportation of the Bessarabian and Ukrainian Jews, followed later by transports of Romani Romanians and Jews from Moldavia proper (that is, the portions of Moldavia west of the Prut).

The accord over Transnistria&#x27;s administration, signed in Tighina, also placed areas between the Dniester and the Dnieper under Romanian military occupation, while granting control over all resources to Germany. In September 1941, Antonescu ordered Romanian forces to take Odessa, a prize he badly wanted for reasons of prestige. Russians had traditionally been seen in Romania as brutal aggressors, and for Romanian forces to take a major Soviet city and one of the largest Black Sea ports like Odessa would be a sign of how far Romania had been &quot;regenerated&quot; under Antonescu&#x27;s leadership. Much to Antonescu&#x27;s intense fury, the Red Army were able to halt the Romanian offensive on Odessa and 24 September 1941 Antonescu had to reluctantly ask for the help of the Wehrmacht with the drive on Odessa. On 16 October 1941 Odessa fell to the German-Romanian forces. The Romanian losses had been so heavy that the area around Odessa was known to the Romanian Army as the Vale of Tears. Antonescu&#x27;s anti-Semitism was sharpened by the Odessa fighting as he was convinced that the only reason why the Red Army had fought so fiercely around Odessa was that the average Russian soldier had been terrorized by bloodthirsty Jewish commissars into fighting hard. When Wilhelm Filderman wrote a letter to Antonescu complaining about the murder of Jews in Odessa, Antonescu wrote back: &quot;Your Jews, who have become Soviet commissars, are driving Soviet soldiers in the Odessa region into a futile bloodbath, through horrendous terror techniques as the Russian prisoners themselves have admitted, simply to cause us heavy losses&quot;. Antonescu ended his letter with the claim that Russian Jewish commissars had savagely tortured Romanian POWs and that the entire Jewish community of Romania, Filderman included were morally responsible for all of the losses and sufferings of the Romanians around Odessa. In the fall of 1941, Antonescu planned to deport all of the Jews of the &quot;Regat&quot;, southern Bukovina and southern Transylvania into Transnistria as the prelude to killing them, but this operation was vetoed by Germany, who complained that Antonescu had not finished killing the Jews of Transnistria yet. This veto was largely motivated by bureaucratic politics, namely if Antonescu exterminated all of the Jews of Romania himself, there would be nothing for the SS and the &quot;Auswärtiges Amt&quot; to do. Killinger informed Antonescu that Germany would reduce its supplies of arms if Antonescu went ahead with his plans to deport the Jews of the &quot;Regat&quot; into Transnistria and told him he would be better off deporting the Jews to the death camps in Poland that the Germans were already busy building. Since Romania had almost no arms industry of its own and was almost entirely dependent upon weapons from Germany to fight the war, Antonescu had little choice, but to comply with Killinger&#x27;s request.

===Reversal of fortunes===


The Romanian Army&#x27;s inferior arms, insufficient armour and lack of training had been major concerns for the German commanders since before the start of the operation. One of the earliest major obstacles Antonescu encountered on the Eastern Front was the resistance of Odessa, a Soviet port on the Black Sea. Refusing any German assistance, he ordered the Romanian Army to maintain a two-month siege on heavily fortified and well-defended positions. The ill-equipped 4th Army suffered losses of some 100,000 men. Antonescu&#x27;s popularity again rose in October, when the fall of Odessa was celebrated triumphantly with a parade through Bucharest&#x27;s &quot;Arcul de Triumf&quot;, and when many Romanians reportedly believed the war was as good as won. In Odessa itself, the aftermath included a large-scale massacre of the Jewish population, ordered by the Marshal as retaliation for a bombing which killed a number of Romanian officers and soldiers (General Ioan Glogojeanu among them). The city subsequently became the administrative capital of Transnistria. According to one account, the Romanian administration planned to change Odessa&#x27;s name to &quot;Antonescu&quot;. Antonescu&#x27;s planned that once the war against the Soviet Union was won to invade Hungary to take back Transylvania and Bulgaria to take back the Dobruja with Antonescu being especially keen on the former. Antonescu planned on attacking Hungary to recover Transylvania at the first opportunity and regarded Romanian involvement on the Eastern Front in part as a way of proving to Hitler that Romania was a better German ally than Hungary, and thus deserving of German support when the planned Romanian-Hungarian war began. The &quot;Conducător&quot; had also created an intra-Axis alliance against Hungary along with Croatia and Slovakia.

As the Soviet Union recovered from the initial shock and slowed down the Axis offensive at the Battle of Moscow (October 1941 – January 1942), Romania was asked by its allies to contribute a larger number of troops. A decisive factor in Antonescu&#x27;s compliance with the request appears to have been a special visit to Bucharest by Wehrmacht chief of staff Wilhelm Keitel, who introduced the &quot;Conducător&quot; to Hitler&#x27;s plan for attacking the Caucasus (&quot;see Battle of the Caucasus&quot;). The Romanian force engaged in the war reportedly exceeded German demands. It came to around 500,000 troops and thirty actively involved divisions. As a sign of his satisfaction, Hitler presented his Romanian counterpart with a luxury car. On 7 December 1941, after reflecting on the possibility for Romania, Hungary and Finland to change their stance, the British government responded to repeated Soviet requests and declared war on all three countries. Following Japan&#x27;s attack on Pearl Harbor and in compliance with its Axis commitment, Romania declared war on the United States within five days. These developments contrasted with Antonescu&#x27;s own statement of 7 December: &quot;I am an ally of the [German] Reich against [the Soviet Union], I am neutral in the conflict between Great Britain and Germany. I am for America against the Japanese.&quot;

A crucial change in the war came with the Battle of Stalingrad in June 1942 – February 1943, a major defeat for the Axis. Romania&#x27;s armies alone lost some 150,000 men (either dead, wounded or captured) and more than half of the country&#x27;s divisions were wiped out. 
The loss of two entire Romanian armies who all either killed or captured by the Soviets produced a major crisis in German-Romanian relations in the winter of 1943 with many people in the Romanian government for the first time questioning the wisdom of fighting on the side of the Axis. Outside of the elites, by 1943 the continuing heavy losses on the Eastern Front, anger at the contempt which the Wehrmacht treated their Romanian allies and declining living standards within Romania made the war unpopular with the Romanian people, and consequently the &quot;Conducător&quot; himself. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that: &quot;The string of broken German promises of equipment and support, the disregard of warnings about Soviet offensive preparations, the unfriendly treatment of retreating Romanian units by German officers and soldiers and the general German tendency to blame their own miscalculations and disasters on their allies all combined to produce a real crisis in German-Romanian relations.&quot; For part of that interval, the Marshal had withdrawn from public life, owing to an unknown affliction, which is variously rumoured to have been a mental breakdown, a foodborne illness or a symptom of the syphilis he had contracted earlier in life. He is known to have been suffering from digestive problems, treating himself with food prepared by Marlene von Exner, an Austrian-born dietitian who moved into Hitler&#x27;s service after 1943. 

Upon his return, Antonescu blamed the Romanian losses on German overseer Arthur Hauffe, whom Hitler agreed to replace. In parallel with the military losses, Romania was confronted with large-scale economic problems. Romania&#x27;s oil was the &quot;Reich&quot;&#x27;s only source of natural oil after the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 to August 1944 (Germany also had synthetic oil plants operating from 1942 onwards), and as such for economic reasons, Romania was always treated as a major ally by Hitler. While Germany monopolized Romania&#x27;s exports, it defaulted on most of its payments. Like all countries whose exports to Germany, particularly in oil, exceeded imports from that country, Romania&#x27;s economy suffered from Nazi control of the exchange rate (&quot;see Economy of Nazi Germany&quot;). On the German side, those directly involved in harnessing Romania&#x27;s economic output for German goals were economic planners Hermann Göring and Walther Funk, together with Hermann Neubacher, the Special Representative for Economic Problems. A recurring problem for Antonescu was attempting to obtain payments for all of the oil he shipped to Germany while resisting German demands for increased oil production. The situation was further aggravated in 1942, as USAAF and RAF were able to bomb the oil fields in Prahova County (&quot;see Bombing of Romania in World War II, Operation Tidal Wave&quot;). Official sources from the following period amalgamate military and civilian losses of all kinds, which produces a total of 554,000 victims of the war. To improve the Romanian army&#x27;s effectiveness, the Mareșal tank destroyer was developed starting in late 1942. Marshal Antonescu, after whom the vehicle was named, was involved in the project himself. The vehicle later influenced the development of the German Hetzer.

In this context, the Romanian leader acknowledged that Germany was losing the war, and he therefore authorized his Deputy Premier and new Foreign Minister Mihai Antonescu to set up contacts with the Allies. In early 1943, Antonescu authorized his diplomats to contact British and American diplomats in Portugal and Switzerland to see if were possible for Romania to sign an armistice with the Western powers. The Romanian diplomats were informed that no armistice was possible until an armistice was signed with the Soviet Union, a condition Antonescu rejected. In parallel, he allowed the PNȚ and the PNL to engage in parallel talks with the Allies at various locations in neutral countries. The discussions were strained by the Western Allies&#x27; call for an unconditional surrender, over which the Romanian envoys bargained with Allied diplomats in Sweden and Egypt (among them the Soviet representatives Nikolai Novikov and Alexandra Kollontai). Antonescu was also alarmed by the possibility of war being carried on Romanian territory, as had happened in Italy after Operation Avalanche. The events also prompted hostile negotiations aimed at toppling Antonescu, and involving the two political parties, the young monarch, diplomats and soldiers. A major clash between Michael and Antonescu took place during the first days of 1943, when the 21-year-old monarch used his New Year&#x27;s address on national radio to part with the Axis war effort.

===Ouster and arrest===

In March 1944, the Soviet Red Army broke the Southern Bug and Dniester fronts, advancing on Bessarabia. This came just as Field Marshal Henry Maitland Wilson, the British Supreme Allied Commander of the Mediterranean theatre, presented Antonescu with an ultimatum. After a new visit to Germany and a meeting with Hitler, Antonescu opted to continue fighting alongside the remaining Axis states, a decision which he later claimed was motivated by Hitler&#x27;s promise to allow Romania possession of Northern Transylvania in the event of an Axis victory. Upon his return, the &quot;Conducător&quot; oversaw a counteroffensive which stabilized the front on a line between Iași and Chișinău to the north and the lower Dniester to the east. This normalized his relations with Nazi German officials, whose alarm over the possible loss of an ally had resulted in the &quot;Margarethe II&quot; plan, an adapted version of the Nazi takeover in Hungary.

However, Antonescu&#x27;s non-compliance with the terms of Wilson&#x27;s ultimatum also had drastic effects on Romania&#x27;s ability to exit the war. By then, Antonescu was conceiving of a separate peace with the Western Allies, while maintaining contacts with the Soviets. In parallel, the mainstream opposition movement came to establish contacts with the Romanian Communist Party (PCR), which, although minor numerically, gained importance for being the only political group to be favored by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin. On the PCR side, the discussions involved Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu and later Emil Bodnăraș. Another participating group at this stage was the old Romanian Social Democratic Party.

Large-scale Allied bombings of Bucharest took place in spring 1944, while the Soviet Red Army approached Romanian borders. The Battle for Romania began in late summer: while German commanders Johannes Frießner and Otto Wöhler of the Army Group South Ukraine attempted to hold Bukovina, Soviet Steppe Front leader Rodion Malinovsky stormed into the areas of Moldavia defended by Petre Dumitrescu&#x27;s troops. In reaction, Antonescu attempted to stabilize the front on a line between Focșani, Nămoloasa and Brăila, deep inside Romanian territory. On 5 August, he visited Hitler one final time in Kętrzyn. On this occasion, the German leader reportedly explained that his people had betrayed the Nazi cause, and asked him if Romania would go on fighting (to which Antonescu reportedly answered in vague terms). After Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov more than once stated that the Soviet Union was not going to require Romanian subservience, the factions opposing Antonescu agreed that the moment had come to overthrow him, by carrying out the Royal Coup of 23 August. On that day, the sovereign asked Antonescu to meet him in the Royal Palace, where he presented him with a request to take Romania out of its Axis alliance. The &quot;Conducător&quot; refused, and was promptly arrested by soldiers of the guard, being replaced as Premier with General Constantin Sănătescu, who presided over a national government.

The new Romanian authorities declared peace with the Allies and advised the population to greet Soviet troops. On 25 August, as Bucharest was successfully defending itself against German retaliations, Romania declared war on Nazi Germany. The events disrupted German domination in the Balkans, putting a stop to the &quot;Maibaum&quot; offensive against Yugoslav Partisans. The coup was nevertheless a unilateral move, and, until the signature of an armistice on 12 September, the country was still perceived as an enemy by the Soviets, who continued to take Romanian soldiers as prisoners of war. In parallel, Hitler reactivated the Iron Guardist exile, creating a Sima-led government in exile that did not survive the war&#x27;s end in Europe.

Placed in the custody of PCR militants, Ion Antonescu spent the interval at a house in Bucharest&#x27;s Vatra Luminoasă quarter. He was afterward handed to the Soviet occupation forces, who transported him to Moscow, together with his deputy Mihai Antonescu, Governor of Transnistria Gheorghe Alexianu, Defense Minister Constantin Pantazi, Gendarmerie commander Constantin Vasiliu and Bucharest Police chief Mircea Elefterescu. They were subsequently kept in luxurious detention at a mansion nearby the city, and guarded by SMERSH, a special counter-intelligence body answering directly to Stalin. Shortly after Germany surrendered in May 1945, the group was moved to Lubyanka prison. There, Antonescu was interrogated and reputedly pressured by SMERSH operatives, among them Viktor Abakumov, but transcripts of their conversations were never sent back to Romania by the Soviet authorities. Later research noted that the main issues discussed were the German-Romanian alliance, the war on the Soviet Union, the economic toll on both countries, and Romania&#x27;s participation in the Holocaust (defined specifically as crimes against &quot;peaceful Soviet citizens&quot;). At some point during this period, Antonescu attempted suicide in his quarters. He was returned to Bucharest in spring 1946 and held in Jilava Prison. He was subsequently interrogated by prosecutor Avram Bunaciu, to whom he complained about the conditions of his detainment, contrasting them with those in Moscow, while explaining that he was a vegetarian and demanding a special diet.

===Trial and execution===

In May 1946, Ion Antonescu was prosecuted at the first in a series of People&#x27;s Tribunals, on charges of war crimes, crimes against the peace and treason. The tribunals had first been proposed by the PNȚ, and were comparable to the Nuremberg Trials in Allied-occupied Germany. The Romanian legislative framework was drafted by coup participant Pătrășcanu, a PCR member who had been granted leadership of the Justice Ministry. Despite the idea having earned support from several sides of the political spectrum, the procedures were politicized in a sense favourable to the PCR and the Soviet Union, and posed a legal problem for being based on &quot;ex post facto&quot; decisions. The first such local trial took place in 1945, resulting in the sentencing of Iosif Iacobici, Nicolae Macici, Constantin Trestioreanu and other military commanders directly involved in planning or carrying out the Odessa massacre.

Antonescu was represented by Constantin Paraschivescu-Bălăceanu and Titus Stoica, two public defenders whom he had first consulted with a day before the procedures were initiated. The prosecution team, led by Vasile Stoican, and the panel of judges, presided over by Alexandru Voitinovici, were infiltrated by PCR supporters. Both consistently failed to admit that Antonescu&#x27;s foreign policies were overall dictated by Romania&#x27;s positioning between Germany and the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, and although references to the mass murders formed just 23% of the indictment and corpus of evidence (ranking below charges of anti-Soviet aggression), the procedures also included Antonescu&#x27;s admission of and self-exculpating take on war crimes, including the deportations to Transnistria. They also evidence his awareness of the Odessa massacre, accompanied by his claim that few of the deaths were his direct responsibility. One notable event at the trial was a testimony by PNȚ leader Iuliu Maniu. Reacting against the aggressive tone of other accusers, Maniu went on record saying: &quot;We [Maniu and Antonescu] were political adversaries, not cannibals.&quot; Upon leaving the bench, Maniu walked toward Antonescu and shook his hand.

Ion Antonescu was found guilty of the charges. This verdict was followed by two sets of appeals, which claimed that the restored and amended 1923 Constitution did not offer a framework for the People&#x27;s Tribunals and prevented capital punishment during peacetime, while noting that, contrary to the armistice agreement, only one power represented within the Allied Commission had supervised the tribunal. They were both rejected within six days, in compliance with a legal deadline on the completion of trials by the People&#x27;s Tribunals. King Michael subsequently received pleas for clemency from Antonescu&#x27;s lawyer and his mother, and reputedly considered asking the Allies to reassess the case as part of the actual Nuremberg Trials, taking Romanian war criminals into foreign custody. Subjected to pressures by the new Soviet-backed Petru Groza executive, he issued a decree in favour of execution. Together with his co-defendants Mihai Antonescu, Alexianu and Vasiliu, the former &quot;Conducător&quot; was executed by a military firing squad on 1 June 1946. Ion Antonescu&#x27;s supporters circulated false rumours that regular soldiers had refused to fire at their commander, and that the squad was mostly composed of Jewish policemen. Another apologetic claim insists that he himself ordered the squad to shoot, but footage of the event has proven it false. However, he did refuse a blindfold and raised his hat in salute once the order was given. The execution site, some distance away from the locality of Jilava and the prison fort, was known as &quot;Valea Piersicilor&quot; (&quot;Valley of the Peach Trees&quot;). His final written statement was a letter to his wife, urging her to withdraw into a convent, while stating the belief that posterity would reconsider his deeds and accusing Romanians of being &quot;ungrateful&quot;.

==Ideology==

===Ethnic nationalism and expansionism===

Antonescu&#x27;s policies were motivated, in large part, by ethnic nationalism. A firm believer in the restoration of Greater Romania as the union of lands inhabited by ethnic Romanians, he never reconciled himself to Hungary&#x27;s incorporation of Northern Transylvania. Although Hungary and Romania were technically allied through the Axis system, their relationship was always tense, and marked by serious diplomatic incidents. The Romanian leader kept contacts with representatives of ethnic Romanian communities directly affected by the Second Vienna Award, including Transylvanian Greek-Catholic clergy. Another aspect of Antonescu&#x27;s nationalist policies was evidenced after the Balkans Campaign. Antonescu&#x27;s Romania did not partake in the military action, but laid a claim to the territories in eastern Vojvodina (western Banat) and the Timok Valley, home to a sizeable Romanian community. Reportedly, Germany&#x27;s initial designs of granting Vojvodina to Hungary enhanced the tensions between Antonescu and Miklós Horthy to the point where war between the two countries became a possibility. Such incidents made Germany indefinitely prolong its occupation of the region. The Romanian authorities issued projects for an independent Macedonia with autonomy for its Aromanian communities, while an official memorandum on the Timok Valley, approved by Antonescu, made mention of &quot;Romanian&quot; areas &quot;from Timok [...] to Salonika&quot;. The &quot;Conducător&quot; also maintained contacts with Aromanian fascists in Axis-occupied Greece, awarding refuge to Alcibiades Diamandi and Nicola Matussi of the Roman Legion, whose pro-Romanian policies had brought them into conflict with other Aromanian factions.

&quot;Conducător&quot; Antonescu thought Hitler willing to revise his stance on Northern Transylvania, and claimed to have obtained the German leader&#x27;s agreement, using it to justify participation on the Eastern Front after the recovery of Bessarabia. However, transcripts of the Hitler-Antonescu conversations do not validate his interpretation. Another version has it that Hitler sent Antonescu a letter informing him that Bessarabia&#x27;s political status still ultimately depended on German decisions. In one of his letters to Hitler, Antonescu himself stated his anti-communist ideological motivation: &quot;I confirm that I will pursue operations in the east to the end against that great enemy of civilization, of Europe, and of my country: Russian Bolshevism [...] I will not be swayed by anyone not to extend this military cooperation into new territory.&quot; Antonescu&#x27;s ideological perspective blended national sentiment with generically Christian and particularly Romanian Orthodox traits. British historian Arnold D. Harvey writes that while this ideology seems a poor match with Nazi doctrine, especially its anti-religious elements, &quot;It seems that Hitler was not even perturbed by the militant Christian orientation of the Antonescu regime&quot;.

It is also possible that, contrary to Antonescu&#x27;s own will, Hitler viewed the transfer of Transnistria as compensation for the Transylvanian areas, and that he therefore considered the matter closed. According to the Romanian representative in Berlin, Raoul Bossy, various German and Hungarian officials recommended the extension of permanent Romanian rule into Transnistria, as well as into Podolia, Galicia and Pokuttya, in exchange for delivering the whole of Transylvania to Hungary (and relocating its ethnic Romanian majority to the new provinces). American political scientist Charles King writes: &quot;There was never any attempt to annex the occupied territory [of Transnistria], for it was generally considered by the Romanian government to be a temporary buffer zone between Greater Romania and the Soviet front line.&quot; At his 1946 trial, Antonescu claimed that Transnistria had been occupied to prevent Romania being caught in a &quot;pincer&quot; between Germany&#x27;s &quot;Drang nach Osten&quot; and the &quot;Volksdeutsch&quot; communities to the east, while denying charges of having exploited the region for Romania&#x27;s benefit.

Romanian historian Lucian Boia believes that Ion Antonescu may have nevertheless had expansionist goals to the east, and that he implicitly understood Operation Barbarossa as a tool for containing Slavic peoples. Similar verdicts are provided by other researchers. Another Romanian historian, Ottmar Trașcă, argues that Antonescu did not wish to annex the region &quot;at least until the end of the war&quot;, but notes that Antonescu&#x27;s own statements make reference to its incorporation in the event of a victory. In addition to early annexation plans to the Southern Bug (reportedly confessed to Bossy in June 1941), the &quot;Conducător&quot; is known to have presented his ministers with designs for the region&#x27;s colonization. The motivation he cited was alleged malnutrition among Romanian peasants, to which he added: &quot;I&#x27;ll take this population, I&#x27;ll lead it into Transnistria, where I shall give it all the land it requires&quot;. Several nationalists sympathetic to Antonescu acclaimed the extension of Romanian rule into Transnistria, which they understood as permanent.

===Antisemitism and antiziganism===
A recurring element in Antonescu&#x27;s doctrines is racism, and in particular antisemitism. This was linked to his sympathy for ethnocratic ideals, and complemented by his statements in favor of &quot;integral nationalism&quot; and &quot;Romanianism&quot;. Like other far right Romanians, he saw a Jewish presence behind liberal democracy, and believed in the existence of Judeo-Masonry. His earliest thoughts on Codreanu&#x27;s ideology criticize the Legionary leader for advocating &quot;brutal measures&quot; in dealing with the &quot;invasion of Jews&quot;, and instead propose &quot;the organization of Romanian classes&quot; as a method for reaching the same objective. Politician Aureliu Weiss, who met General Antonescu during that interval, recalled that, although antisemitic &quot;to the core&quot;, he was capable of restraint in public. According to historian Mihail Ionescu, the &quot;Conducător&quot; was not averse to the Iron Guard&#x27;s &quot;Legionary principles&quot;, but wanted antisemitism to be &quot;applied in an orderly fashion&quot;, as opposed to Horia Sima&#x27;s revolutionary ways. Historian Ioan Scurtu believes that, during the Legionary Rebellion, Antonescu deliberately waited before stepping in, in order for the Guard to be &quot;profoundly discredited&quot; and for himself to be perceived as a &quot;savior&quot;. In April 1941, he let his ministers know that he was considering letting &quot;the mob&quot; deal with the Jews, &quot;and after the slaughter, I will restore order.&quot; Lucian Boia notes that the Romanian leader was indeed motivated by antisemitic beliefs, but that these need to be contextualized in order to understand what separates Antonescu from Hitler in terms of radicalism. However, various other researchers assess that, by aligning himself with Hitler before and during Operation Barbarossa, Antonescu implicitly agreed with his thoughts on the &quot;Jewish Question&quot;, choosing racial over religious antisemitism. According to Harvey, the Iași pogrom made the Germans &quot;evidently willing to accept that organized Christianity in Romania was very different from what it was in Germany&quot;.

Antonescu was a firm believer in the conspiracy theory of &quot;Jewish Bolshevism&quot;, according to which all Jews were supporters of communism and the Soviet Union. His arguments on the matter involved a spurious claim that, during the 1940 retreat from Bessarabia, the Jews had organized themselves and attacked Romanian soldiers. In part, this notion exaggerated unilateral reports of enthusiasm among the marginalized Jews upon the arrival of Red Army troops. In a summer 1941 address to his ministers, Antonescu stated: &quot;The Satan is the Jew. [Ours] is a battle of life and death. Either we win and the world will be purified, either they win and we will become their slaves.&quot; At around the same time, he envisaged the ethnic cleansing (&quot;cleaning out&quot;) of Jews from the eastern Romanian-held territories. However, as early as February 1941, Antonescu was also contemplating the ghettoization of all Jewish Romanians, as an early step toward their expulsion. In this context, Antonescu frequently depicted Jews as a disease or a poison. After the Battle of Stalingrad, he encouraged the army commanders to resist the counteroffensive, as otherwise the Soviets &quot;will bring Bolshevism to the country, wipe out the entire leadership stratum, impose the Jews on us, and deport masses of our people.&quot;

Ion Antonescu&#x27;s antiziganism manifested itself as the claim that some or all Romani people, specifically nomadic ones, were given to criminal behavior. The regime did not act consistently on this belief: in various cases, those deported had close relatives drafted into the Romanian Army. Although racist slogans targeting Romani people had been popularized by the Iron Guard, it was only under Antonescu&#x27;s unchallenged rule that solving the &quot;Gypsy problem&quot; became official policy and antiziganist measures were enforced. After a February 1941 inspection, Antonescu singled out Bucharest&#x27;s Romani community for alleged offences committed during the blackout, and called on his ministers to present him with solutions. Initially, he contemplated sending all Romani people he considered undesirable to the inhospitable Bărăgan Plain, to join the ranks of a local community of manual labourers. In 1942, he commissioned the Romanian Central Institute for Statistics to compile a report on Romani demography, which, in its edited form, provided scientifically racist conclusions, warning the &quot;Conducător&quot; about alleged Romani-Romanian miscegenation in rural Romania. In doing so, Antonescu offered some credit to a marginal and pseudoscientific trend in Romanian sociology, which, basing itself on eugenic theories, recommended the marginalization, deportation or compulsory sterilization of the Romani people, whose numeric presence it usually exaggerated. Among those who signed the report was demographer Sabin Manuilă, who saw the Romani presence as a major racial problem. The exact effect of the report&#x27;s claims on Antonescu is uncertain.

===Fascism and conservatism===

There is a historiographic dispute about whether Ion Antonescu&#x27;s regime was fascist or more generically right-wing authoritarian, itself integrated within a larger debate about the aspects and limits of fascism. Israeli historian of fascism Zeev Sternhell describes Antonescu, alongside his European counterparts Pierre-Étienne Flandin, Francisco Franco, Miklós Horthy, François de La Rocque, Philippe Pétain and Italian King Victor Emmanuel III, as a &quot;conservative&quot;, noting that all of them &quot;were not deceived by a [fascist] propaganda trying to place them in the same category [as the fascist movements].&quot; A similar verdict is provided by German historian of Europe Hagen Schulze, who views Horthy, Franco and the Romanian leader alongside Portugal&#x27;s &quot;Estado Novo&quot; theorist António de Oliveira Salazar and Second Polish Republic founder Józef Piłsudski, as rulers of &quot;either purely military dictatorships, or else authoritarian governments run by civilian politicians&quot;, and thus a category apart from the leaders of &quot;Fascist states.&quot; For Schulze, the defining elements of such governments is the presence of a &quot;conservative establishment&quot; which ensured &quot;social stability&quot; by extending the control of a &quot;traditional state&quot; (thus effectively blocking &quot;revolutionary suggestions&quot; from the far left and the far right alike). The term &quot;conservative autocrat&quot; is used in relation to the &quot;Conducător&quot; by British political theorist Roger Griffin, who attributes to the Iron Guard the position of a subservient fascist movement, while others identify Antonescu&#x27;s post-1941 rule as a military rather than a fascist dictatorship. Several other scholars prefer &quot;conservative&quot; as a defining term for Antonescu&#x27;s policies. Antonescu described himself as &quot;by fate a dictator&quot;, and explained that his policies were &quot;militaristic&quot; or, on one occasion, &quot;national-totalitarian&quot;.

Nevertheless, other historians theorize a synthesis of fascist and conservative elements, performed by Antonescu and other European leaders of his day. Routledge&#x27;s 2002 &quot;Companion to Fascism and the Far Right&quot; uses the terms &quot;para-fascist&quot; to define Antonescu, adding: &quot;generally regarded as an authoritarian conservative [Antonescu] incorporated fascism into his regime, in the shape of the Iron Guard, rather than embodying fascism himself.&quot; &quot;Para-fascist&quot; is also used by Griffin, to denote both Antonescu and Carol II. American historian of fascism Robert Paxton notes that, like Salazar, Romania&#x27;s dictator crushed a competing fascist movement, &quot;after copying some of [its] techniques of popular mobilization.&quot; Political scientists John Gledhill and Charles King discuss the Iron Guard as Romania&#x27;s &quot;indigenous fascist movement&quot;, remark that Antonescu &quot;adopted much of the ideology of the Guardists&quot;, and conclude that the regime he led was &quot;openly fascist&quot;. References to the fascist traits of Antonescu&#x27;s dictatorship are also made by other researchers.

The synthetic aspect of Antonescu&#x27;s rule is discussed in detail by various authors. British historian Dennis Deletant, who notes that the fascist label relies on both Antonescu&#x27;s adoption of some fascist &quot;trappings&quot; and the &quot;dichotomy of wartime and postwar evaluation&quot; of his regime, also notes that post-1960 interpretations &quot;do more to explain his behaviour than the preceding orthodoxy.&quot; Deletant contrasts the lack of &quot;mass political party or ideology&quot; with the type of rule associated with Nazism or Italian fascism. British-born sociologist and political analyst Michael Mann writes: &quot;The authoritarian regimes of Antonescu [...] and Franco [...] purported to be &#x27;traditional&#x27;, but actually their fascist-derived corporatism was a new immanent ideology of the right.&quot; Another distinct view is held by Romanian-born historian of ideas Juliana Geran Pilon, who describes Romania&#x27;s &quot;military fascist regime&quot; as a successor to Iron Guardist &quot;mystical nationalism&quot;, while mentioning that Antonescu&#x27;s &quot;national ideology was rather more traditionally militaristic and conservative.&quot;

===Power base, administration and propaganda===

In theory, Antonescu&#x27;s policies had at least one revolutionary aspect. The leader himself claimed: &quot;I want to introduce a patriotic, heroic, military-typed education, because economic education and all the others follow from it.&quot; According to Boia, his arrival in power was explicitly meant to &quot;regenerate&quot; Romania, and his popularity hinged on his being perceived as a &quot;totalitarian model&quot; and a &quot;saviour&quot; figure, like Corneliu Zelea Codreanu and Carol II before him. The &quot;providential&quot; and &quot;saviour&quot; themes are also emphasized by historian Adrian Majuru, who notes that Antonescu both adopted such ideals and criticized Carol for failing to live up to them. Seeing his rule as legitimized by the national interest, the general is also known to have referred to political pluralism as &quot;poltronerie&quot; (&quot;poltroonishness&quot;). Accordingly, Antonescu formally outlawed all political forces in February 1941, codifying penal labor as punishment for most public forms of political expression. In Deletant&#x27;s assessment, his regenerative program was more declarative than factual, and contradicted by Antonescu&#x27;s own decision to allow the informal existence of some opposition forces. At the same time, some historians believe his monopolizing of power in the name of a German alliance turned Romania into either a &quot;puppet state&quot; of Hitler or one of Germany&#x27;s &quot;satellite&quot; governments. However, Deletant notes: &quot;Romania retained her sovereignty throughout the period of the alliance [with Nazi Germany]. [...] Antonescu had, of course, his own country&#x27;s interests uppermost in his mind, but in following Hitler, he served the Nazi cause.&quot; He describes Romania&#x27;s contribution to the war as that of &quot;a principal ally of Germany&quot;, as opposed to a &quot;minor Axis satellite.&quot;

Although he assigned an unimportant role to King Michael, Antonescu took steps to increase the monarchy&#x27;s prestige, personally inviting Carol&#x27;s estranged wife, Queen Mother Helen, to return home. However, his preferred military structures functioned in cooperation with a bureaucracy inherited from the National Renaissance Front. According to historian of fascism Philip Morgan: &quot;Antonescu probably wanted to create, or perpetuate, something like Carol&#x27;s front organization.&quot; Much of his permanent support base comprised former National Christian Party members, to the point where he was seen as successor to Octavian Goga. While maintaining a decorative replacement for Parliament—known as &quot;Adunarea Obștească Plebiscitară a Națiunii Române&quot; (&quot;The General Plebiscitary Assembly of the Romanian Nation&quot;) and convoked only twice— he took charge of hierarchical appointments, and personally drafted new administrative projects. In 1941, he disestablished participative government in localities and counties, replacing it with a corporatist structure appointed by prefects whom he named. In stages between August and October 1941, he instituted civilian administration of Transnistria under Governor Gheorghe Alexianu, whose status he made equivalent to that of a cabinet minister. Similar measures were taken in Bukovina and Bessarabia (under Governors Corneliu Calotescu and Gheorghe Voiculescu, respectively). Antonescu strictly relied on the chain of command, and his direct orders to the Army overrode civilian hierarchies. This system allowed room for endemic political corruption and administrative confusion. The Romanian leader also tolerated a gradual loss of authority over the German communities in Romania, in particular the Transylvanian Saxon and Banat Swabian groups, in agreement with Hitler&#x27;s views on the &quot;Volksdeutsche&quot;. This trend was initiated by Saxon Nazi activist Andreas Schmidt in cooperation with the &quot;Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle&quot;, resulting in &quot;de facto&quot; self-governance under a Nazi system which was also replicated among the 130,000 Black Sea Germans of Transnistria. Many young German Romanian men opted to join the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; as early as 1940 and, in 1943, an accord between Antonescu and Hitler automatically sent ethnic Germans of recruitable age into the Wehrmacht.

The regime was characterized by the leader&#x27;s attempts to regulate even remote aspects of public life, including relations between the sexes. He imposed drastic penalties for misdemeanors, and the legal use of capital punishment was extended to an unprecedented level. He personally set standards for nightclub programs, for the length of skirts and for women&#x27;s use of bicycles, while forcing all men to wear coats in public. His wife Maria was a patron of state-approved charitable organizations, initially designed to compete with successful Iron Guardist ventures such as &quot;Ajutorul Legionar&quot;. According to Romanian-born gender studies academic Maria Bucur, although the regime allowed women &quot;to participate in the war effort on the front in a more regularized, if still marginal, fashion&quot;, the general tone was sexist.

The administrative apparatus included official press and propaganda sectors, which moved rapidly from constructing Carol&#x27;s personality cult to doing the same for the new military leader: journals &quot;Universul&quot; and &quot;Timpul&quot;, as well as Camil Petrescu&#x27;s &quot;România&quot; magazine, were particularly active in this process. Some other such venues were &quot;Porunca Vremii&quot;, Nichifor Crainic&#x27;s &quot;Sfarmă-Piatră&quot;, as well as all the seemingly independent newspapers and some ten new periodicals the government founded for this purpose. Among the individual journalists involved in propaganda were Crainic, Petrescu, Stelian Popescu, and &quot;Curentul&quot; editor Pamfil Șeicaru (the &quot;Conducător&quot; purposefully ignored support from Carol&#x27;s former adviser, corporatist economist and newspaperman Mihail Manoilescu, whom he reportedly despised). Much of the propaganda produced during the Antonescu era supported the antisemitic theses put forth by the &quot;Conducător&quot;. Antisemitism was notable and virulent at the level of Romanian Army units addressing former Soviet citizens in occupied lands, and reflected the regime&#x27;s preference for the ethnic slur &quot;jidani&quot; (akin to &quot;kikes&quot; or &quot;Yids&quot; in English). The religious aspect of anti-communism surfaced in such venues, which frequently equated Operation Barbarossa with a holy war or a crusade. Romania&#x27;s other enemies were generally treated differently: Antonescu himself issued objections to the anti-British propaganda of explicitly pro-Nazi papers such as &quot;Porunca Vremii&quot;. A special segment of Antonescu&#x27;s post-1941 propaganda was &quot;Codrenist&quot;: it revisited the Iron Guard&#x27;s history to minimize Sima&#x27;s contributions and to depict him as radically different from Codreanu.

==Antonescu and The Holocaust==
===Iași pogrom===
Three weeks after gaining power and inaugurating the National Legionary regime, Ion Antonescu declared to Italian interviewers at &quot;La Stampa&quot; that solving the &quot;Jewish Question&quot; was his pressing concern, and that he considered himself &quot;haunted&quot; by the large Jewish presence in Moldavian towns. Antonescu&#x27;s crimes against the Jewish population were inaugurated by new racial discrimination laws: urban Jewish property was expropriated, Jews were banned from performing a wide range of occupations and forced to provide community work for the state (&quot;muncă de interes obștesc&quot;) instead of the inaccessible military service, mixed Romanian-Jewish marriages were forbidden and many Jews, primarily those from strategic areas such as Ploiești, were confined to internment camps. The expulsion of Jewish professionals from all walks of life was also carried out in the National Legionary period, and enforced after the Legionary Rebellion. After a post-Legionary hiatus, &quot;Romanianization&quot; commissions resumed their work under the supervision of a National Center, and their scope was extended.

Often discussed as a prelude to the Holocaust in Romania and in connection with Antonescu&#x27;s views on &quot;Jewish Bolshevism&quot;, the Iași pogrom occurred just days after the start of Operation Barbarossa, and was partly instigated, partly tolerated by the authorities in Bucharest. For a while before the massacre, these issued propaganda claiming that the Jews in Iași, whose numbers had been increased by forced evictions from smaller localities, were actively helping Soviet bombers find their targets through the blackout and plotting against the authorities, with Antonescu himself ordering that the entire community be expelled from the city on such grounds. The discourse appealed to local antisemites, whose murderous rampage, carried out with the officials&#x27; complicity, resulted in several thousand deaths among Jewish men, women and children.

In the aftermath of the pogrom, thousands of survivors were loaded into the so-called &quot;death trains&quot;. These overcrowded and sealed Romanian Railways cattle wagons circled the countryside in the extreme heat of the summer, and periodically stopped to unload the dead. At least 4,000 people died during the initial massacre and the subsequent transports. Varied estimates of the Iași massacre and related killings place the total number of Jews killed at 8,000, 10,000, 12,000 or 14,000. Some assistance in their murder was provided by units of the German XXXth Army Corps, a matter which later allowed the authorities to shift blame from themselves and from Antonescu—who was nonetheless implicated by the special orders he had released. The complicity of the Special Intelligence Service and its director Eugen Cristescu was also advanced as a possibility. The subsequent attempts at a cover-up included omissive explanations given by the central authorities to foreign diplomats and rewriting official records.

===Transnistria===
Right upon setting up camp in Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, Romanian troops joined the Wehrmacht and the Schutzstaffel-organized &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; in mass shootings of Bessarabian and Ukrainian Jews, resulting in the deaths of 10,000 to 20,000 people. Scholar Christopher R. Browning compares these killings with similar atrocities perpetrated by locals in &quot;Reichskommissariat Ukraine&quot;, Lithuania and Latvia (&quot;see Holocaust in Latvia, Holocaust in Lithuania, Holocaust in Ukraine&quot;). From then on, as the fighting troops progressed over the Dniester, the local administration deported large numbers of Jews into the fighting zone, in hopes that they would be exterminated by the Germans. Antonescu himself stated: &quot;I am in favor of expelling the Jews from Bessarabia and [Northern] Bukovina to the other side of the border [...]. There is nothing for them to do here and I don&#x27;t mind if we appear in history as barbarians [...]. There has never been a time more suitable in our history to get rid of the Jews, and if necessary, you are to make use of machine guns against them.&quot; He also explained that his aim was: &quot;the policy of purification of the Romanian race, and I will not give way before any obstacle in achieving this historical goal of our nation. If we do not take advantage of the situation which presents itself today [...] we shall miss the last chance that history offers to us. And I do not wish to miss it, because if I do so further generations will blame me.&quot; He made a contradictory statement about the murder of Jews in Chișinău, claiming that their perpetrators were &quot;bastards&quot; who &quot;stained&quot; his regime&#x27;s reputation. Antonescu saw the &quot;war&quot; against the Jews as being just as important as the war against the Soviet Union, and regularly demanded reports from his officers in Bessarabia and Transnistria about their measures against the Jews. In late August 1941, in Tighina, Antonescu called a secret conference attended by himself, the governors of Bessarabia and Bukovina and the governor-designate of Transnistria to discuss his plans regarding the Jews in those regions.

Many deaths followed, as the direct results of starvation and exhaustion, while the local German troops carried out selective shootings. The survivors were sent back over the river, and the German commanders expressed irritation over the methods applied by their counterparts. Romanian authorities subsequently introduced ghettos or transit camps. After the annexation of Transnistria, there ensued a systematic deportation of Jews from Bessarabia, with additional transports of Jews from the Old Kingdom (especially Moldavia-proper). Based on an assignment Antonescu handed down to General Ioan Topor, the decision involved specific quotas, and the transports, most of which were carried out by foot, involved random murders. In conjunction with Antonescu&#x27;s expansionist ambitions, it is possible that the ultimate destination for the survivors, once circumstances permitted it, was further east than the Southern Bug. On 11 October 1941, the chief of the Federation of Jewish Communities, Wilhelm Filderman issued a public letter to Antonescu asking him to stop the deportations, writing: &quot;This is death, death for no reason except that they are Jews.&quot; Antonescu replied to Filderman in a long letter explaining that because the entire Jewish community of Bessarabia had allegedly collaborated with the Soviets during the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia, his policies were a justified act of revenge. On 11 November 1941, Antonescu sent Filderman a second letter stating no Jews would be allowed to live in the &quot;liberated territories&quot; and as for the Jews of the &quot;Regat&quot;:

We decided to defend our Romanian rights because our all-too-tolerant past was taken advantage of by the Jews and facilitated the abuse of our rights by foreigners, particularly the Jews...We are determined to put an end to this situation. We cannot afford to put in jeopardy the existence of our nation because of several hundred thousand Jews, or in order to salvage some principle of humane democracy that has not been understood properly.&quot;

The deportees&#x27; remaining property was nationalized, confiscated or left available for plunder. With its own Jewish population confined and subjected to extermination, Transnistria became infamous in short time, especially so for its five main concentration camps: Pechora, Akhmechetka, Bogdanovka, Domanovka and Obodovka. Manned by Romanian Gendarmes and local Ukrainian auxiliaries who acted with the consent of central authorities, Transnistrian localities became the sites of mass executions, particularly after the administrators became worried about the spread of typhus from the camps and into the surrounding region. At a Cabinet meeting on 16 December 1941 to discuss the fate of the Jews of Transnistria, Antonescu stated:

The question of the Yids is being discussed in Berlin. The Germans want to bring the Yids from Europe to Russia and settle them in certain areas, but there is still time before this plan is carried out. Meanwhile, what should we do? Shall we wait for a decision in Berlin? Shall we wait for a decision that concerns us? Shall we ensure their safety? Pack them into catacombs! Throw them into the Black Sea! As far I am concerned, 100 may die, 1,000 may die, all of them may die&quot;

Between 21–24 and 28–31 December 1941, Romanian gendarmes and Ukrainian auxiliaries killed about 70,000 Jews at the Bogdanovca camp; the massacre was Antonescu&#x27;s way of dealing with a typhus epidemic that had broken out among the Jews of Transnistria owing to the poor living conditions that had been forced to endure. The last wave of Jewish deportations, occurring in June 1942, came mainly from the Cernăuți area in Northern Bukovina.

Also in the summer of 1942, Ion Antonescu became a perpetrator of the &quot;Porajmos&quot;, or Holocaust-related crimes against the Romani people, when he ordered the Transnistrian deportation of Romanian Romani from the Old Kingdom, transited through camps and resettled in inhumane conditions near the Southern Bug. They were joined there by 2,000 conscientious objectors of the Inochentist church, a millennialist denomination. As Antonescu admitted during his trial, he personally supervised these operations, giving special orders to the Gendarmerie commanders. In theory, the measures taken against Romani people were supposed to affect only nomads and those with a criminal record created or updated recently, but arbitrary exceptions were immediately made to this rule, in particular by using the vague notion of &quot;undesirable&quot; to define some members of sedentary communities. The central authorities noted differences in the criteria applied locally, and intervened to prevent or sanction under-deportation and, in some cases, over-deportation. Antonescu and Constantin Vasiliu had been made aware of the problems Transnistria faced in feeding its own population, but ignored them when deciding in favour of expulsion. With most of their property confiscated, the Romani men, women and children were only allowed to carry hand luggage, on which they were supposed to survive winter. Famine and disease ensued from criminal negligence, Romani survival being largely dependent on occasional government handouts, the locals&#x27; charity, stealing and an underground economy. Once caught, escapees who made their way back into Romania were returned by the central authorities, even as local authorities were objecting.

===Odessa massacre===
The Odessa massacre, an act of collective punishment carried out by the Romanian Army and Gendarmes, took the lives of a minimum of between 15,000 and 25,000 to as many as 40,000 or even more than 50,000 Jewish people of all ages. The measure came as the enforcement of Antonescu&#x27;s own orders, as retaliation for an explosion that killed 67 people at Romanian headquarters on that city. Antonescu believed that the original explosion was a terrorist act, rejecting the possibility of the building in question having been fitted with land mines by the retreating Soviets. In addition, Antonescu blamed the Jews, specifically &quot;Jewish commissars&quot; in the Red Army, for the losses suffered by his 4th Army throughout the siege, although both an inquiry he had ordered and German assessments pointed to the ill-preparedness of Romanian soldiers. While the local command took the initiative for the first executions, Antonescu&#x27;s personal intervention amplified the number of victims required, and included specific quotas (200 civilians for every dead officer, 100 for every dead soldier). By the time of the explosion, the Jewish population was already rounded up into makeshift ghettos, being made subject to violence and selective murders.

Purportedly the largest single massacre of Jews in the war&#x27;s history, it involved mass shootings, hangings, acts of immolation and a mass detonation. Antonescu is quoted saying that the Romanian Army&#x27;s criminal acts were &quot;reprisals, not massacres&quot;. Survivors were deported to the nearby settlement of Slobidka, and kept in inhumane conditions. Alexianu himself intervened with Antonescu for a solution to their problems, but the Romanian leader decided he wanted them out of the Odessa area, citing the nearby resistance of Soviet troops in the Siege of Sevastopol as a ferment for similar Jewish activities. His order to Alexianu specified: &quot;Pack them into the catacombs, throw them into the Black Sea, but get them out of Odessa. I don&#x27;t want to know. A hundred can die, a thousand can die, all of them can die, but I don&#x27;t want a single Romanian official or officer to die.&quot; Defining the presence of Jews in occupied Odessa as &quot;a crime&quot;, Antonescu added: &quot;I don&#x27;t want to stain my activity with such lack of foresight.&quot; As a result of this, around 35,000–40,000 Jewish people were deported out of Odessa area and into other sectors of Transnistria. Several thousands were purposefully driven into Berezivka and other areas inhabited by the Black Sea Germans, where &quot;Selbstschutz&quot; organizations massacred them.

===Overall death toll and particularities===

A common assessment ranks Antonescu&#x27;s Romania as second only to Nazi Germany in its antisemitic extermination policies. According to separate works by historians Dennis Deletant and Adrian Cioroianu, the flaws of Antonescu&#x27;s 1946 trial notwithstanding, his responsibility for war crimes was such that he would have been equally likely to be found guilty and executed in a Western Allied jurisdiction. The often singular brutality of Romanian-organized massacres was a special topic of reflection for Jewish Holocaust escapee and American political theorist Hannah Arendt, as discussed in her 1963 work &quot;Eichmann in Jerusalem&quot;. Official Romanian estimates made in 2003 by the Wiesel Commission mention that between 280,000 and 380,000 Jews were killed by Romanian authorities under Antonescu&#x27;s rule. The Transnistria deportations account for 150,000 to 170,000 individual expulsions of Jews from Romania proper, of whom some 90,000–120,000 never returned. According to Romanian-born Israeli historian Jean Ancel, the Transnistria deportations from other areas account for around 145,000 deaths, while the number of local Transnistrian Jews killed could be as high as 280,000. More conservative estimates for the latter number mention some 130,000–180,000 victims. Other overall estimates speak of 200,000 to over 300,000 Jews purposefully killed as a result of Romania&#x27;s action. According to historians Antony Polonsky and Joanna B. Michlic: &quot;none of these massacres was carried out by the Germans, although [the latter] certainly encouraged such actions and, in some cases, may have coordinated them.&quot; The Romani deportations affected some 25,000 people, at least 11,000 of whom died in Transnistria.

The Jewish population in the Old Kingdom, numbering between 300,000 and 400,000 people, survived the Holocaust almost intact. Reflecting on this fact, Lucian Boia noted that Antonescu could not &quot;decently&quot; be viewed as a rescuer of Jews, but that there still is a fundamental difference between the effects of his rule and those of Hitler&#x27;s, concluding that the overall picture is not &quot;completely dark.&quot; For Dennis Deletant, this situation is a &quot;major paradox&quot; of Antonescu&#x27;s time in power: &quot;more Jews survived under [Antonescu&#x27;s] rule than in any other country within Axis Europe.&quot; American historian of Romania William O. Oldson views Antonescu&#x27;s policies as characterized by &quot;violence, inconsistency and inanity&quot;, but places them in the wider context of local antisemitism, noting some ideological exceptions from their respective European counterparts. These traits, he argues, became &quot;providential&quot; for the more assimilated Jewish communities of the Old Romanian Kingdom, while exposing Jews perceived as foreign. Discussing Antonescu&#x27;s policy of ethnic cleansing, Polonksy and Mihlic note: &quot;[it] raises important questions about the thin line between the desire to expel an unwanted minority and a small-scale genocidal project under sanctioned conditions.&quot; American military historian Gerhard L. Weinberg made reference to the Antonescu regime&#x27;s &quot;slaughter of large number of Jews in the areas ceded to the Soviet Union in 1940 when those areas were retaken in 1941 as well as in [...] Transnistria&quot;, but commented: &quot;the government of Marshal Ion Antonescu preferred to rob and persecute Jews [from Romania]; the government would not turn them over to the Germans for killing.&quot;

Alongside the noticeable change in fortunes on the Eastern Front, a main motivator for all post-1943 changes, noted by various historians, was the manifold financial opportunity of Jewish survival. Wealthier Jews were financially extorted in order to avoid community work and deportation, and the work of some professionals was harnessed by the public sector, and even by the Army. From the beginning, the regime had excepted from deportations some Jews who were experts in fields such as forestry and chemistry, and some others were even allowed to return despite antisemitic protests in their home provinces. Economic exploitation was institutionalized in late 1941-early 1942, with the creation of a Central Jewish Office. Supervised by Commissioner Radu Lecca and formally led by the Jewish intellectuals Nandor Gingold and Henric Streitman, it collected funds which were in part redirected toward Maria Antonescu&#x27;s charities. Small numbers of Romanian Jews left independently for the Palestine as early as 1941, but British opposition to Zionist plans made their transfer perilous (one notorious example of this being the MV &quot;Struma&quot;). On a personal level, Antonescu&#x27;s encouragement of crimes alternated with periods when he gave in to the pleas of Jewish community leader Wilhelm Filderman. In one such instance, he reversed his own 1942 decision to impose the wearing of yellow badges, which nevertheless remained in use everywhere outside the Old Kingdom and, in theory, to any Romanian Jews elsewhere in Axis-controlled Europe. Assessing these contradictions, commentators also mention the effect of Allied promises to prosecute those responsible for genocide throughout Europe. In the late stages of the war, Antonescu was attempting to shift all blame for crimes from his regime while accusing Jews of &quot;bring[ing] destruction upon themselves&quot;.

The regime permitted non-deported Romanian Jews and American charities to send humanitarian aid into Transnistrian camps, a measure it took an interest in enforcing in late 1942. Deportations of Jews ceased altogether in October of the same year. A common explanation historians propose for this reassessment of policies is the change in Germany&#x27;s fortunes on the Eastern Front, with mention that Antonescu was considering using the Jewish population as an asset in his dealings with the Western Allies. It nevertheless took the regime more than a year to allow more selective Jewish returns from Transnistria, including some 2,000 orphans. After Transnistria&#x27;s 1944 evacuation, Antonescu himself advocated the creation of new camps in Bessarabia. In conversations with his cabinet, the &quot;Conducător&quot; angrily maintained that surviving Jews were better off than Romanian soldiers.

The policies applied in respect to the Romani population were ambivalent: while ordering the deportation of those he considered criminals, Ion Antonescu was taking some interest in improving the lives of Romani laborers of the Bărăgan Plain. According to Romanian historian Viorel Achim, although it had claimed the existence of a &quot;Gypsy problem&quot;, the Antonescu regime &quot;did not count it among its priorities.&quot; By 1943, Antonescu was gradually allowing those deported to return home. Initially, Constantin Vasiliu allowed the families of soldiers to appeal their deportation on a selective basis. Romanian authorities also appear to have been influenced by the objections of Nazi administrators in the &quot;Reichskommissariat Ukraine&quot;, who feared that the newly arrived population would outnumber local Germans. By January 1944, the central authorities ordered local ones not to send back apprehended fugitives, instructed them to provide these with some food and clothing, and suggested corporal punishment for Romani people who did not adhere to a behavioural code. As the Romanian administrators abandoned Transnistria, most survivors from the group returned on their own in summer 1944.

===Antonescu and the Final Solution projects===
Ion Antonescu and his subordinates were for long divided on the issue of the Final Solution, as applied in territories under direct Nazi control from 1941. At an early stage, German attempts to impose the RSHA&#x27;s direct control over Old Kingdom Jews drew some objections from Mihai Antonescu, but the two sides agreed to a common policy with reference to Soviet Jews. In various of his early 1940s statements, Ion Antonescu favorably mentions the Axis goal of eliminating the Jewish presence in the event of victory. The unrestrained character of some Romanian actions toward Jews alarmed Nazi officials, who demanded a methodical form of extermination. When confronted with German decisions to push back Jews he had expelled before the occupation of Transnistria, Antonescu protested, arguing that he had conformed with Hitler&#x27;s decisions regarding &quot;eastern Jews&quot;. In August 1941, in preparation for the Final Solution&#x27;s universal application, Hitler remarked: &quot;As for the Jewish question, today in any case one could say that a man like Antonescu, for example, proceeds much more radically in this manner than we have done until now. But I will not rest or be idle until we too have gone all the way with the Jews.&quot;

By summer 1942, German representatives in Romania obtained Antonescu&#x27;s approval to deport the remaining Jewish population to extermination camps in occupied Poland. Among those involved on the German side were mass murderer Adolf Eichmann and his aide Gustav Richter, while the Romanian side was represented by Jewish Affairs Commissioner Lecca (reporting to Antonescu himself). Richter directed Lecca in setting up the Central Jewish Office, which he assumed would function as a &quot;Judenrat&quot; to streamline extermination policies. According to such plans, only some 17,000 Jews, labeled useful to Romania&#x27;s economy, were to be exempt. The transports had already been announced to the Romanian Railways by autumn 1942, but the government eventually decided to postpone these measures indefinitely as was done with most other deportations to Transnistria. Antonescu&#x27;s new orders on the matter were brought up in his conversations with Hitler at Schloss Klessheim, where both leaders show themselves aware of the fate awaiting Jewish deportees to Poland. By then, German authorities charged with applying the Final Solution in Eastern Europe completely abandoned their plans with respect to Romania. In August 1942, Antonescu had worked out plans with the SS for deporting all of the Jews of the &quot;Regat&quot; or the &quot;Old Kingdom&quot; to the German-run death camps in Poland, but then cancelled the deportation. The principal reasons for his change of mind were signs of disapproval from court circles, a warning from the American government passed on by the Swiss ambassador that he would prosecuted for war crimes and crimes against humanity after the Allies had won if the deportation went ahead, and most importantly because Hitler would not undo the Second Vienna Award and return northern Transylvania to Romania. Antonescu saw the deportation of the Jews of the &quot;Regat&quot; as the &quot;pro quid quo&quot; for the return of Transylvania and unable to obtain satisfactory promises from the German Ambassador Baron Manfred von Killinger that Romania would be rewarded with the return of Transylvania in exchange for handing over its Jews, Antonescu cancelled the deportation until the Germans would make him a better offer.

According to Oldson, by the final stage of the war Romania rejected &quot;all extreme measures against Jews who could not be proven to be communists.&quot; The planned transports to Palestine, the prospect of which irritated Nazi German observers, implied a hope that the Allies&#x27; focus would shift away from the regime&#x27;s previous guilt and, at the same time, looked forward to payments to be made in exchange for each person saved. The contrary implications of Romanian nationalism, manifested as reluctance to obey German commands and discomfort with drastic change in general, are occasionally offered as further explanations of the phenomenon. While reflecting upon the issue of emigration to Palestine, Antonescu also yielded to pleas of Jewish community leaders, and allowed safe passage through Romania for various Northern Transylvanian Jews fleeing the Holocaust in Hungary. He was doing the same for certain Northern Transylvanian Romani communities who had escaped southwards. In that context, Nazi German ideologues began objecting to Antonescu&#x27;s supposed leniency. Antonescu nevertheless alternated tolerance of illegal immigration with drastic measures. In early 1944, he issued an order to shoot illegal immigrants, which was probably never enforced by the Border Police (who occasionally turned in Jewish refugees to the German authorities). The Antonescu regime allowed the extermination of the Romanian Jewish diaspora in other parts of Europe, formally opposing their deportation in some cases where it appeared Germany was impinging upon Romania&#x27;s sovereignty.

==Opposition and political persecution==

===Political mainstream===

The circumstances of wartime accounted for cautious and ambivalent approaches to Antonescu&#x27;s rule from among the Romanian political mainstream, which grouped advocates of liberal democracy and anti-fascism. According to Gledhill and King: &quot;Romanian liberals had been critical of their government&#x27;s warm relationship with Hitler, which had been developing throughout the 1930s, but the [1940] Soviet attack on Romanian territory left them with little chance but to support Germany&#x27;s invasion of the Soviet Union.&quot; Other authors also cite the Greater Romanian agenda of the Antonescu executive as a reason behind the widespread acquiescence. The tendency was illustrated by Dinu Brătianu, who, in late January 1941, told his National Liberal colleagues that the new &quot;government of generals&quot; was &quot;the best solution possible to the current crisis&quot;, urging the group to provide Antonescu with &quot;all the support we can give him.&quot; An early point of contention between Antonescu and the National Peasants&#x27; Party came in spring 1941, when Antonescu&#x27;s support for the Balkans Campaign and Romania&#x27;s claim to parts of Vojvodina were met with a letter of protest from Iuliu Maniu, which Antonescu dismissed. Maniu and Brătianu also issued several condemnations of Antonescu&#x27;s decision to continue the war beyond the Dniester. One such letter, signed by both, claimed that, while earlier steps had been &quot;legitimized by the entire soul of the nation, the Romanian people will never consent to the continuation of the struggle beyond our national borders.&quot; Maniu specifically mentioned the possibility of Allied victory, accused Antonescu of diverting attention from the goal of Greater Romania (Northern Transylvania included), and stressed that Romania&#x27;s ongoing participation in the Axis was &quot;troubling enough&quot;.

Antonescu is known to have publicly admonished opposition leaders for their disobedience, which he equated with obstruction, and to have monitored their activities through the Special Intelligence Service. However, some early communiqués he addressed to Brătianu also feature offers of resignation, which their recipient reluctantly rejected. The Germans objected to such ambiguities, and Hitler once advised Antonescu to have Maniu killed, an option which the &quot;Conducător&quot; rejected because of the PNȚ leader&#x27;s popularity with the peasants. While tolerating contacts between Maniu and the Allies, Antonescu arrested the clandestine British envoys to Romania, thus putting a stop to the 1943 &quot;Operation Autonomous&quot;. In parallel, his relationship with Queen Mother Helen and Michael rapidly deteriorated after he began advising the royal family on how to conduct its affairs. Dissent from Antonescu&#x27;s policies sometimes came from inside his own camp. Both the officer corps and the General Staff were divided on the issue of war beyond the Dniester, although it is possible that the majority agreed it would bring Northern Transylvania back to Romania. A prominent case was that of Iosif Iacobici, the Chief of the Romanian General Staff, whose objection to the massive transfer of Romanian troops to the Eastern Front resulted in his demotion and replacement with Ilie Șteflea (January 1942). Șteflea issued similar calls, and Antonescu&#x27;s eventually agreed to preserve a home army just before the Battle of Stalingrad. Various other military men extended their protection to persecuted Jews. Overall, Antonescu met significant challenges in exercising control over the politicized sectors in the armed forces.

Antonescu&#x27;s racial discrimination laws and Romania&#x27;s participation in the Holocaust earned significant objections from various individuals and groups in Romanian society. One noted opponent was Queen Mother Helen, who actively intervened to save Jews from being deported. The Mayor of Cernăuți, Traian Popovici, publicly objected to the deportation of Jews, as did Gherman Pântea, his counterpart in Odessa. The appeals of Queen Helen, King Michael, the Orthodox Metropolitan of Transylvania Nicolae Bălan, Apostolic Nuncio Andrea Cassulo and Swiss Ambassador René de Weck are credited with having helped avert the full application of the Final Solution in Antonescu&#x27;s Romania. Cassulo and Bălan together pleaded for the fate of certain Jews, including all who had converted to Christianity, and the former publicly protested against deportations. While Romania and the United States were still at peace, American Minister Plenipotentiary Franklin Mott Gunther repeatedly attempted to make his superiors aware of Romanian actions against the Jews, and Turkish diplomats unsuccessfully sought American approval for transferring Romanian Jews to safe passage through Anatolia and into Palestine. Dinu Brătianu also condemned antisemitic measures, prompting Antonescu to accuse him of being an ally of &quot;the Yid in London&quot;. Together with Maniu and Ion Mihalache, Brătianu signed statements condemning the isolation, persecution and expulsion of Jews, which prompted Antonescu to threaten to clamp down on them. However, both parties were occasionally ambiguous on racial issues, and themselves produced antisemitic messages. Brătianu is also known for publicly defending the cause of Romani people, opposing their deportation on grounds that it would &quot;turn back the clock on several centuries of history&quot;, a stance which drew support from his civilian peers. In parallel, some regular Romanians such as nurse Viorica Agarici intervened to save Jewish lives, while, from inside the Jewish community, Chief Rabbi Alexandru Șafran and activist Mișu Benvenisti rallied with Wilhelm Filderman in public protests against Antonescu&#x27;s decisions, being occasionally joined by A. L. Zissu. In 1943, Filderman himself was deported to Mohyliv-Podilskyi, but eventually allowed to return.

===Political underground===

Organized resistance movements in Antonescu&#x27;s Romania were comparatively small-scale and marginal. In addition to a Zionist underground which aided Jews to pass through or flee the country, the regime was confronted with local political movements of contrasting shades. One of them comprised far left and left-wing elements, which Antonescu&#x27;s rise to power had caught in an unusual position. The minor Romanian Communist Party, outlawed since the rule of Ferdinand I for its Cominternist national policies, had been rendered virtually inactive by the German-Soviet non-aggression pact. Once reanimated by Operation Barbarossa, the PCR was unable to create an actual armed resistance movement, although it was able to coordinate the policies of several other small leftist groups. Speaking shortly before the invasion of the Soviet Union, and adopting the &quot;Jewish Bolshevism&quot; position, Antonescu ordered authorities to compile lists comprising &quot;the names of all Jewish and communist agents&quot;, who were to be kept under close surveillance. Among people arrested on suspicion of communism, Jews were sent to Transnistrian sites such as Vapniarka and Rîbnița, while others were interned in regular facilities such as those in Caransebeș and Târgu Jiu. In all, some 2,000 Jewish Romanian deportees to the region had been accused of political crimes (the category also included those who had tried to escape forced labor). According to one estimate, people held on charges of being communists accounted for just under 2,000 people, of whom some 1,200 were jailed in Romania proper. Capital punishment was used against various partisan-like activists, while the vast majority of communist prisoners in Rîbnița were massacred in March 1944. At the other end of the political spectrum, after the Legionary Rebellion and the Iron Guard&#x27;s decapitation, many Legionaries who opposed the regime, and whom Antonescu himself believed were &quot;communists in [Legionary] green shirts&quot;, were killed or imprisoned. An Iron Guardist underground was nevertheless formed locally, and probably numbered in thousands. Some of Antonescu&#x27;s political prisoners from both camps were given a chance to redeem themselves by joining units on the Eastern Front.

Although repressed, divided and weak, the PCR capitalized on the Soviet victories, being integrated into the mainstream opposition. At the same time, a &quot;prison faction&quot; emerged around Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, opposing both the formal leadership and the so-called &quot;Muscovite&quot; communists who had taken refuge in the Soviet Union before the war. While maneuvering for control within the PCR during and after 1944, &quot;prison&quot; communists destroyed a third group, formed around the PCR&#x27;s nominal leader Ștefan Foriș (whom they kidnapped and eventually killed). The PCR leadership was still suffering from a crisis of legitimacy after beginning talks with the larger parties. The Soviets and &quot;Muscovite&quot; communists campaigned among Romanian prisoners of war in order to have them switch sides in the war, and eventually managed to set up the Tudor Vladimirescu Division.

===Cultural circles===
Measures enforced by the Ion Antonescu regime had contradictory effects on the Romanian cultural scene. According to Romanian literary historians Letiția Guran and Alexandru Ștefan, &quot;the Antonescu regime [...] did not affect negatively cultural modernity. The Romanian cultural elite regarded Antonescu&#x27;s policies for the most part with sympathy.&quot; Nevertheless, other researchers record the dissent of several cultural environments: the classic liberalism and cosmopolitanism of aging literary theorist Eugen Lovinescu, the &quot;Lovinescian&quot; Sibiu Literary Circle, and the rebellious counterculture of young avant-garde writers (Ion Caraion, Geo Dumitrescu, Dimitrie Stelaru, Constant Tonegaru). Prominent left-wing writers Tudor Arghezi, Victor Eftimiu and Zaharia Stancu were political prisoners during the Antonescu years. Author George Călinescu also stood out against the official guidelines, and, in 1941, took a risk by publishing a synthesis of Romanian literature which emphasized Jewish contributions, while composer George Enescu pleaded with Antonescu personally for the fate of Romani musicians. Similar acts of solidarity were performed by various prominent intellectuals and artists. In August 1942, King Michael received a manifesto endorsed by intellectuals from various fields, deploring the murders in Transnistria, and calling for a realignment of policies. Another such document of April 1944 called for an immediate peace with the Soviet Union. On a more intimate level, a diary kept by philosopher and art critic Alice Voinescu expresses her indignation over the antisemitic measures and massacres.

A special aspect of political repression and cultural hegemony was Antonescu&#x27;s persecution of Evangelical or Restorationist Christian denominations, first outlawed under the National Legionary regime. Several thousand adherents of the Pentecostal Union and the Baptist Union were reportedly jailed in compliance with his orders. Persecution targeted groups of religiously motivated conscientious objectors. In addition to the Inochentist movement, these groups included the Pentecostal Union, the Seventh-day Adventist Conference and the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses Association. Antonescu himself recounted having contemplated using the death penalty against &quot;sects&quot; who would not allow military service, and ultimately deciding in favor of deporting &quot;recalcitrant&quot; ones. On 9 September 1940, the Ministry of Culture and Art issued a list of confessions that were recognized and protected by the regime. The list included the Romanian Orthodox Church, the Greek Catholic Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Armenian Orthodox Church, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, the Calvinist Church, the Lutheran Church, the Unitarian Church, and Islam. Any confession not listed was considered officially banned.

==Legacy==

===Consequences of the Antonescu trial===
The period following Antonescu&#x27;s fall returned Romania to a democratic regime and the 1923 Constitution, as well as its participation in the war alongside the Allies. However, it also saw the early stages of a communist takeover—which culminated with King Michael&#x27;s forced abdication on 30 December 1947 and the subsequent establishment of Communist Romania. The Antonescu trial thus fit into a long series of similar procedures and political purges on charges of collaborationism, instrumented by the Romanian People&#x27;s Tribunals and various other institutions. During the rigged general election of 1946 and for years after Ion Antonescu&#x27;s execution, the Romanian Communist Party and its allies began using the implications of his trial as an abusive means of compromising some of their political opponents. One such early example was Iuliu Maniu, by then one of the country&#x27;s prominent anti-communists, who was accused of being a fascist and an Antonescu sympathizer, mainly for having shaken his hand during the trial. The enlistment of ethnic Germans into Nazi German units, as approved by Antonescu, was used as a pretext for a Soviet-led expulsion of Germans from Romania. On similar grounds, the Soviet occupation forces organized the capture of certain Romanian citizens, as well as the return of war refugees from Romania proper into Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. Both the arrestees and the returnees were often deported deeper into the Soviet Union. As part of its deteriorating relationship with Romanian Roman Catholics, and urged on by the Soviets, the communist cabinet of Petru Groza also deemed Apostolic Nuncio Andrea Cassulo a collaborator of Antonescu and a &quot;persona non grata&quot;, based on transcripts of the Cassulo-Antonescu conversations. It also used such allegations to pressure several Greek-Catholic clergymen into accepting union with the Romanian Orthodox Church.

Nevertheless, Romanian-born Holocaust historian Radu Ioanid notes, few Romanians involved in organizing the Holocaust were prosecuted, and, of those, none were executed after the Antonescu trial. He attributes this to nationalist resistance within the administrative and judicial apparatus, to communist fears of alienating a too large number of people, to the emigration of Zionist survivors, and to the open hostility of some communists toward liberal Jewish community leaders. Jews also faced conflict with the new authorities and with the majority population, as described by other researchers. There were, nonetheless, sporadic trials for Holocaust-related crimes, including one of Maria Antonescu. Arrested in September 1944 and held 1945–1946 in Soviet custody, she was re-arrested at home in 1950, tried and ultimately found guilty of economic crimes for her collaboration with the Central Jewish Office. Five years later, she was sent into internal exile, and died of heart problems in 1964. After 1950, a large number of convicted war criminals, even some sentenced to life imprisonment, were deemed fit for &quot;social cohabitation&quot; (that is, fit to live amongst the general population) and released, while some suspects were never prosecuted.

===In communist historiography===
Although the Marxist analytical works of the increasingly marginalized communist figure Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu make isolated mentions of the Holocaust, the heavily politicized official discourse inspired by Soviet historiography interpreted Romania&#x27;s wartime evolution exclusively based on the Marxist-Leninist idea of class conflict. In this context, the main effort to document and expose the Antonescu-era massacres came from Jewish Romanians. This began in 1945, when Jewish journalists Marius Mircu and Maier Rudrich contributed first-hand testimonies. In 1946–1948, the Jewish community leader Matatias Carp published &quot;Cartea neagră&quot; (&quot;The Black Book&quot;), a voluminous and detailed account of all stages of the Holocaust. After forming a secondary element in Antonescu&#x27;s indictment, the deportation of Romani people was largely ignored in official discourse.

The communist regime overemphasized the part played by the PCR in King Michael&#x27;s Coup, while commemorating its 23 August date as a national holiday. The Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej faction emerged as the winner of the interior PCR struggles and incorporated nationalist discourse. That faction claimed a decisive role in toppling Antonescu, even though a majority of its members had been jailed for most of the period. In accordance with Stalinist principles, censorship produced historical revisionism that excluded focus on such negative aspects of Romanian behavior during the war as antisemitism and the Holocaust, and obscured Romania&#x27;s participation on the Eastern Front. Beginning in the mid-1960s, when Nicolae Ceaușescu took power and embarked on a national communist course, the celebration of 23 August as the inception of the communist regime was accompanied by a contradictory tendency, which implied a gradual rehabilitation of Antonescu and his regime. Historians who focused on this period believe that the revival of nationalist tenets and the relative distance taken from Soviet policies contributed to the rehabilitation process. After a period of liberalization, the increasingly authoritarian Ceaușescu regime revived the established patterns of personalized rule, and even made informal use of the title &quot;Conducător&quot;. Beginning in the early 1970s, when the new policies were consecrated by the &quot;July Theses&quot;, Ceaușescu tolerated a nationalist, antisemitic and Holocaust denialist intellectual faction, illustrated foremost by &quot;Săptămîna&quot; and &quot;Luceafărul&quot; magazines of Eugen Barbu and Corneliu Vadim Tudor, by poet Adrian Păunescu and his &quot;Flacăra&quot; journal, and by novelist Ion Lăncrănjan. The regime also came to cultivate a relationship with exiled tycoon Iosif Constantin Drăgan, a former Iron Guard member who had come to endorse both Antonescu&#x27;s rehabilitation and the national communist version of protochronism. In contrast, much of dissident culture and the Romanian diaspora embraced the image of Michael I as its counterpart to the increasingly official Antonescu myth. Lucian Boia described this as &quot;the spectacular confrontation between the two contradictory myths [transposing] into historical and mythological terms a fundamental fissure which divides the Romanian society of today.&quot;

Topics relating to the Holocaust in Romania were distorted during the communist era. Ceaușescu himself mentioned the number of survivors of the deportations (some 50,000 people) as a total number of victims, failed to mention the victims&#x27; ethnic background, and presented most of them as &quot;communists and antifascists.&quot; The regime also placed emphasis on the Holocaust in Northern Transylvania (where the Final Solution had been applied by the Germans and the local Arrow Cross Party). Vladimir Tismăneanu has said Antonescu has a &quot;pseudo-sacred aura&quot; and many Romanians consider the attempts to diminsh this to be an affront to their national dignity: &quot;In post-Communist societies, fantasies of persecution offer immense gratification to large strata of frustrated individuals&quot;. These national views are based on propaganda advanced during the Ceaușescu regime.

Earlier accounts of the massacres, which had already been placed under restricted use, were completely removed from public libraries. While a special politicized literature dealt with the Holocaust in Hungary, the entire Ceaușescu period produced only one work entirely dedicated to Romania&#x27;s participation. Centred on the Iași pogrom, it shifted the blame from Romanian authorities and advanced a drastically reduced death toll. In its preface, official historian Nicolae Minei claimed that Romania was not responsible for any deaths among Jews. Other official texts made more radical claims, openly denying that Antonescu&#x27;s regime was antisemitic, and that all those killed were victims of Germany or of circumstance.

===Debates of the 1990s===
Romanians&#x27; image of Antonescu shifted several times after the 1989 Revolution toppled communism. Polls carried out in the 1990s show the &quot;Conducător&quot; was well liked by portions of the general public. This tendency, Lucian Boia argues, was similar to a parallel trend favoring Wallachia&#x27;s 15th century Prince Vlad III the Impaler, indicating a preference for &quot;authoritarian solutions&quot; and reflecting &quot;a pantheon that was largely set in place in the &#x27;Ceaușescu era&#x27; &quot;. It was also popular at the time to see the 1944 Coup exclusively as the onset of communization in Romania, while certain sections of the public opinion revived the notion of &quot;Jewish Bolshevism&quot;, accusing Jews of having brought communism to Romania. British historian Tony Judt connected such reflexes to growing anti-Russian sentiment and Holocaust denial in various countries of the former Eastern Bloc, and termed them collectively &quot;mis-memory of anti-communism&quot;. Vladimir Tismăneanu, a prominent Romanian-born political scientist, referred to Antonescu&#x27;s &quot;pseudo-sacred&quot; image with the post-1989 public, and to the phenomenon as &quot;fantasies of persecution.&quot; The wartime dictator&#x27;s image appealed to many politicians of the post-1989 period, and sporadic calls for his rehabilitation were issued at the highest levels of authority. Far right groups issued calls for his canonization by the Romanian Orthodox Church (together with a similar request to canonize Corneliu Zelea Codreanu). Certain neofascist groups claim to represent a legacy of &quot;Codrenism&quot; from which Sima was a deviationist, and these have also become Antonescu apologists.

A particular case in this process was that of forces gathered around the Greater Romania Party, a group often characterized as merging xenophobic or neofascist messages and the legacy of Ceaușescu&#x27;s national communism. Founded by party leader and former &quot;Săptămîna&quot; contributor Corneliu Vadim Tudor, &quot;România Mare&quot; magazine is known to have equated Antonescu and Ceaușescu, presenting them both as &quot;apostles of the Romanian people&quot;. In his bid for the office of President during the 1996 election, Vadim Tudor vowed to be a new Antonescu. Boia remarks that this meeting of extremes offers an &quot;extraordinary paradox&quot;. Drăgan also openly resumed his activities in Romania, often in collaboration with Vadim Tudor&#x27;s group, founding three organizations tasked with campaigning for Antonescu&#x27;s rehabilitation: the media outlet Europa Nova, the Ion Antonescu Foundation and the Ion Antonescu League. His colleague Radu Theodoru endorsed such projects while accusing Jews of being &quot;a long-term noxious factor&quot; and claiming that it was actually ethnic Romanians who were victims of a communist Holocaust. Ion Coja and Paul Goma notably produced radical claims relying on fabricated evidence and deflecting blame for the crimes onto the Jews themselves. Several journals edited by Ion Cristoiu repeatedly argued in favor of Antonescu&#x27;s rehabilitation, also making xenophobic claims; similar views were sporadically present in national dailies of various hues, such as &quot;Ziua&quot;, &quot;România Liberă&quot; and &quot;Adevărul&quot;.

Various researchers argue that the overall tendency to exculpate Antonescu was endorsed by the ruling National Salvation Front (FSN) and its successor group, later known as Social Democratic Party, who complemented an emerging pro-authoritarian lobby while depicting their common opponent King Michael and his supporters as traitors. Similar attempts to deny the role of Antonescu in the Holocaust were also made by the main opposition parties, the Christian Democratic National Peasants&#x27; Party and the National Liberal Party, with Radu Câmpeanu, the latter party&#x27;s president, publicly describing the wartime leader as a &quot;great Romanian&quot; who tried to defend the Jews. Sections of both governing and opposition groups contemplated the idea of rehabilitating the wartime leader, and, in May 1991, Parliament observed a moment of silence in his memory. The perceived governmental tolerance of Antonescu&#x27;s rehabilitation raised international concern and protests. While the FSN-supported Romanian President Ion Iliescu publicly opposed attempts to rehabilitate Antonescu and acknowledged the &quot;crimes he committed against the Jews&quot;, it was his successor, Emil Constantinescu, a representative of the Democratic Convention, who in 1997 became the first Romanian officeholder to recognize the collective responsibility of Romanian authorities. Nevertheless, during the same period, Attorney General Sorin Moisescu followed a since-deprecated special appeal procedure to overturn sentences passed against Antonescu and other 1946 defendants, which he eventually withdrew.

To a certain degree, such pro-Antonescu sentiments were also present in post-1989 historiography. Reflecting back on this phenomenon in 2004, Maria Bucur wrote: &quot;the perverse image of Antonescu is not the product of a propaganda campaign led by right-wing extremists, but a pervasive myth fed by historical debates and political contests, and which the public seems indifferent to or accepts unproblematically.&quot; After the Revolution, archival sources concerning Antonescu, including those in the National Archives of Romania, were made more available to researchers, but documents confiscated or compiled by Soviet officials, kept in Russia, remained largely inaccessible. Although confronted with more evidence from the newly opened archives, several historians, including some employed by official institutions, continued to deny the Holocaust in Romania, and attributed the death toll exclusively to German units. In parallel, some continued an exclusive focus on Northern Transylvanian massacres. Local authors who have actively promoted Antonescu&#x27;s image as a hero and wrote apologetic accounts of his politics include historians Gheorghe Buzatu and Mihai Pelin, and researcher Alex Mihai Stoenescu. Larry L. Watts published a similarly controversial monograph in the United States. Although criticized for denying the uniqueness of the Holocaust and downplaying Antonescu&#x27;s complicity, Dinu C. Giurescu was recognized as the first post-communist Romanian historian to openly acknowledge his country&#x27;s participation, while his colleagues Șerban Papacostea and Andrei Pippidi were noted as early critics of attempts to exculpate Antonescu. The matter of crimes in Transnistria and elsewhere was first included within the Romanian curriculum with a 1999 state-approved alternative textbook edited by Sorin Mitu.

===Wiesel Commission and aftermath===

In 2003, after a period in which his own equivocal stance on the matter had drawn controversy, Constantinescu&#x27;s successor Ion Iliescu established the Wiesel Commission, an international group of expert historians whose mission was the study of the Holocaust in Romania, later succeeded by the Elie Wiesel National Institute. The &quot;Final Report&quot; compiled by the Commission brought the official recognition of Ion Antonescu&#x27;s participation in the Holocaust. After that moment, public displays of support for Antonescu became illegal. Antonescu&#x27;s SMERSH interrogations were recovered from the Russian archives and published in 2006. Despite the renewed condemnation and exposure, Antonescu remained a popular figure: as a result of the 2006 &quot;Mari Români&quot; series of polls conducted by the national station TVR 1, viewers nominated Antonescu as the 6th greatest Romanian ever. The vote&#x27;s knockout phase included televised profiles of the ten most popular figures, and saw historian Adrian Cioroianu using the portion dedicated to Antonescu to expose and condemn him, giving voters reasons not to see the dictator as a great Romanian. The approach resulted in notable controversy after &quot;Ziua&quot; newspaper criticized Cioroianu, who defended himself by stating he had an obligation to tell the truth.

The same year, on 5 December, the Bucharest Court of Appeal overturned Antonescu&#x27;s conviction for certain crimes against peace, on the grounds that the objective conditions of 1940 justified a preventive war against the Soviet Union, which would make Article 3 of the 1933 Convention for the Definition of Aggression inapplicable in his case (as well as in those of Alexianu, Constantin Pantazi, Constantin Vasiliu, Sima, and various Iron Guard politicians). This act raised official protests in Moldova, the independent state formed in Bessarabia upon the breakup of the Soviet Union, and in Russia, the Soviet successor state, as well as criticism by historians of the Holocaust. The Court of Appeals decision was overturned by the Romanian Supreme Court in May 2008. The same year, Maria Antonescu&#x27;s collateral inheritors advanced a claim on a Predeal villa belonging to the couple, but a Brașov tribunal rejected their request, citing laws which confiscated the property of war criminals.

===Cultural legacy, portrayals and landmarks===
Beyond their propaganda and censorship efforts, Antonescu and his regime had a sizable impact on Romanian culture, art and literature. Owing to austere guidelines on culture and to the circumstances of wartime, this period&#x27;s direct imprint is less than that of other periods in the country&#x27;s history. Few large heroes&#x27; memorials were built during the war years. Memorials produced at the time were mainly roadside triptychs (&quot;troițe&quot;). The Heroes&#x27; Cult organization received expropriation rights to Bucharest&#x27;s Jewish cemetery in 1942, and proposed to replace it with a major monument of this category, but that plan was eventually abandoned. Antonescu and his wife preferred donating to Orthodox churches, and were &quot;ktitors&quot; of churches in three separate Bucharest areas: Mărgeanului Church in Rahova, one in Dămăroaia, and the Saints Constantine and Helena Church in Muncii, where both the Marshal and his wife are depicted in a mural. After floods took a toll on his native Argeș County, the Marshal himself established &quot;Antonești&quot;, a model village in Corbeni (partly built by Ukrainian prisoners of war, and later passed into state property), while ordering hydroelectric exploitation of the Argeș River. He also had sporadic contacts with the artistic and literary environment, including an interview he awarded to his supporter, writer Ioan Alexandru Brătescu-Voinești. His 1946 trial was notably attended and documented by George Călinescu in a series of articles for &quot;Națiunea&quot; journal. Political humor of the 1940s preserved distinct images of the Romanian leader. Romanian jokes circulated under Antonescu&#x27;s rule ridiculed his adoption of the title &quot;Marshal of Romania&quot;, viewing it as a self-promotion and dubbing him the &quot;Auto-Marshal&quot;. During the war, Soviet agitprop portrayed Antonescu and the other secondary Axis leaders as villains and servile dog-like creatures, representations notably present in musical theater and puppetry shows, as well as in press cartoons.

Marin Preda&#x27;s 1975 novel &quot;Delirul&quot; displays the Ceaușescu regime&#x27;s ambiguous relationship with Antonescu. Critics John Neubauer and Marcel Cornis-Pope remark that the novel is &quot;admittedly not [Preda&#x27;s] best work&quot;, and discuss his &quot;complex representation&quot; of Antonescu as &quot;an essentially flawed but active leader who tried to negotiate some maneuvering room between the demands of Germany and the threats of the Soviet Union [and whose failure] led to the dismantling of Romania&#x27;s fragile democratic system.&quot; The book sought Antonescu&#x27;s rehabilitation for his attitudes on the Bessarabia-Northern Bukovina issue, but did not include any mention of his antisemitic policies, of which Preda himself may have been ignorant. An international scandal followed, once negative comments on the book were published by the Soviet magazine &quot;Literaturnaya Gazeta&quot;. Although an outspoken nationalist, Eugen Barbu produced a satirical image of Antonescu in his own 1975 novel, &quot;Incognito&quot;, which was described by Deletant as &quot;character assassination&quot;.

During the 1990s, monuments to Antonescu were raised and streets were named after him in Bucharest and several other cities. Among those directly involved in this process were Iosif Constantin Drăgan, the nationalist Mayor of Cluj-Napoca, Gheorghe Funar, and General Mircea Chelaru, whose resignation from the Army was subsequently requested and obtained. Also during that interval, in 1993, filmmaker and Social Democratic politician Sergiu Nicolaescu produced &quot;Oglinda&quot;, which depicts Antonescu (played by Ion Siminie) apologetically. The rehabilitation trend was also represented at an October 1994 commemorative exhibit at the National Military Museum. The same year, a denialist documentary film, &quot;Destinul mareșalului&quot; (&quot;The Marshal&#x27;s Destiny&quot;), was distributed by state-owned companies, a matter which raised concern. After the Wiesel Commission presented its findings and such public endorsement was outlawed, statues in Antonescu&#x27;s likeness were torn down or otherwise made unavailable for public viewing. An unusual case is that of his Saints Constantine and Helena Church, where, after lengthy debates, his bust was sealed inside a metal box. Outside of this context, the publicized display of Antonescu&#x27;s portraits and racist slogans by football hooligans during Liga I&#x27;s 2005–2006 season prompted UEFA intervention (&quot;see Racism Breaks the Game&quot;). As of 2019, Romania has nine streets named after Antonescu; locations include Constanța, Râmnicu Sărat, and Bechet.

==Awards and decorations==
Antonescu received a number of awards and decorations throughout his military career, most notable being the Order of Michael the Brave, which was personally awarded to him by King Ferdinand I during the Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919. He also received several decorations from foreign countries. He was the first Romanian to receive the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross, being awarded it by Hitler himself.

==Notes==
==References and further reading==

*&quot;Final Report&quot; of the International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania, Polirom, Iași, 2004. 
*Viorel Achim, &quot;The Roma in Romanian History&quot;, Central European University Press, Budapest, 2004. 
*Jean Ancel,
**&quot;Preludiu la asasinat. Pogromul de la Iași, 29 iunie 1941&quot;, Polirom, Iași, 2005. 
**&quot; &#x27;The New Jewish Invasion&#x27; – The Return of the Survivors in Transnistria&quot;, in David Bankier (ed.), &quot;The Jews are Coming Back: The Return of the Jews to Their Countries of Origin after WWII&quot;, Berghahn Books, Providence, 2005, pp. 231–256. 
*Lucian Boia, &quot;Istorie și mit în conștiința românească&quot;, Humanitas, Bucharest, 1997. 
*Christopher R. Browning, &quot;The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939 – March 1942&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 2004. 
*Maria Bucur,
**&quot;Edifices of the Past: War Memorials and Heroes in Twentieth-century Romania&quot;, in Maria Todorova (ed.), &quot;Balkan Identities: Nation and Memory&quot;, C. Hurst &amp; Co. Publishers, London, 2004, pp. 158–179. 
**&quot;Women&#x27;s Stories as Sites of Memory: Gender and Remembering Romania&#x27;s World Wars&quot;, in Nancy M. Wingfield, Maria Bucur (eds.), &quot;Gender &amp; War in Twentieth-century Eastern Europe&quot;, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 2006, pp. 171–192
*Christopher Chant, &quot;The Encyclopedia of Codenames of World War II&quot;, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul Books Ltd., London, 1987. 
*Adrian Cioroianu, &quot;&quot;, Editura Curtea Veche, Bucharest, 2005. 
*Marcel Cornis-Pope, John Neubauer (eds.), &quot;History of the Literary Cultures of East-Central Europe&quot;, John Benjamins, Amsterdam &amp; Philadelphia, 2004. ; see:
**Letiția Guran, Alexandru Ștefan, &quot;Romanian Literature under Stalinism&quot;, pp. 112–124
**John Neubauer &quot;et al.&quot;, &quot;1945&quot;, pp. 143–177
*Dennis Deletant, &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Forgotten Ally: Ion Antonescu and His Regime, Romania, 1940–1944&quot;, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2006. 
*Dennis Deletant, &quot;Romania&quot; in &quot;The Oxford Companion to World War II&quot; edited by I. C. B. Dear and M. R. D. Foot (2001) pp 954–959.
*Stanislaw Frankowski, &quot;Post-Communist Europe&quot;, in Peter Hodgkinson, Andrew Rutherford (eds.), &quot;Capital Punishment: Global Issues and Prospects&quot;, Waterside Press, Winchester, 1996, pp. 215–242. 
*Aleksander Gella, &quot;Development of Class Structure in Eastern Europe: Poland and Her Southern Neighbors&quot;, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1989. 
*Juliana Geran Pilon, &quot;The Bloody Flag. Post-Communist Nationalism in Eastern Europe. Spotlight on Romania&quot; (&quot;Studies in Social Philosophy &amp; Policy No. 16&quot;), Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick &amp; London, 1992. 
* Dinu C. Giurescu, &quot;Romania in the Second World War: 1939–1945&quot; (East European Monographs, 2000).
*Roger Griffin, &quot;The Nature of Fascism&quot;, Routledge, London, 1993. 
*Arnold D. Harvey, &quot;Collision of Empires: Britain in Three World Wars, 1793–1945&quot;, Continuum International Publishing Group, London, 1992. 
*Rebecca Ann Haynes, &quot; &#x27;A New Greater Romania&#x27;? Romanian Claims to the Serbian Banat in 1941&quot;, in &quot;Central Europe&quot;, Vol. 3, No. 2, November 2005, pp. 99–120; republished by University College London&#x27;s Library Services
*Radu Ioanid, &quot;Romania&quot;, in David S. Wyman, Charles H. Rosenzveig (eds.), &quot;The World Reacts to the Holocaust&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore &amp; London, 1996, pp. 225–252. 
*Michelle Kelso, &quot;Gypsy Deportations from Romania to Transnistria, 1942–44&quot;, in Karola Fings, Donald Kenrick (eds.), &quot;In the Shadow of the Swastika: Volume 2: The Gypsies during the Second World War&quot;, University of Hertfordshire Press, Hatfield, 1999, pp. 95–130. 
*Padraic Kenney, &quot;The Burdens of Freedom: Eastern Europe since 1989&quot;, Zed Books, London, 2006. 
*Peter C. Kent, &quot;The Lonely Cold War of Pope Pius XII: The Roman Catholic Church and the Division of Europe, 1943–1950&quot;, McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, Montreal &amp; Kingston, 2002. 
*Charles King, &quot;The Moldovans: Romania, Russia, and the Politics of Culture&quot;, Hoover Press, Stanford, 2000. 
*Walter Laqueur, &quot;Fascism: Past, Present, Future&quot;, Oxford University Press, Oxford etc., 1997. 
*Philip Morgan, &quot;Fascism in Europe, 1919–1945&quot;, Routledge, London, 2003. 
*David Nicholls, &quot;Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion&quot;, ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, 2000. 
*William O. Oldson, &quot;A Providential Anti-Semitism. Nationalism and Polity in Nineteenth-Century Romania&quot;, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1991. 
*Z. Ornea, &quot;Anii treizeci. Extrema dreaptă românească&quot;, Editura Fundației Culturale Române, Bucharest, 1995. 
*Monty Noam Penkower, &quot;The Jews Were Expendable: Free World Diplomacy and the Holocaust&quot;, Wayne State University Press, Detroit, 1988. 
*Antony Polonsky, Joanna B. Michlic, introduction to &quot;The Neighbors Respond: The Controversy over the Jedwabne Massacre in Poland&quot;, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2004, pp. 1–43. 
*Sabrina P. Ramet, &quot;The Way We Were—And Should Be Again? European Orthodox Churches and the &#x27;Idyllic Past&#x27; &quot;, in Timothy A. Byrnes, Peter J. Katzenstein (eds.), &quot;Religion in an Expanding Europe&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006. 
*Steven D. Roper, &quot;Romania: The Unfinished Revolution&quot;, Routledge, London, 2000. 
*Michael Shafir, &quot;The Mind of Romania&#x27;s Radical Right&quot;, in Sabrina P. Ramet (ed.), &quot;The Radical Right in Central and Eastern Europe since 1989&quot;, Penn State University Press, University Park, 1999, pp. 213–232. 
* Thomas, Martin. &quot;To arm an ally: French arms sales to Romania, 1926–1940.&quot; &quot;Journal of Strategic Studies&quot; 19.2 (1996): 231–259.
*Ottmar Trașcă, &quot;Ocuparea orașului Odessa de căre armata română și măsurile adoptate față de populația evreiască&quot; , in the Romanian Academy George Bariț Institute of History&#x27;s &quot;Historica Yearbook&quot; 2008, pp. 377–425
*Francisco Veiga, &quot;Istoria Gărzii de Fier, 1919–1941: Mistica ultranaționalismului&quot;, Humanitas, Bucharest, 1993. 
* Watts, Larry L. &quot;Romanian Cassandra: Ion Antonescu and the Struggle for Reform, 1916–1941&quot; (East European Monographs, 1993)
*Petru Weber, &quot;Die Wahrnehmung des »Domestic Holocaust« im Rumänien der Nachkriegsjahre&quot;, in Regina Fritz, Carola Sachse, Edgar Wolfrum (eds.), &quot;Nationen und ihre Selbstbilder. Postdiktatorische Gesellschaften in Europa&quot;, Wallstein Verlag, Göttingen, 2008, pp. 150–167. 
*Gerhard L. Weinberg, &quot;Germany, Hitler, and World War II: Essays in Modern German and World History&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996. 

===Historiography and memory===
* Chioveanu, Mihai. &quot;A Deadlock Of Memory The Myth And Cult Of Ion Antonescu In Post-Communist Romania.&quot; &quot;Studia Hebraica&quot; 3 (2003): 102–123.
*Treptow, Kurt W. &quot;Romania and World War II&quot; ( Center for Romanian Studies, 1996).
* White, George W. &quot;Nationalism and Territory. Constructing Group Identity in Southeastern Europe&quot;, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, Lanham, 2000. 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="0" end="13" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12732507" start="70" end="77" title="Mareșal (Romania)" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357609" start="111" end="132" title="Romania during World War II" label="wartime dictatorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="136" end="150" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q868715" start="161" end="171" title="Conducător" label="Conducător"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="248" end="272" title="the Holocaust in Romania" label="the Holocaust in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="327" end="340" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q811241" start="385" end="411" title="1907 Romanian peasants&amp;#x27; revolt" label="1907 peasants&amp;#x27; revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q553157" start="420" end="449" title="Romania in World War I" label="World War I Romanian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="494" end="503" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="508" end="515" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="535" end="551" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097072" start="572" end="598" title="Chief of the Romanian General Staff" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612392" start="619" end="635" title="Ministry of National Defense (Romania)" label="Defense Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q223414" start="673" end="686" title="Octavian Goga" label="Octavian Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12729731" start="713" end="734" title="First Cristea cabinet" label="First Cristea cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="868" end="876" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="1000" end="1024" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q442004" start="1053" end="1063" title="Horia Sima" label="Horia Sima"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="1071" end="1081" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1128" end="1140" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="1177" end="1196" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="Legionary Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="1341" end="1361" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="1374" end="1384" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="1389" end="1406" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12732507" start="1430" end="1448" title="Marshal of Romania" label="Marshal of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1476" end="1485" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="1612" end="1623" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778017" start="1625" end="1634" title="History of the Jews in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="1639" end="1652" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Romanian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="1665" end="1680" title="Roma minority in Romania" label="Romanian Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="1700" end="1727" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="complicity in the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q707508" start="1774" end="1789" title="1941 Odessa massacre" label="Odessa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="1795" end="1811" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="1853" end="1865" title="Transnistria (World War II)" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="2023" end="2034" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="2073" end="2087" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="2196" end="2205" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715519" start="2253" end="2292" title="Bombing of Romania in World War II" label="Aerial attacks on Romania by the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="2329" end="2342" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="2455" end="2464" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="2469" end="2487" title="1944 Romanian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569365" start="2690" end="2707" title="Wiesel Commission" label="Wiesel Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q187938" start="2780" end="2787" title="Pitești" label="Pitești"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2815" end="2824" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19671714" start="2844" end="2849" title="Lineal descendant" label="scion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="2856" end="2874" title="upper-middle class" label="upper-middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="2875" end="2892" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q168057" start="3137" end="3144" title="Craiova" label="Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q404358" start="3585" end="3602" title="Wilhelm Filderman" label="Wilhelm Filderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="3615" end="3640" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Romanian Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q188673" start="3935" end="3945" title="Târgoviște" label="Târgoviște"/>
<link wikidata="Q811241" start="4450" end="4476" title="1907 Romanian Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="1907 peasants&amp;#x27; revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731458" start="4506" end="4521" title="Covurlui County" label="Covurlui County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4844" end="4853" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="4868" end="4874" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="4934" end="4938" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="4939" end="4946" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="4987" end="4996" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044391" start="5151" end="5170" title="Carol I National Defence University" label="Advanced War School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="5239" end="5256" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="5265" end="5273" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="5297" end="5310" title="Staff (military)" label="staff officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="5344" end="5351" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="5424" end="5430" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q868851" start="5487" end="5504" title="Constantin Prezan" label="Constantin Prezan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="5551" end="5563" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="5569" end="5578" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="5735" end="5743" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097072" start="5911" end="5937" title="Chief of the Romanian General Staff" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889252" start="6097" end="6116" title="Battle of Mărășești" label="Battle of Mărășești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915424" start="6166" end="6183" title="Eremia Grigorescu" label="Eremia Grigorescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q76909" start="6264" end="6284" title="August von Mackensen" label="August von Mackensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58285" start="6520" end="6538" title="Alexandru Averescu" label="Alexandru Averescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="6689" end="6719" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="6755" end="6771" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Bolshevik Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="6793" end="6807" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="6869" end="6882" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q165755" start="6942" end="6978" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1918)" label="peace treaty with the Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="7283" end="7317" title="union of Transylvania with Romania" label="union of Transylvania with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377596" start="7425" end="7436" title="Ion G. Duca" label="Ion G. Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="7724" end="7729" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="8109" end="8131" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="8488" end="8503" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="8559" end="8580" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="8604" end="8609" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855882" start="8624" end="8636" title="Timok Valley" label="Timok Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407172" start="8889" end="8899" title="Jean Ancel" label="Jean Ancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q781476" start="9226" end="9243" title="Nicolae Titulescu" label="Nicolae Titulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q297770" start="9359" end="9373" title="Marthe Bibesco" label="Marthe Bibesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q294572" start="9416" end="9430" title="Gustave Le Bon" label="Gustave Le Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355183" start="9448" end="9464" title="crowd psychology" label="crowd psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q315747" start="9575" end="9592" title="Georges Boulanger" label="Georges Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44290" start="9673" end="9688" title="Mihai Antonescu" label="Mihai Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612392" start="9910" end="9926" title="Ministry of National Defense (Romania)" label="Defense Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827008" start="9934" end="9950" title="Vintilă Brătianu" label="Vintilă Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761010" start="9971" end="9986" title="Maria Antonescu" label="Maria Niculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636938" start="10065" end="10080" title="Romanian Police" label="Romanian Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="10343" end="10352" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="10476" end="10486" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="10542" end="10565" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10950" end="10964" title="Paul Angelescu" label="Paul Angelescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="11081" end="11093" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573063" start="11156" end="11165" title="camarilla" label="camarilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11183" end="11195" title="Škoda Affair" label="Škoda Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q77656" start="11396" end="11414" title="Siguranța Statului" label="Siguranța Statului"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583505" start="11472" end="11489" title="Ministry of Administration and Interior (Romania)" label="Interior Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="11505" end="11521" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="11786" end="11802" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="11811" end="11834" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="11930" end="11939" title="far right" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270876" start="12026" end="12050" title="National Christian Party" label="National Christian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223414" start="12060" end="12073" title="Octavian Goga" label="Octavian Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292131" start="12212" end="12243" title="Gheorghe Cantacuzino-Grănicerul" label="Gheorghe Cantacuzino-Grănicerul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826796" start="12527" end="12552" title="1937 Romanian general election" label="December general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="12606" end="12620" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="12685" end="12706" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="12731" end="12747" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528718" start="12872" end="12896" title="Ministry of Communications and Information Society (Romania)" label="Communications portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="12929" end="12945" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q733951" start="13190" end="13204" title="Little Entente" label="Little Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13251" end="13263" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="13272" end="13291" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="13488" end="13500" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13623" end="13629" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="13630" end="13640" title="revanchism" label="revanchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="13653" end="13667" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826038" start="13694" end="13721" title="Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance" label="Franco-Soviet rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711609" start="14036" end="14044" title="Lăncieri" label="Lăncieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="14091" end="14102" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564250" start="14290" end="14318" title="1938 Constitution of Romania" label="1938 Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q303668" start="14320" end="14346" title="National Renaissance Front" label="National Renaissance Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14443" end="14455" title="Veturia Goga" label="Veturia Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268352" start="15129" end="15142" title="Miron Cristea" label="Miron Cristea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="15483" end="15490" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="15656" end="15664" title="Internment" label="interned"/>
<link wikidata="Q511951" start="15668" end="15675" title="Predeal" label="Predeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223129" start="15713" end="15723" title="Third Army (Romania)" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="15756" end="15766" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="15854" end="15862" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="15957" end="15963" title="bigamy" label="bigamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428127" start="16179" end="16188" title="Jandarmeria Română" label="Gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16332" end="16344" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="16384" end="16395" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="16404" end="16423" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16450" end="16462" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357609" start="16510" end="16537" title="Romania during World War II" label="Romania during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="16601" end="16618" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="16635" end="16652" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="16716" end="16730" title="Fall of France" label="Fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="16867" end="16883" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="16917" end="16931" title="Czechoslovak Republic (1918–1938)" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320263" start="17204" end="17222" title="Bistrița Monastery" label="Bistrița Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065534" start="17397" end="17415" title="Oil industry in Romania" label="local oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17535" end="17552" title="Wilhelm Fabricius" label="Wilhelm Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292449" start="18027" end="18044" title="Treaty of Craiova" label="Treaty of Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="18056" end="18077" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="18081" end="18088" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="18100" end="18119" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18391" end="18397" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="18413" end="18424" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q442004" start="18513" end="18523" title="Horia Sima" label="Horia Sima"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="18552" end="18568" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18764" end="18777" title="Alice Sturdza" label="Alice Sturdza"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="18860" end="18868" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278752" start="20255" end="20268" title="Dinu Brătianu" label="Dinu Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="20314" end="20324" title="abdication" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="20547" end="20560" title="reserve power" label="reserve power"/>
<link wikidata="Q106982795" start="20700" end="20718" title="European interwar dictatorships" label="dictatorial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982641" start="20824" end="20842" title="Bucharest Garrison" label="Bucharest Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299760" start="20849" end="20866" title="Gheorghe Argeșanu" label="Gheorghe Argeșanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313852" start="20906" end="20921" title="Dumitru Coroamă" label="Dumitru Coroamă"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150510" start="21010" end="21025" title="Gheorghe Mihail" label="Gheorghe Mihail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21030" end="21045" title="Paul Teodorescu" label="Paul Teodorescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q868715" start="21463" end="21473" title="Conducător" label="Conducător"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="21680" end="21693" title="Elena Lupescu" label="Elena Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320217" start="22785" end="22804" title="Central government" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="22830" end="22839" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="22850" end="22871" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="23397" end="23421" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="23521" end="23553" title="One-party state" label="the only legally permitted party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="24426" end="24432" title="Balkans" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="24443" end="24464" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="24609" end="24619" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="24668" end="24674" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="24762" end="24777" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="24836" end="24855" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="25129" end="25141" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576784" start="25276" end="25291" title="Romanianization" label="Romanianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="25446" end="25459" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg law"/>
<link wikidata="Q921959" start="25517" end="25528" title="Ion Gigurtu" label="Ion Gigurtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q404358" start="25641" end="25658" title="Wilhelm Filderman" label="Wilhelm Filderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053283" start="25667" end="25696" title="Federation of Jewish Communities of Romania" label="Jewish Communities Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="25902" end="25916" title="Paramilitary" label="paramilitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538395" start="26175" end="26187" title="Buna Vestire" label="Buna Vestire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779298" start="26465" end="26476" title="Freemasonry in Romania" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="26488" end="26500" title="Anti-Masonry" label="Anti-Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658524" start="26647" end="26689" title="1940 Bucharest earthquake" label="large-scale earthquake affecting Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070808" start="26929" end="26944" title="Jilava Massacre" label="Jilava Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q313581" start="26968" end="26981" title="Nicolae Iorga" label="Nicolae Iorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933788" start="26986" end="27001" title="Virgil Madgearu" label="Virgil Madgearu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636938" start="27249" end="27255" title="Romanian Police" label="Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27256" end="27271" title="Ștefan Zăvoianu" label="Ștefan Zăvoianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628977" start="27638" end="27654" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Romania)" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845159" start="27655" end="27672" title="Mihail R. Sturdza" label="Mihail R. Sturdza"/>
<link wikidata="Q215904" start="27716" end="27746" title="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger" label="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27882" end="27901" title="Constantin Greceanu" label="Constantin Greceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="27953" end="27963" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="27967" end="27983" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q76876" start="27985" end="28004" title="Baldur von Schirach" label="Baldur von Schirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="28009" end="28024" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q568605" start="28077" end="28093" title="List of German foreign ministers" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="28094" end="28116" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="28125" end="28134" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="28349" end="28369" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="29614" end="29622" title="Bucharest pogrom" label="a pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="29666" end="29685" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="Legionary Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583505" start="29944" end="29961" title="Ministry of Administration and Interior (Romania)" label="Interior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163758" start="29963" end="29986" title="Constantin Petrovicescu" label="Constantin Petrovicescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q368100" start="30348" end="30368" title="Constantin Sănătescu" label="Constantin Sănătescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q215904" start="30448" end="30478" title="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger" label="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="30827" end="30843" title="political asylum" label="political asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067154" start="30881" end="30899" title="Capital punishment in Romania" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="31001" end="31011" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="31016" end="31022" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="31023" end="31042" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31241" end="31259" title="Ion Zelea Codreanu" label="Ion Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="31362" end="31377" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="31766" end="31782" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63725" start="32718" end="32730" title="Paul Schmidt (interpreter)" label="Paul Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="32953" end="32970" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="32982" end="32998" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="33171" end="33186" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="33187" end="33204" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616723" start="33214" end="33243" title="List of diplomats from the United Kingdom to Romania" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137993" start="33244" end="33258" title="Reginald Hoare" label="Reginald Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="33277" end="33285" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="34423" end="34430" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="34432" end="34439" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="34441" end="34448" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="34450" end="34456" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="34458" end="34465" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="35894" end="35905" title="untermensch" label="untermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="36203" end="36210" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="36216" end="36233" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="State of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="36239" end="36255" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="36265" end="36293" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63948" start="37621" end="37646" title="Eugen Ritter von Schobert" label="Eugen Ritter von Schobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="37679" end="37692" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="37826" end="37836" title="Prut River" label="Prut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="37995" end="37999" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102584" start="38077" end="38088" title="Iași pogrom" label="Iași pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="38178" end="38201" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445368" start="38252" end="38263" title="Francophile" label="Francophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="39948" end="39985" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="40050" end="40059" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158799" start="40068" end="40077" title="Berdychiv" label="Berdychiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q12732507" start="40109" end="40127" title="Marshal of Romania" label="Marshal of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="40224" end="40239" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="40684" end="40692" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="40821" end="40838" title="war of aggression" label="war of aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="40899" end="40911" title="Transnistria (World War II)" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="40942" end="40955" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="40978" end="40992" title="Moldavian ASSR" label="Moldavian ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q225302" start="41652" end="41669" title="Gheorghe Alexianu" label="Gheorghe Alexianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="41720" end="41740" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="Holocaust in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="41768" end="41779" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778017" start="41784" end="41798" title="History of the Jews in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="41832" end="41848" title="Roma minority in Romania" label="Romani Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="41996" end="42003" title="Tighina" label="Tighina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="42052" end="42059" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q404358" start="43218" end="43235" title="Wilhelm Filderman" label="Wilhelm Filderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="45188" end="45194" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="45217" end="45226" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q682409" start="45303" end="45318" title="Siege of Odessa (1941)" label="two-month siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613020" start="45386" end="45394" title="4th Army (Romania)" label="4th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q638278" start="45580" end="45595" title="Arcul de Triumf" label="Arcul de Triumf"/>
<link wikidata="Q707508" start="45718" end="45738" title="1941 Odessa massacre" label="large-scale massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580369" start="45882" end="45897" title="Ioan Glogojeanu" label="Ioan Glogojeanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48813091" start="46675" end="46694" title="Croatian–Romanian–Slovak friendship proclamation" label="intra-Axis alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="46703" end="46710" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="46722" end="46729" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="46734" end="46742" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="46840" end="46856" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="47105" end="47119" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="47203" end="47211" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q653470" start="47223" end="47245" title="Battle of the Caucasus" label="Battle of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="47718" end="47723" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="47731" end="47753" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="47826" end="47839" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="48160" end="48180" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362529" start="48240" end="48261" title="Romanian armies in the Battle of Stalingrad" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="49003" end="49019" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="49567" end="49583" title="mental breakdown" label="mental breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="49587" end="49604" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="49625" end="49633" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="49790" end="49797" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q842811" start="49804" end="49813" title="dietitian" label="dietitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995740" start="49829" end="49850" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s vegetarianism" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s service"/>
<link wikidata="Q75633" start="49938" end="49951" title="Arthur Hauffe" label="Arthur Hauffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="50398" end="50409" title="Monopoly" label="monopolized"/>
<link wikidata="Q280832" start="50574" end="50596" title="Economy of Romania" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="50631" end="50644" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q679790" start="50656" end="50679" title="Economy of Nazi Germany" label="Economy of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="50817" end="50831" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q57237" start="50836" end="50848" title="Walther Funk" label="Walther Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q112462" start="50864" end="50881" title="Hermann Neubacher" label="Hermann Neubacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="51152" end="51157" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="51162" end="51165" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q188665" start="51202" end="51216" title="Prahova County" label="Prahova County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715519" start="51228" end="51262" title="Bombing of Romania in World War II" label="Bombing of Romania in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q512914" start="51264" end="51284" title="Operation Tidal Wave" label="Operation Tidal Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283238" start="51499" end="51521" title="Mareșal (tank destroyer)" label="Mareșal tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="51708" end="51714" title="Hetzer" label="Hetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="52447" end="52461" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q813919" start="52480" end="52503" title="unconditional surrender" label="unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="52571" end="52577" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="52582" end="52587" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q975683" start="52627" end="52642" title="Nikolai Novikov (diplomat)" label="Nikolai Novikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q179558" start="52647" end="52666" title="Alexandra Kollontai" label="Alexandra Kollontai"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="52790" end="52809" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Operation Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488631" start="53121" end="53135" title="Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company" label="national radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="53222" end="53230" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="53241" end="53253" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="53318" end="53331" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q280748" start="53332" end="53353" title="Henry Maitland Wilson" label="Henry Maitland Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050792" start="53367" end="53391" title="Supreme Allied Commander" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="53399" end="53420" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Mediterranean theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="53450" end="53459" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="53695" end="53716" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="53875" end="53883" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q118896045" start="54063" end="54076" title="Operation Margarethe II" label="Margarethe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059658" start="54115" end="54139" title="Operation Margarethe" label="Nazi takeover in Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300991" start="54332" end="54346" title="separate peace" label="separate peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="54501" end="54525" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="54652" end="54665" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q838996" start="54709" end="54728" title="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu" label="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q466114" start="54739" end="54752" title="Emil Bodnăraș" label="Emil Bodnăraș"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390996" start="54808" end="54840" title="Romanian Social Democratic Party (1927-1948)" label="Romanian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042421" start="54855" end="54883" title="Bombing of Bucharest in World War II" label="Allied bombings of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="54928" end="54936" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q311765" start="54970" end="54988" title="Second Jassy–Kishinev Offensive" label="Battle for Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q60400" start="55035" end="55052" title="Johannes Frießner" label="Johannes Frießner"/>
<link wikidata="Q64794" start="55057" end="55068" title="Otto Wöhler" label="Otto Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q585349" start="55076" end="55100" title="Army Group South Ukraine" label="Army Group South Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="55119" end="55127" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347332" start="55136" end="55148" title="Steppe Front" label="Steppe Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q204338" start="55156" end="55173" title="Rodion Malinovsky" label="Rodion Malinovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q372473" start="55221" end="55237" title="Petre Dumitrescu" label="Petre Dumitrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192265" start="55327" end="55334" title="Focșani" label="Focșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13571305" start="55336" end="55345" title="Nămoloasa" label="Nămoloasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188478" start="55350" end="55356" title="Brăila" label="Brăila"/>
<link wikidata="Q319397" start="55439" end="55446" title="Kętrzyn" label="Kętrzyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="55659" end="55682" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="Soviet Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="55683" end="55701" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="55896" end="55919" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="Royal Coup of 23 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361220" start="55983" end="55995" title="Royal Palace of Bucharest" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q368100" start="56204" end="56224" title="Constantin Sănătescu" label="Constantin Sănătescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="56246" end="56265" title="National unity government" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="56622" end="56640" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="56718" end="56727" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="56848" end="56864" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="56943" end="56962" title="government in exile" label="government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="56988" end="57012" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="war&amp;#x27;s end in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57119" end="57134" title="Vatra Luminoasă" label="Vatra Luminoasă"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296124" start="57175" end="57199" title="Soviet occupation of Romania" label="Soviet occupation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="57224" end="57230" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q225302" start="57299" end="57316" title="Gheorghe Alexianu" label="Gheorghe Alexianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612392" start="57318" end="57334" title="Ministry of National Defense (Romania)" label="Defense Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150531" start="57335" end="57353" title="Constantin Pantazi" label="Constantin Pantazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428127" start="57355" end="57366" title="Gendarmerie (Romania)" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57377" end="57395" title="Constantin Vasiliu" label="Constantin Vasiliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636938" start="57410" end="57416" title="Romanian Police" label="Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57423" end="57441" title="Mircea Elefterescu" label="Mircea Elefterescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="57539" end="57545" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="57557" end="57577" title="counter-intelligence" label="counter-intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="57627" end="57646" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="Germany surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q646334" start="57683" end="57698" title="Lubyanka Building" label="Lubyanka prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q360758" start="57791" end="57806" title="Viktor Abakumov" label="Viktor Abakumov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="58063" end="58091" title="The Holocaust in Romania" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="58095" end="58108" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12737764" start="58323" end="58336" title="Jilava Prison" label="Jilava Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905114" start="58385" end="58398" title="Avram Bunaciu" label="Avram Bunaciu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="58532" end="58542" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362569" start="58671" end="58694" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals" label="People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="58710" end="58719" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496097" start="58722" end="58746" title="crimes against the peace" label="crimes against the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="58751" end="58758" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="58837" end="58853" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="58857" end="58880" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528718" start="59013" end="59029" title="Ministry of Justice and Citizenship Freedoms (Romania)" label="Justice Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="59254" end="59267" title="Ex post facto law" label="ex post facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150910" start="59363" end="59377" title="Iosif Iacobici" label="Iosif Iacobici"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150566" start="59379" end="59393" title="Nicolae Macici" label="Nicolae Macici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59395" end="59418" title="Constantin Trestioreanu" label="Constantin Trestioreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q707508" start="59499" end="59514" title="1941 Odessa massacre" label="Odessa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59546" end="59580" title="Constantin Paraschivescu-Bălăceanu" label="Constantin Paraschivescu-Bălăceanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59585" end="59597" title="Titus Stoica" label="Titus Stoica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528049" start="59603" end="59618" title="public defender" label="public defender"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59726" end="59740" title="Vasile Stoican" label="Vasile Stoican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59784" end="59805" title="Alexandru Voitinovici" label="Alexandru Voitinovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="60514" end="60525" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="60675" end="60684" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibals"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="60855" end="60861" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="60908" end="60925" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="1923 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067154" start="60998" end="61016" title="Capital punishment in Romania" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q716342" start="61129" end="61146" title="Allied Commission" label="Allied Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="61358" end="61366" title="Pardon" label="clemency"/>
<link wikidata="Q317313" start="61616" end="61627" title="Petru Groza" label="Petru Groza"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="61814" end="61826" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654950" start="62295" end="62301" title="Jilava" label="Jilava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="62491" end="62498" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="62741" end="62759" title="ethnic nationalism" label="ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="62799" end="62814" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="62850" end="62866" title="ethnic Romanians" label="ethnic Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="62931" end="62952" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="63224" end="63243" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="63255" end="63283" title="Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic" label="Transylvanian Greek-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="63372" end="63388" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="63502" end="63511" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984402" start="63513" end="63526" title="Banat (1941–44)" label="western Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855882" start="63536" end="63548" title="Timok Valley" label="Timok Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015980" start="63569" end="63587" title="Romanians of Serbia" label="Romanian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="63709" end="63722" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="63933" end="63942" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="63965" end="63974" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="64130" end="64138" title="Thessaloniki" label="Salonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="64225" end="64245" title="Axis occupation of Greece during World War II" label="Axis-occupied Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q583539" start="64266" end="64285" title="Alcibiades Diamandi" label="Alcibiades Diamandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218140" start="64290" end="64304" title="Nicolaos Matussis" label="Nicola Matussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284745" start="64312" end="64324" title="Roman Legion (1941–1943)" label="Roman Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="64626" end="64639" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="64991" end="65005" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="65171" end="65177" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="65179" end="65189" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="65378" end="65387" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="65405" end="65422" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="65522" end="65535" title="Nazism" label="Nazi doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063279" start="65552" end="65575" title="religion in Nazi Germany" label="anti-religious elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="65792" end="65804" title="Transnistria (World War II)" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293734" start="65954" end="65965" title="Raoul Bossy" label="Raoul Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="66094" end="66101" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="66103" end="66110" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312454" start="66115" end="66123" title="Pokuttya" label="Pokuttya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079801" start="66286" end="66298" title="Charles King (professor of international affairs)" label="Charles King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="66469" end="66480" title="buffer zone" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q313099" start="66696" end="66712" title="Drang nach Osten" label="Drang nach Osten"/>
<link wikidata="Q313323" start="66733" end="66745" title="Volksdeutsche" label="Volksdeutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="66878" end="66889" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="66944" end="66956" title="Expansionism" label="expansionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="67010" end="67030" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="67056" end="67070" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="67424" end="67436" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="67586" end="67598" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="67636" end="67648" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="68054" end="68060" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="68080" end="68092" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472296" start="68130" end="68141" title="Ethnocracy" label="ethnocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281117" start="68203" end="68223" title="integral nationalism" label="integral nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="68270" end="68279" title="far right" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="68323" end="68340" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="68375" end="68388" title="Judeo-Masonry" label="Judeo-Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68689" end="68702" title="Aureliu Weiss" label="Aureliu Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68875" end="68889" title="Mihail Ionescu" label="Mihail Ionescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q442004" start="69079" end="69089" title="Horia Sima" label="Horia Sima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69127" end="69138" title="Ioan Scurtu" label="Ioan Scurtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="69165" end="69184" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="Legionary Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="69840" end="69860" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="69921" end="69936" title="Jewish Question" label="Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390212" start="69953" end="69959" title="Racial antisemitism" label="racial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015203" start="69965" end="69987" title="religious antisemitism" label="religious antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102584" start="70014" end="70025" title="Iași pogrom" label="Iași pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="70208" end="70225" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="70235" end="70252" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="70307" end="70316" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="70410" end="70438" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina" label="1940 retreat from Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="70620" end="70628" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="70907" end="70923" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="71076" end="71082" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="71244" end="71264" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q584475" start="71525" end="71537" title="antiziganism" label="antiziganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="71586" end="71599" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048416" start="71614" end="71621" title="Nomadic peoples of Europe" label="nomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="72178" end="72186" title="Blackout (wartime)" label="blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q775944" start="72346" end="72359" title="Bărăgan Plain" label="Bărăgan Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="72522" end="72532" title="demography" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="72570" end="72591" title="Scientific racism" label="scientifically racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="72670" end="72683" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="72763" end="72779" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="72833" end="72840" title="Eugenics" label="eugenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584475" start="72899" end="72944" title="Sterilization of Romani women" label="compulsory sterilization of the Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740294" start="73043" end="73056" title="Sabin Manuilă" label="Sabin Manuilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="73299" end="73306" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="73327" end="73337" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="73338" end="73351" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184435" start="73464" end="73478" title="Zeev Sternhell" label="Zeev Sternhell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471296" start="73536" end="73558" title="Pierre-Étienne Flandin" label="Pierre-Étienne Flandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="73560" end="73576" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="73578" end="73591" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339879" start="73593" end="73614" title="François de La Rocque" label="François de La Rocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="73616" end="73631" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="73636" end="73648" title="King of Italy" label="Italian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="73649" end="73668" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="73681" end="73693" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q71981" start="73911" end="73924" title="Hagen Schulze" label="Hagen Schulze"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="73985" end="73993" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="74007" end="74018" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="74034" end="74061" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="74066" end="74088" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="74097" end="74112" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="74396" end="74422" title="The Establishment" label="conservative establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="74606" end="74614" title="far left" label="far left"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="74623" end="74632" title="far right" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="74669" end="74677" title="Autocracy" label="autocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q705817" start="74764" end="74777" title="Roger Griffin" label="Roger Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="75175" end="75187" title="Militarism" label="militaristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="75230" end="75242" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="75403" end="75412" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879145" start="75497" end="75509" title="Para-fascism" label="para-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="75809" end="75817" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229212" start="75849" end="75862" title="Robert Paxton" label="Robert Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189074" start="76520" end="76535" title="Dennis Deletant" label="Dennis Deletant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="76959" end="76965" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="76969" end="76984" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425193" start="77033" end="77045" title="Michael Mann (sociologist)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307750" start="77324" end="77343" title="Juliana Geran Pilon" label="Juliana Geran Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="77788" end="77797" title="Patriotism" label="patriotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="78121" end="78144" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q622857" start="78419" end="78436" title="national interest" label="national interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="78484" end="78503" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="political pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="78652" end="78663" title="penal labor" label="penal labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="79061" end="79073" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="79115" end="79148" title="Nazi-occupied Europe" label="&amp;quot;satellite&amp;quot; governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="79743" end="79761" title="Helen of Greece and Denmark" label="Queen Mother Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="79855" end="79866" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q303668" start="79886" end="79912" title="National Renaissance Front" label="National Renaissance Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270876" start="80127" end="80151" title="National Christian Party" label="National Christian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223414" start="80208" end="80221" title="Octavian Goga" label="Octavian Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="80270" end="80280" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453413" start="80615" end="80623" title="Counties of Romania" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="80645" end="80656" title="Corporatism" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q225302" start="80816" end="80833" title="Gheorghe Alexianu" label="Gheorghe Alexianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171279" start="80970" end="80988" title="Corneliu Calotescu" label="Corneliu Calotescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80993" end="81012" title="Gheorghe Voiculescu" label="Gheorghe Voiculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="81062" end="81078" title="chain of command" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="81182" end="81202" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="81305" end="81334" title="Germans of Romania" label="German communities in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="81354" end="81373" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Transylvanian Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q445618" start="81378" end="81391" title="Banat Swabians" label="Banat Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313323" start="81451" end="81464" title="Volksdeutsche" label="Volksdeutsche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81520" end="81535" title="Andreas Schmidt (Transylvanian Saxon Nazi)" label="Andreas Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q701763" start="81566" end="81592" title="Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle" label="Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="81619" end="81627" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="81634" end="81649" title="self-governance" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q704858" start="81714" end="81731" title="Black Sea Germans" label="Black Sea Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="81804" end="81817" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="81956" end="81965" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="82147" end="82158" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067154" start="82182" end="82200" title="Capital punishment in Romania" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761010" start="82412" end="82417" title="Maria Antonescu" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="82449" end="82472" title="charitable organization" label="charitable organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82558" end="82575" title="Ajutorul Legionar" label="Ajutorul Legionar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="82610" end="82624" title="gender studies" label="gender studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069892" start="82634" end="82645" title="Maria Bucur" label="Maria Bucur"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="82811" end="82817" title="Sexism" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="82877" end="82887" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="82948" end="82964" title="personality cult" label="personality cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q951617" start="83027" end="83036" title="Universul" label="Universul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807661" start="83053" end="83059" title="Timpul" label="Timpul"/>
<link wikidata="Q857714" start="83078" end="83092" title="Camil Petrescu" label="Camil Petrescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83206" end="83220" title="Porunca Vremii" label="Porunca Vremii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272124" start="83228" end="83244" title="Nichifor Crainic" label="Nichifor Crainic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459705" start="83258" end="83271" title="Sfarmă-Piatră" label="Sfarmă-Piatră"/>
<link wikidata="Q445003" start="83481" end="83496" title="Stelian Popescu" label="Stelian Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194707" start="83508" end="83516" title="Curentul" label="Curentul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83530" end="83544" title="Pamfil Șeicaru" label="Pamfil Șeicaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445331" start="83675" end="83692" title="Mihail Manoilescu" label="Mihail Manoilescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="84033" end="84044" title="ethnic slur" label="ethnic slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271973" start="84079" end="84083" title="kike" label="kike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827102" start="84241" end="84249" title="Religious war" label="holy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="84255" end="84262" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q923353" start="84872" end="84881" title="La Stampa" label="La Stampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="84911" end="84926" title="Jewish Question" label="Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="85137" end="85158" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124647" start="85288" end="85302" title="Civil conscription" label="community work"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="85509" end="85517" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="85536" end="85552" title="Internment" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="85693" end="85712" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="Legionary Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576784" start="85751" end="85766" title="Romanianization" label="Romanianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="85915" end="85935" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="Holocaust in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="85991" end="86008" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102584" start="86020" end="86031" title="Iași pogrom" label="Iași pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="86252" end="86256" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="86404" end="86412" title="Blackout (wartime)" label="blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="86887" end="86904" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="Romanian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523184" start="86905" end="86917" title="cattle wagon" label="cattle wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668492" start="87310" end="87326" title="XXXth Army Corps (Germany)" label="XXXth Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87515" end="87543" title="Serviciul Special de Informații" label="Special Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406907" start="87561" end="87576" title="Eugen Cristescu" label="Eugen Cristescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="87897" end="87910" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="87927" end="87941" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="87969" end="87980" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778017" start="87985" end="87999" title="History of the Jews in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q59098" start="88061" end="88084" title="Christopher R. Browning" label="Christopher R. Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="88164" end="88190" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Reichskommissariat Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="88198" end="88207" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="88212" end="88218" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499395" start="88230" end="88249" title="Holocaust in Latvia" label="Holocaust in Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752358" start="88251" end="88273" title="Holocaust in Lithuania" label="Holocaust in Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499410" start="88275" end="88295" title="Holocaust in Ukraine" label="Holocaust in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="88361" end="88369" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="89386" end="89394" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="89767" end="89774" title="Tighina" label="Tighina"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="90299" end="90305" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="90349" end="90361" title="Transnistria (World War II)" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="90470" end="90481" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90568" end="90578" title="Ioan Topor" label="Ioan Topor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="90741" end="90753" title="Expansionism" label="expansionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="90888" end="90900" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979824" start="92079" end="92091" title="Nationalization in Romania" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="92284" end="92302" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q45471294" start="92305" end="92312" title="Pechora concentration camp" label="Pechora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92314" end="92325" title="Akhmechetka" label="Akhmechetka"/>
<link wikidata="Q39700" start="92327" end="92337" title="Bogdanovka concentration camp" label="Bogdanovka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92339" end="92348" title="Domanovka" label="Domanovka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92353" end="92361" title="Obodovka" label="Obodovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428127" start="92382" end="92391" title="Jandarmeria Română" label="Gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="92402" end="92411" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q626632" start="92412" end="92423" title="Auxiliary police" label="auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="92610" end="92616" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="93666" end="93674" title="Chernivtsi" label="Cernăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="93779" end="93787" title="Porajmos" label="Porajmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="93899" end="93914" title="Roma minority in Romania" label="Romanian Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="94007" end="94019" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="94053" end="94075" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664203" start="94084" end="94102" title="Inochentism" label="Inochentist church"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="94106" end="94119" title="Millenarianism" label="millennialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94780" end="94798" title="Constantin Vasiliu" label="Constantin Vasiliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="95104" end="95110" title="Famine" label="Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11640551" start="95135" end="95154" title="criminal negligence" label="criminal negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="95273" end="95292" title="underground economy" label="underground economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707508" start="95464" end="95479" title="1941 Odessa massacre" label="Odessa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690716" start="95491" end="95512" title="collective punishment" label="collective punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="95905" end="95914" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="95998" end="96007" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229607" start="96102" end="96111" title="commissar" label="commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="96126" end="96134" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839864" start="96167" end="96175" title="4th Infantry Division (Romania)" label="4th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130491" start="97038" end="97046" title="Slobidka" label="Slobidka"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="97282" end="97301" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)" label="Siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q375856" start="97404" end="97413" title="Odessa Catacombs" label="catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="97435" end="97444" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q819103" start="97982" end="97991" title="Berezivka" label="Berezivka"/>
<link wikidata="Q704858" start="98025" end="98042" title="Black Sea Germans" label="Black Sea Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416195" start="98056" end="98068" title="Selbstschutz" label="Selbstschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q372760" start="98339" end="98355" title="Adrian Cioroianu" label="Adrian Cioroianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="98719" end="98732" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q480743" start="98770" end="98791" title="Eichmann in Jerusalem" label="Eichmann in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569365" start="98847" end="98864" title="Wiesel Commission" label="Wiesel Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407172" start="99177" end="99187" title="Jean Ancel" label="Jean Ancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="99584" end="99599" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Antony Polonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205764" start="99604" end="99621" title="Joanna B. Michlic" label="Joanna B. Michlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="100045" end="100056" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100561" end="100578" title="William O. Oldson" label="William O. Oldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294354" start="100890" end="100901" title="Assimilated Jew" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="101030" end="101046" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="101199" end="101208" title="Genocide" label="genocidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="101280" end="101299" title="Gerhard L. Weinberg" label="Gerhard L. Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="101929" end="101937" title="Extortion" label="extorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="102044" end="102057" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="102188" end="102196" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="102201" end="102210" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102402" end="102423" title="Central Jewish Office (Romania)" label="Central Jewish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281722" start="102452" end="102462" title="Radu Lecca" label="Radu Lecca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102508" end="102522" title="Nandor Gingold" label="Nandor Gingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715813" start="102527" end="102543" title="Henric Streitman" label="Henric Streitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761010" start="102601" end="102616" title="Maria Antonescu" label="Maria Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="102693" end="102702" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="102725" end="102743" title="Aliyah Bet" label="British opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="102747" end="102754" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647805" start="102831" end="102852" title="Struma disaster" label="MV &amp;quot;Struma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q404358" start="102997" end="103014" title="Wilhelm Filderman" label="Wilhelm Filderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q329429" start="103097" end="103109" title="yellow badge" label="yellow badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="103664" end="103680" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="104078" end="104092" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q775944" start="104712" end="104725" title="Bărăgan Plain" label="Bărăgan Plain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="104759" end="104771" title="Viorel Achim" label="Viorel Achim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="104999" end="105017" title="Constantin Vasiliu" label="Constantin Vasiliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="105212" end="105238" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Reichskommissariat Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704858" start="105307" end="105320" title="Black Sea Germans" label="local Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="105498" end="105517" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="105827" end="105841" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="105955" end="105959" title="RSHA" label="RSHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="107133" end="107151" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="107156" end="107171" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="107232" end="107246" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q75321" start="107260" end="107274" title="Gustav Richter" label="Gustav Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q833941" start="107494" end="107502" title="Judenrat" label="Judenrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="107705" end="107722" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="Romanian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q872639" start="107969" end="107986" title="Schloss Klessheim" label="Schloss Klessheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="108150" end="108164" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215904" start="109059" end="109080" title="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger" label="Manfred von Killinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q926080" start="110140" end="110160" title="Holocaust in Hungary" label="Holocaust in Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362532" start="110555" end="110568" title="Romanian Border Police" label="Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="111116" end="111133" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="111138" end="111150" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="111506" end="111521" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278752" start="111637" end="111650" title="Dinu Brătianu" label="Dinu Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="111688" end="111704" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="111973" end="112002" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="112062" end="112078" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="112116" end="112125" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="112165" end="112176" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="112318" end="112326" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="112688" end="112703" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="112705" end="112726" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113016" end="113044" title="Serviciul Special de Informații" label="Special Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096772" start="113552" end="113572" title="Operation Autonomous" label="Operation Autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="113615" end="113633" title="Helen of Greece and Denmark" label="Queen Mother Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="113908" end="113916" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150910" start="114050" end="114064" title="Iosif Iacobici" label="Iosif Iacobici"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097072" start="114070" end="114105" title="Chief of the Romanian General Staff" label="Chief of the Romanian General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385874" start="114233" end="114245" title="Ilie Șteflea" label="Ilie Șteflea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="114371" end="114391" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="114602" end="114623" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="114880" end="114888" title="Chernivtsi" label="Cernăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492483" start="114890" end="114905" title="Traian Popovici" label="Traian Popovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033409" start="114960" end="114974" title="Gherman Pântea" label="Gherman Pântea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="114995" end="115001" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115049" end="115086" title="Metropolis of Transylvania" label="Orthodox Metropolitan of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977863" start="115087" end="115100" title="Nicolae Bălan" label="Nicolae Bălan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="115102" end="115118" title="Apostolic Nuncio" label="Apostolic Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755008" start="115119" end="115133" title="Andrea Cassulo" label="Andrea Cassulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="115138" end="115143" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115155" end="115167" title="René de Weck" label="René de Weck"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="115234" end="115248" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056295" start="115505" end="115538" title="United States Ambassador to Romania" label="American Minister Plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115539" end="115560" title="Franklin Mott Gunther" label="Franklin Mott Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="115652" end="115659" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="115765" end="115773" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273708" start="115909" end="115912" title="Yid" label="Yid"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="115916" end="115922" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="115954" end="115967" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083617" start="116525" end="116540" title="Viorica Agarici" label="Viorica Agarici"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="116615" end="116626" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628948" start="116627" end="116643" title="Alexandru Șafran" label="Alexandru Șafran"/>
<link wikidata="Q113246830" start="116657" end="116672" title="Mișu Benvenisti" label="Mișu Benvenisti"/>
<link wikidata="Q404358" start="116686" end="116703" title="Wilhelm Filderman" label="Wilhelm Filderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040826" start="116788" end="116799" title="A. L. Zissu" label="A. L. Zissu"/>
<link wikidata="Q997469" start="116844" end="116861" title="Mohyliv-Podilskyi" label="Mohyliv-Podilskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="116937" end="116956" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="117048" end="117055" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="117224" end="117232" title="far left" label="far left"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="117237" end="117246" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="117339" end="117363" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="117392" end="117403" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="117412" end="117421" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="117488" end="117521" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="German-Soviet non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="117542" end="117562" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="117603" end="117628" title="Resistance during World War II" label="armed resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="117798" end="117815" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993501" start="118089" end="118098" title="Vapniarka" label="Vapniarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q216363" start="118103" end="118110" title="Rîbnița" label="Rîbnița"/>
<link wikidata="Q33208" start="118178" end="118188" title="Caransebeș" label="Caransebeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q202357" start="118193" end="118202" title="Târgu Jiu" label="Târgu Jiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571535" start="118283" end="118298" title="political crime" label="political crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067154" start="118532" end="118550" title="Capital punishment in Romania" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="118576" end="118584" title="Partisan (military)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="118743" end="118762" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="Legionary Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="118771" end="118781" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="119087" end="119105" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q294072" start="119398" end="119420" title="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej" label="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej"/>
<link wikidata="Q838826" start="119733" end="119745" title="Ștefan Foriș" label="Ștefan Foriș"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="119980" end="119996" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329432" start="120081" end="120108" title="Tudor Vladimirescu Division" label="Tudor Vladimirescu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972914" start="120213" end="120236" title="Culture of Romania" label="Romanian cultural scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="120375" end="120393" title="Modernism" label="cultural modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="120586" end="120604" title="classic liberalism" label="classic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="120609" end="120624" title="cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493179" start="120652" end="120667" title="Eugen Lovinescu" label="Eugen Lovinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677589" start="120697" end="120718" title="Sibiu Literary Circle" label="Sibiu Literary Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="120739" end="120753" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="120763" end="120774" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154091" start="120784" end="120795" title="Ion Caraion" label="Ion Caraion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12728912" start="120797" end="120811" title="Geo Dumitrescu" label="Geo Dumitrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12726713" start="120813" end="120829" title="Dimitrie Stelaru" label="Dimitrie Stelaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163639" start="120831" end="120848" title="Constant Tonegaru" label="Constant Tonegaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q435755" start="120879" end="120892" title="Tudor Arghezi" label="Tudor Arghezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q935162" start="120894" end="120908" title="Victor Eftimiu" label="Victor Eftimiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468239" start="120913" end="120927" title="Zaharia Stancu" label="Zaharia Stancu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988829" start="120988" end="121004" title="George Călinescu" label="George Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077256" start="121108" end="121127" title="Literature of Romania" label="Romanian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q77177" start="121182" end="121195" title="George Enescu" label="George Enescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q534656" start="121691" end="121705" title="Alice Voinescu" label="Alice Voinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54427" start="121823" end="121840" title="cultural hegemony" label="cultural hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="121877" end="121888" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="121892" end="121906" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="Restorationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291465" start="122018" end="122035" title="Pentecostal Union of Romania" label="Pentecostal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857695" start="122044" end="122057" title="Baptist Union of Romania" label="Baptist Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="122165" end="122187" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664203" start="122209" end="122220" title="Inochentism" label="Inochentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362582" start="122280" end="122312" title="Romanian Union Conference of Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventist Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479663" start="122321" end="122357" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses Association of Romania" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="122726" end="122750" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="122756" end="122777" title="Greek Catholic Church" label="Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="122783" end="122804" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="122810" end="122834" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q59493657" start="122840" end="122865" title="Orthodox Church of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="122871" end="122887" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Calvinist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="122893" end="122908" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q582355" start="122914" end="122930" title="Unitarian Church of Transylvania" label="Unitarian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="122936" end="122941" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="123149" end="123166" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="1923 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="123408" end="123425" title="Communist Romania" label="Communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="123532" end="123548" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaborationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362569" start="123570" end="123602" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals" label="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827067" start="123653" end="123677" title="1946 Romanian general election" label="general election of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="123734" end="123758" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="123914" end="123925" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="123971" end="123986" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="124123" end="124137" title="Germans of Romania" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517946" start="124227" end="124260" title="Expulsion of Germans from Romania after World War II" label="expulsion of Germans from Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296124" start="124286" end="124310" title="Soviet occupation of Romania" label="Soviet occupation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828009" start="124508" end="124545" title="Soviet deportations from Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="deported deeper into the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q144306" start="124594" end="124618" title="Roman Catholicism in Romania" label="Romanian Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q317313" start="124674" end="124685" title="Petru Groza" label="Petru Groza"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="124698" end="124714" title="Apostolic Nuncio" label="Apostolic Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755008" start="124715" end="124729" title="Andrea Cassulo" label="Andrea Cassulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="124770" end="124787" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="124906" end="124920" title="Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic" label="Greek-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="124961" end="124985" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125036" end="125047" title="Radu Ioanid" label="Radu Ioanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="125363" end="125370" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761010" start="125675" end="125690" title="Maria Antonescu" label="Maria Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125878" end="125899" title="Central Jewish Office (Romania)" label="Central Jewish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="126297" end="126304" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q838996" start="126372" end="126391" title="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu" label="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087106" start="126488" end="126509" title="Soviet historiography" label="Soviet historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="126580" end="126596" title="Marxism-Leninism" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="126605" end="126619" title="class conflict" label="class conflict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126886" end="126899" title="Matatias Carp" label="Matatias Carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="127241" end="127265" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q294072" start="127333" end="127355" title="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej" label="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="127613" end="127622" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058914" start="127635" end="127645" title="Censorship in Communist Romania" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="127655" end="127677" title="historical revisionism" label="historical revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="127891" end="127908" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692115" start="127938" end="127956" title="National communism" label="national communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150357" start="128104" end="128118" title="Political rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="128347" end="128361" title="liberalization" label="liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q868715" start="128512" end="128522" title="Conducător" label="Conducător"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310680" start="128612" end="128623" title="July Theses" label="July Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="128682" end="128698" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706165" start="128754" end="128763" title="Săptămîna" label="Săptămîna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734493" start="128780" end="128790" title="Luceafărul (magazine)" label="Luceafărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q500999" start="128810" end="128821" title="Eugen Barbu" label="Eugen Barbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133702" start="128826" end="128846" title="Corneliu Vadim Tudor" label="Corneliu Vadim Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662067" start="128856" end="128871" title="Adrian Păunescu" label="Adrian Păunescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456597" start="128886" end="128893" title="Flacăra" label="Flacăra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128925" end="128939" title="Ion Lăncrănjan" label="Ion Lăncrănjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770368" start="129009" end="129032" title="Iosif Constantin Drăgan" label="Iosif Constantin Drăgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q773068" start="129160" end="129173" title="protochronism" label="protochronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="129196" end="129205" title="dissident" label="dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="129222" end="129239" title="Romanian diaspora" label="Romanian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="129336" end="129347" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926080" start="129938" end="129972" title="Holocaust in Hungary" label="Holocaust in Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="129984" end="129998" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="130045" end="130062" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905119" start="130065" end="130084" title="Vladimir Tismăneanu" label="Vladimir Tismăneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102584" start="130791" end="130802" title="Iași pogrom" label="Iași pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130933" end="130946" title="Nicolae Minei" label="Nicolae Minei"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="131288" end="131303" title="Romanian Revolution of 1989" label="1989 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="131512" end="131521" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="131542" end="131548" title="Prince of Wallachia" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q43715" start="131549" end="131569" title="Vlad III the Impaler" label="Vlad III the Impaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="131658" end="131666" title="Pantheon (gods)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989699" start="131819" end="131832" title="communization" label="communization"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="131918" end="131935" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312279" start="132015" end="132024" title="Tony Judt" label="Tony Judt"/>
<link wikidata="Q512990" start="132060" end="132082" title="anti-Russian sentiment" label="anti-Russian sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="132139" end="132151" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905119" start="132224" end="132243" title="Vladimir Tismăneanu" label="Vladimir Tismăneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q966381" start="132513" end="132529" title="History of Romania since 1989" label="post-1989 period"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="132621" end="132630" title="Far right" label="Far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="132659" end="132671" title="canonization" label="canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="132679" end="132703" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="132749" end="132772" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="132783" end="132793" title="Neofascism" label="neofascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789476" start="132876" end="132888" title="deviationism" label="deviationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q828039" start="133013" end="133034" title="Greater Romania Party" label="Greater Romania Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="133075" end="133085" title="Xenophobia" label="xenophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133702" start="133233" end="133253" title="Corneliu Vadim Tudor" label="Corneliu Vadim Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133261" end="133273" title="România Mare (magazine)" label="România Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="133437" end="133446" title="President of Romania" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720207" start="133458" end="133471" title="1996 Romanian presidential election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133903" end="133916" title="Radu Theodoru" label="Radu Theodoru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="134102" end="134110" title="Ion Coja" label="Ion Coja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363756" start="134115" end="134124" title="Paul Goma" label="Paul Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063028" start="134277" end="134289" title="Ion Cristoiu" label="Ion Cristoiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894227" start="134475" end="134479" title="Ziua" label="Ziua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363426" start="134493" end="134507" title="România Liberă" label="România Liberă"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="134524" end="134532" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455738" start="134643" end="134667" title="National Salvation Front (Romania)" label="National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="134714" end="134737" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="134990" end="135040" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="135049" end="135071" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417157" start="135078" end="135091" title="Radu Câmpeanu" label="Radu Câmpeanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="135356" end="135366" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="135569" end="135580" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q299152" start="135726" end="135745" title="Emil Constantinescu" label="Emil Constantinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420523" start="135771" end="135792" title="Romanian Democratic Convention" label="Democratic Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="135951" end="135967" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="135968" end="135982" title="Sorin Moisescu" label="Sorin Moisescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="136019" end="136025" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069892" start="136283" end="136294" title="Maria Bucur" label="Maria Bucur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970454" start="136647" end="136675" title="National Archives of Romania" label="National Archives of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="136785" end="136791" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="136987" end="137007" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="Holocaust in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189180" start="137291" end="137306" title="Gheorghe Buzatu" label="Gheorghe Buzatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735500" start="137311" end="137322" title="Mihai Pelin" label="Mihai Pelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717503" start="137339" end="137359" title="Alex Mihai Stoenescu" label="Alex Mihai Stoenescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="137412" end="137421" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395581" start="137553" end="137569" title="Dinu C. Giurescu" label="Dinu C. Giurescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q969021" start="137598" end="137612" title="Post-Communism" label="post-communist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="137709" end="137726" title="Șerban Papacostea" label="Șerban Papacostea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545443" start="137731" end="137745" title="Andrei Pippidi" label="Andrei Pippidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372165" start="137891" end="137910" title="Education in Romania" label="Romanian curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="137969" end="137979" title="Sorin Mitu" label="Sorin Mitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="138148" end="138159" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569365" start="138176" end="138193" title="Wiesel Commission" label="Wiesel Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360730" start="138319" end="138349" title="Elie Wiesel National Institute for Studying the Holocaust in Romania" label="Elie Wiesel National Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="138589" end="138595" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q251552" start="138789" end="138800" title="100 greatest Romanians" label="Mari Români"/>
<link wikidata="Q682554" start="138857" end="138862" title="TVR 1" label="TVR 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q372760" start="139037" end="139053" title="Adrian Cioroianu" label="Adrian Cioroianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894227" start="139246" end="139250" title="Ziua" label="Ziua"/>
<link wikidata="Q18215791" start="139396" end="139421" title="Bucharest Court of Appeal" label="Bucharest Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496097" start="139473" end="139493" title="crimes against peace" label="crimes against peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="139560" end="139574" title="preventive war" label="preventive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150531" start="139743" end="139761" title="Constantin Pantazi" label="Constantin Pantazi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="139763" end="139781" title="Constantin Vasiliu" label="Constantin Vasiliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="139863" end="139870" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="139924" end="139951" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)" label="breakup of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="139979" end="139994" title="Succession of states" label="successor state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="140101" end="140123" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="Romanian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q511951" start="140219" end="140226" title="Predeal" label="Predeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="140264" end="140270" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972914" start="140511" end="140527" title="Culture of Romania" label="Romanian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229522" start="140529" end="140532" title="Art of Romania" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077256" start="140537" end="140547" title="Literature of Romania" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q79218" start="140843" end="140851" title="triptych" label="triptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q28582098" start="140943" end="140975" title="Jewish cemetery on Sevastopol Street" label="Bucharest&amp;#x27;s Jewish cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q138365" start="141171" end="141177" title="ktitor" label="ktitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274949" start="141254" end="141260" title="Rahova" label="Rahova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320487" start="141269" end="141278" title="Dămăroaia" label="Dămăroaia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="141328" end="141334" title="Muncii" label="Muncii"/>
<link wikidata="Q179567" start="141436" end="141448" title="Argeș County" label="Argeș County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888356" start="141507" end="141520" title="model village" label="model village"/>
<link wikidata="Q10260525" start="141524" end="141531" title="Corbeni" label="Corbeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="141549" end="141558" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="141559" end="141575" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="141631" end="141644" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q214811" start="141665" end="141676" title="Argeș River" label="Argeș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12730588" start="141811" end="141843" title="Ioan Alexandru Brătescu-Voinești" label="Ioan Alexandru Brătescu-Voinești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988829" start="141899" end="141915" title="George Călinescu" label="George Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="141950" end="141958" title="Națiunea" label="Națiunea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362614" start="142053" end="142067" title="Romanian humor" label="Romanian jokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12732507" start="142149" end="142167" title="Marshal of Romania" label="Marshal of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q374278" start="142275" end="142283" title="agitprop" label="agitprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="142420" end="142435" title="musical theater" label="musical theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="142440" end="142448" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360145" start="142487" end="142498" title="Marin Preda" label="Marin Preda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142523" end="142530" title="Delirul" label="Delirul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142639" end="142657" title="Marcel Cornis-Pope" label="Marcel Cornis-Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865276" start="143386" end="143406" title="Literaturnaya Gazeta" label="Literaturnaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q500999" start="143449" end="143460" title="Eugen Barbu" label="Eugen Barbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770368" start="143796" end="143819" title="Iosif Constantin Drăgan" label="Iosif Constantin Drăgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q716395" start="143837" end="143842" title="List of mayors of Cluj-Napoca" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="143846" end="143857" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q281218" start="143859" end="143873" title="Gheorghe Funar" label="Gheorghe Funar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735679" start="143887" end="143901" title="Mircea Chelaru" label="Mircea Chelaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="144026" end="144043" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634875" start="144055" end="144072" title="Sergiu Nicolaescu" label="Sergiu Nicolaescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080126" start="144088" end="144095" title="Oglinda" label="Oglinda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144138" end="144149" title="Ion Siminie" label="Ion Siminie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488935" start="144261" end="144285" title="National Military Museum (Romania)" label="National Military Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="144314" end="144330" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="144914" end="144932" title="Football hooliganism" label="football hooligans"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="144940" end="144946" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231594" start="144954" end="144970" title="Divizia A 2005–06" label="2005–2006 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="144980" end="144984" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279725" start="145009" end="145031" title="Racism Breaks the Game" label="Racism Breaks the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="145118" end="145127" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q617624" start="145129" end="145142" title="Râmnicu Sărat" label="Râmnicu Sărat"/>
<link wikidata="Q253872" start="145148" end="145154" title="Bechet" label="Bechet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536698" start="145293" end="145319" title="Order of Michael the Brave" label="Order of Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="145365" end="145376" title="Ferdinand of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="145388" end="145410" title="Hungarian–Romanian War" label="Hungarian–Romanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="145522" end="145559" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569365" start="145677" end="145729" title="Wiesel Commission" label="International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209795" start="145731" end="145738" title="Polirom" label="Polirom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="145754" end="145766" title="Viorel Achim" label="Viorel Achim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061054" start="145810" end="145843" title="Central European University Press" label="Central European University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407172" start="145863" end="145873" title="Jean Ancel" label="Jean Ancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209795" start="145947" end="145954" title="Polirom" label="Polirom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891646" start="146193" end="146207" title="Berghahn Books" label="Berghahn Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="146242" end="146253" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680566" start="146308" end="146317" title="Humanitas publishing house" label="Humanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q59098" start="146338" end="146361" title="Christopher R. Browning" label="Christopher R. Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="146476" end="146504" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069892" start="146523" end="146534" title="Maria Bucur" label="Maria Bucur"/>
<link wikidata="Q834824" start="146630" end="146644" title="Maria Todorova" label="Maria Todorova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006526" start="146702" end="146731" title="C. Hurst &amp;amp; Co. Publishers" label="C. Hurst &amp;amp; Co. Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069892" start="146889" end="146900" title="Maria Bucur" label="Maria Bucur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="146975" end="146999" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="147111" end="147120" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q372760" start="147166" end="147182" title="Adrian Cioroianu" label="Adrian Cioroianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338752" start="147198" end="147218" title="Editura Curtea Veche" label="Editura Curtea Veche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147239" end="147257" title="Marcel Cornis-Pope" label="Marcel Cornis-Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221533" start="147350" end="147364" title="John Benjamins" label="John Benjamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189074" start="147572" end="147587" title="Dennis Deletant" label="Dennis Deletant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="147681" end="147699" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189074" start="147717" end="147732" title="Dennis Deletant" label="Dennis Deletant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967941" start="147816" end="147829" title="I. C. B. Dear" label="I. C. B. Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308472" start="147834" end="147847" title="M. R. D. Foot" label="M. R. D. Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050071" start="148198" end="148232" title="State University of New York Press" label="State University of New York Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307750" start="148250" end="148269" title="Juliana Geran Pilon" label="Juliana Geran Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833710" start="148431" end="148453" title="Transaction Publishers" label="Transaction Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395581" start="148492" end="148508" title="Dinu C. Giurescu" label="Dinu C. Giurescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q705817" start="148600" end="148613" title="Roger Griffin" label="Roger Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115285" start="148677" end="148693" title="A. D. Harvey" label="Arnold D. Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036513" start="148769" end="148809" title="Continuum International Publishing Group" label="Continuum International Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="149029" end="149054" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="149080" end="149091" title="Radu Ioanid" label="Radu Ioanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241330" start="149117" end="149131" title="David S. Wyman" label="David S. Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="149210" end="149240" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734190" start="149376" end="149388" title="Karola Fings" label="Karola Fings"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716374" start="149507" end="149540" title="University of Hertfordshire Press" label="University of Hertfordshire Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123910" start="149572" end="149586" title="Padraic Kenney" label="Padraic Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801272" start="149808" end="149844" title="McGill-Queen&amp;#x27;s University Press" label="McGill-Queen&amp;#x27;s University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079801" start="149879" end="149891" title="Charles King (professor of international affairs)" label="Charles King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="149966" end="149978" title="Hoover Press" label="Hoover Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213692" start="149998" end="150012" title="Walter Laqueur" label="Walter Laqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="150058" end="150081" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="150256" end="150264" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="150289" end="150306" title="William O. Oldson" label="William O. Oldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="150404" end="150434" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071814" start="150458" end="150466" title="Z. Ornea" label="Z. Ornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740485" start="150523" end="150557" title="Editura Fundației Culturale Române" label="Editura Fundației Culturale Române"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976644" start="150677" end="150705" title="Wayne State University Press" label="Wayne State University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="150724" end="150739" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Antony Polonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205764" start="150741" end="150758" title="Joanna B. Michlic" label="Joanna B. Michlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="150865" end="150891" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q84931" start="151073" end="151093" title="Peter J. Katzenstein" label="Peter J. Katzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="151147" end="151173" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q90195531" start="151286" end="151300" title="Michael Shafir" label="Michael Shafir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163300" start="151455" end="151482" title="Penn State University Press" label="Penn State University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q901677" start="151804" end="151820" title="Romanian Academy" label="Romanian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436832" start="151912" end="151927" title="Francisco Veiga" label="Francisco Veiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q680566" start="152006" end="152015" title="Humanitas publishing house" label="Humanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="152463" end="152482" title="Gerhard L. Weinberg" label="Gerhard L. Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="153018" end="153042" title="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield" label="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37262" wikidata="Q180398" url="?curid=37262" title="Jørn Utzon">
<text>Jørn Oberg Utzon (; 9 April 191829 November 2008) was a Danish architect. In 1957, he won an international design competition for his design of the Sydney Opera House in Australia. Utzon&#x27;s revised design, which he completed in 1961, was the basis for the landmark, although it was not completed until 1973.

When the Sydney Opera House was declared a World Heritage Site on 28 June 2007, Utzon became only the second person to have received such recognition for one of his works during his lifetime, after Oscar Niemeyer. Other noteworthy works include Bagsværd Church near Copenhagen and the National Assembly Building in Kuwait. He also made important contributions to housing design, especially with his Kingo Houses near Helsingør.

Utzon attended the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts (1937–42) and was influenced early on by Gunnar Asplund and Alvar Aalto.

==Early life and career==
Utzon was born in Copenhagen, the son of a naval architect, and grew up in Aalborg, Denmark, where he became interested in ships and a possible naval career. As a result of his family&#x27;s interest in art, from 1937 he attended the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts where he studied under Kay Fisker and Steen Eiler Rasmussen. Following his graduation in 1942, he joined Gunnar Asplund in Stockholm where he worked together with Arne Jacobsen and Poul Henningsen. He took a particular interest in the works of American architect Frank Lloyd Wright.
After the end of World War II and the German Occupation of Denmark, he returned to Copenhagen.

In 1946 he visited Alvar Aalto in Helsinki. In 1947–48 he travelled in Europe, in 1948 he went to Morocco where he was taken by the tall clay buildings. In 1949, he travelled to the United States and Mexico, where the pyramids provided further inspiration. Fascinated by the way the Mayans built towards the sky to get closer to God, he commented that his time in Mexico was &quot;One of the greatest architectural experiences in my life.&quot;

In America, he visited Frank Lloyd Wright&#x27;s home, Taliesin West, in the Arizona desert and met Charles and Ray Eames. In 1950 he established his own studio in Copenhagen and, in 1952, built an open-plan house for himself, the first of its kind in Denmark. In 1957, he travelled first to China (where he was particularly interested in the Chinese desire for harmony), Japan (where he learnt much about the interaction between interiors and exteriors) and India, before arriving in Australia in 1957 where he stayed until 1966. All this contributed to Utzon&#x27;s understanding of factors which contribute to successful architectural design.

==Architectural approach==

Utzon had a Nordic sense of concern for nature which, in his design, emphasized the synthesis of form, material and function for social values. His fascination with the architectural legacies of the ancient Mayas, the Islamic world, China, and Japan also informed his practice. This developed into what Utzon later referred to as Additive Architecture, comparing his approach to the growth patterns of nature.
A design can grow like a tree, he explained: &quot;If it grows naturally, the architecture will look after itself.&quot;

==Sydney Opera House==
In 1957, Utzon unexpectedly won the competition to design the Sydney Opera House. His submission was one of 233 designs from 32 countries, many of them from the most famous architects of the time. Although he had won six other architectural competitions previously, the Opera House was his first non-domestic project. One of the judges, Eero Saarinen, described it as &quot;genius&quot; and declared he could not endorse any other choice.

The designs Utzon submitted were little more than preliminary drawings. Emory Kemp&#x27;s consulting career began at Ove Arup, where, he conducted analytical calculations for the roof, noting this was no simple task, as Utzon&#x27;s sketches were designed to embellish the beauty of the international landmark, not necessarily for simple mathematics. Concerned that delays would lead to lack of public support, the Cahill government of New South Wales nonetheless gave the go-ahead for work to begin in 1958. The British engineering consultancy Ove Arup and Partners put out tenders without adequate working drawings and construction work began on 2 March 1959. As a result, the podium columns were not strong enough to support the roof and had to be rebuilt. The situation was complicated by Cahill&#x27;s death in October 1959.

The extraordinary structure of the shells themselves represented a puzzle for the engineers. This was not resolved until 1961, when Utzon himself finally came up with the solution. He replaced the original elliptical shells with a design based on complex sections of a sphere. Utzon says his design was inspired by the simple act of peeling an orange: the 14 shells of the building, if combined, would form a perfect sphere.

Although Utzon had spectacular, innovative plans for the interior of these halls, he was unable to realise this part of his design. In mid-1965, the New South Wales Liberal government of Robert Askin was elected. Askin had been a &#x27;vocal critic of the project prior to gaining office.&#x27; His new Minister for Public Works, Davis Hughes, was even less sympathetic. Elizabeth Farrelly, Australian architecture critic has written that
Utzon soon found himself in conflict with the new Minister. Attempting to rein in the escalating cost of the project, Hughes began questioning Utzon&#x27;s capability, his designs, schedules and cost estimates, refusing to pay running costs. In 1966, after a final request from Utzon that plywood manufacturer Ralph Symonds should be one of the suppliers for the roof structure was refused, he resigned from the job, closed his Sydney office and vowed never to return to Australia. When Utzon left, the shells were almost complete, and costs amounted to only $22.9 million. Following major changes to the original plans for the interiors, costs finally rose to $103 million.

The Opera House was finally completed in 1973 and Elizabeth II attended its opening. Utzon was invited to the opening ceremony by the Premier and while pleased by the invitation, he declined commenting &quot;I cannot be a guest of the Government of New South Wales and at the same time criticize one of its ministers&quot;. He was, however, to be recognised later when he was asked to design updates to the interior of the opera house. The Utzon Room, overlooking Sydney Harbour, was officially dedicated in October 2004. In a statement at the time Utzon wrote: &quot;The fact that I&#x27;m mentioned in such a marvellous way, it gives me the greatest pleasure and satisfaction. I don&#x27;t think you can give me more joy as the architect. It supersedes any medal of any kind that I could get and have got.&quot; Furthermore, Frank Gehry, one of the Pritzker Prize judges, commented: &quot;Utzon made a building well ahead of its time, far ahead of available technology, and he persevered through extraordinarily malicious publicity and negative criticism to build a building that changed the image of an entire country.&quot;

==Works in Denmark==
While some of Utzon&#x27;s most notable works are spread around the globe, he was most prolific in his native Denmark, whose landscape inspired him more than any other. Bagsværd Church, just north of Copenhagen, is considered to be a masterpiece of contemporary church architecture, thanks to its bright, naturally illuminated interior and its concrete ceiling straddled with softly-rounded vaulting inspired by clouds. Designed in 1968, the church was completed in 1976. In the church there is a grand piano by Steingraeber designed by Utzon. The Kingo Houses in Helsingør (1958) consist of 63 L-shaped homes based on the design of traditional Danish farmhouses with central courtyards. Built in rows following the undulations of the site, each of the houses not only has a view of its own but enjoys the best possible conditions for sunlight and shelter from the wind. Utzon described the arrangement as &quot;flowers on the branch of a cherry tree, each turning towards the sun.&quot; In general, Utzon&#x27;s houses display sophisticated and varied relationships to the path of the sun.

A few years later, he went on to design the Fredensborg Houses (1963) for Danish pensioners who had worked for long periods abroad. Utzon helped select the site, and planned a complex consisting of 47 courtyard homes and 30 terraced houses as well as a central building with a restaurant, meeting rooms and nine guest rooms. His design was inspired by housing in Beijing&#x27;s Forbidden City. The homes are located around a square in groups of three, designed to maximize privacy, natural lighting, and views of the surrounding countryside. When he was awarded the Pritzker Prize in 2003, Utzon was specifically lauded for his working designing housing projects that, the jury said, were &quot;designed with people in mind.&quot;

His Paustian Furniture Store (1988) on Copenhagen&#x27;s waterfront stands on a multitude of columns inspired by a beech forest. A temple-like finish is achieved by 11 columns with fan-shaped capitals overlooking the harbour. Similar columns are also present inside the spacious interior, stretching up to the skylight dominating the roof.

In 2005, in close collaboration with his son Kim Utzon, he helped to plan the Utzon Center in Aalborg (completed 2008) designed to inspire young students of architecture. Located on the waterfront, its high sculptured roofs rise over an auditorium, a boathall and a library while the lower roofs of its exhibition rooms and workshops surround a central courtyard, sheltered from the wind.

==Other works==
Kuwait&#x27;s National Assembly Building, completed in 1982, stands on the sea front with (in Utzon&#x27;s words) &quot;haze and white light and an untidy town behind.&quot; Benefiting from an understanding of Islamic architecture, Utzon designed a building consisting of a covered square, a parliamentary chamber, a conference hall, and a mosque. Its waving roof conveys the impression of moving fabric. Its columns are reminiscent of the Karnak temples.
He was also referenced in a Durham University tour video by Youtuber Jack Edwards as being the designer for the University&#x27;s Student&#x27;s Union building.
The Melli Bank building in Tehran, slightly set back from the lines of the busy street where it stands, has a reinforced concrete frame faced with natural stone. The ground-level banking hall, naturally illuminated by skylight vaults, is connected to the upper floor by a central spiral staircase, providing maximum flexibility of space.

==Later life==

On his return from Australia in 1966, Utzon made a stop on Mallorca. Fascinated by the island, he decided to build a summer house there on the top of a cliff near the fishing village of Portopetro. Named Can Lis after his wife, the house was based on the home he had intended to build in Australia but was inspired by local materials and climate, setting standards for contemporary Mediterranean architecture. The house consists of five loosely linked blocks with a colonnaded outdoor area, a living room and two bedrooms, each with its own courtyard. The use of locally sourced pink stone in rough pillars is designed to give the impression of a much older building, in keeping with the landscape.

Although Utzon and his wife spent an increasing amount of time on Mallorca, they became disturbed by all the tourists who came to see their home. They decided to move to a more remote area in the mountains where they built a second house known as Can Feliz, consisting of three blocks for dining, living and sleeping, separated by courtyards. The upper part of the grand theatrical living space is furnished for working with heavy timber bookcases and a large table. A huge window provides magnificent views of the pine forests and the sea beyond.

The Utzon Center in Aalborg, designed together with his son Kim, was the architect&#x27;s last assignment. In 2005 he commented, &quot;From the bottom of my heart, I hope that the Utzon Center will be a place where positive thoughts converge and where students from the School of Architecture gather when they want to get together to discuss their ideas. It is intended to be a power centre for the architects and people of the future.&quot;

Utzon died in Copenhagen on 29 November 2008, aged 90, of a heart attack in his sleep after a series of operations. He had never returned to Australia to see the completed opera house. On 2 December 2008 the Parliament of New South Wales passed a special motion of condolence to honour Utzon&#x27;s life and work. He was survived by his wife, Lis, his sons Jan and Kim, his daughter Lin, and several grandchildren. His sons are trained architects and his daughter is a designer, muralist and artist who was at one time married to the Australian architect Alex Popov.

==Buildings and projects==
;Major built projects:

* Water tower in Svaneke, Bornholm, Denmark, 1952
* Architect&#x27;s own house, Hellebæk, Denmark, 1952
* House in Holte, Denmark, 1953
* Kingo Houses, Helsingør, Denmark 1956–59
* Elineberg Housing, Helsingborg, Sweden, 1966
* Planetstaden housing project in Lund, Sweden, 1957–58
* Sydney Opera House, Sydney, Australia, 1973
* Fredensborg Houses, courtyard housing in Fredensborg, Denmark, 1965
* Melli Bank, University of Tehran Branch, Tehran, Iran, 1962
* Hammershøj Care Centre, Helsingør, Denmark, 1966
* Espansiva building system, pre-fabricated single-family houses, Denmark, 1960s
* Bagsværd Church, Bagsværd, Denmark, 1976
* Can Lis, Architect&#x27;s own house, Majorca, Spain, 1971
* National Assembly of Kuwait, Kuwait City, Kuwait, 1982
* Paustian Furniture Store, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1987
* Can Feliz, Majorca, Spain, 1994
* Skagen Odde Nature Centre, Skagen, Denmark, 1989 (completed by his son Jan Utzon in 1999–2000)
* Esbjerg Performing Arts Centre, Esbjerg, Denmark, 1997
* Utzon Center, Aalborg, 2008 (with Kim Utzon)

==Written works==

;Books:
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;The Courtyard Houses: Logbook Vol. I&quot;, Copenhagen, Edition Bløndal, 2004, 180 pages. 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Bagsværd Church: Logbook Vol. II&quot;, Copenhagen, Edition Bløndal, 2005, 168 pages. 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Two Houses on Majorca: Logbook Vol. III&quot;, Copenhagen, Edition Bløndal, 2004, 76 pages. 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Kuwait National Assembly: Logbook Vol. IV&quot;, Copenhagen, Edition Bløndal, 2008, 312 pages. 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Additive Architecture: Logbook Vol. V&quot;, Copenhagen, Edition Bløndal, 2009, 312 pages. 
*Jørn Utzon and Philip Drew, &quot;Sydney Opera House&quot;, London, Phaidon Press, 1995, 60 pages. 
*Martin Keiding and Kim Dirckinck-Holmfeld (ed.), &quot;Utzon and the new tradition&quot;, Utzon Library, Copenhagen, Danish Architectural Press, 2005, 262 pages. 
*Martin Keiding and Kim Dirckinck-Holmfeld (ed.), &quot;Utzon&#x27;s own houses&quot;, Utzon Library, Copenhagen, Danish Architectural Press, 2004. 

;Journal articles:
*Jørn Utzon and Tobias Faber, &quot;Tendenser i nutidens arkitektur&quot;, Arkitektur, Copenhagen, 1947 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Additiv arkitektur&quot;, Arkitektur, Copenhagen 1970, No. 1 
*Jørn Utzon, &quot;Platforms and Plateaus: Ideas of a Danish Architect&quot;, Zodiac 10, Milan 1962
*Jørn Utzon and others, A survey of Utzon&#x27;s work, some descriptions by Utzon, and the Sydney Opera House as finally contemplated, Zodiac 5, Milan 1959
*Jørn Utzon and others, Utzon&#x27;s descriptions of the Sydney Opera House, the Silkeborg Museum and the Zurich Theatre. Also Giedion&#x27;s &quot;Jørn Utzon and the Third Generation&quot;, Zodiac 14, Milan 1965

== Awards and recognition ==
Utzon was bestowed an Honorary Fellowship of the American Institute of Architects (Hon. FAIA) in 1970 for his distinguished achievements as a foreign architect. On 17 May 1985, he was made an Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia (AC). He was given the Keys to the City of Sydney in 1998. He was involved in redesigning the Opera House, and in particular, the Reception Hall, beginning in 1999. In 2003, he received in his absence an honorary Doctor of Science degree in Architecture (Hon. DScArch) from the University of Sydney; his son accepted the award on his behalf. In 2003, he was awarded the Pritzker Prize, architecture&#x27;s highest honor.

In March 2006, Queen Elizabeth II opened the western colonnade addition to the building designed by Utzon who had not returned to Australia since 1966. His son, Jan, took his place at the opening ceremony instead, saying his father was &quot;too old by now to take the long flight to Australia. But he lives and breathes the Opera House, and as its creator he just has to close his eyes to see it.&quot;

On 28 June 2007, the Sydney Opera House was declared a World Heritage Site.

In 2007 the Australian Institute of Architects named their annual international award the Jørn Utzon Award for International Architecture.

Following Utzon&#x27;s death in 2008, on 25 March 2009, a state memorial and reconciliation concert was held in the Concert Hall at Sydney Opera House.

;List of awards:

* 1967 C. F. Hansen Medal
* 1973 RAIA Gold Medal from the Royal Australian Institute of Architects
* 1978 RIBA Royal Gold Medal
* 1980 The Daylight and Building Component Award
* 1982 Alvar Aalto Medal
* 1987 Nykredit Architecture Prize
* 1992 Wolf Prize
* 1998 Sonning Prize
* 2000 Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement
* 2003 Pritzker Prize

==Influence==
According to Kenneth Frampton, Utzon&#x27;s architectural influence is manifest on three levels: the emphasis given to the roof element, the importance given to the grounding of the building, and the commitment to &quot;the cultural validity of organic growth&quot;. Kim Dirkinck-Holmfeld, writing in &quot;Dansk Arkitektur: 1960–1995&quot;, comments: Utzon did not obtain many commissions in his mother country but his importance was considerable in terms of direct imitation or inspiration. And he was the only Danish architect who made a significant contribution to the global development of Modernism.

==See also==
* Architecture of Denmark

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Michael Asgaard Andersen: &quot;Jørn Utzon. Arkitekturens tilblivelse og virke&quot;. Copenhagen: Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck, 2011, , english &quot;Jørn Utzon. Drawings and Buildings&quot;, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2014, 
* Daryl Dellora: &quot;Jørn Utzon and the Sydney Opera House.&quot; Penguin, Melbourne 2013. 
* Françoise Fromonot: &quot;Jørn Utzon, The Sydney Opera House.&quot; Corte Madera, California: Gingko Press, 1998. 
* Richard Weston: &quot;Utzon — Inspiration, Vision, Architecture.&quot; Denmark: Edition Bløndal, 2002. 
* J.J. Ferrer Forés: &quot;Jørn Utzon. Obras y Proyectos. Works and Projects.&quot; Spain: GG 2006. 
* Katarina Stübe and Jan Utzon, &quot;Sydney Opera House: A Tribute to Jørn Utzon&quot;. Reveal Books, 2009. 

== External links ==
*Interview with Jørn Utzon, October 1992
*Utzon Center
*Pritzker Architecture Prize 2003, including essays and photographs.
*Profile at the Sydney Opera House
* CC-By-SA]
*Obituary in &quot;The Economist&quot;, 11 December 2008.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180398" start="0" end="16" title="Jørn Utzon" label="Jørn Oberg Utzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="148" end="166" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="356" end="375" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q134165" start="511" end="525" title="Oscar Niemeyer" label="Oscar Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q800141" start="558" end="573" title="Bagsværd Church" label="Bagsværd Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15156679" start="598" end="624" title="Kuwait National Assembly Building" label="National Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428102" start="712" end="724" title="Kingo Houses" label="Kingo Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="730" end="739" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641001" start="761" end="794" title="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts" label="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q312070" start="836" end="850" title="Gunnar Asplund" label="Gunnar Asplund"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="855" end="866" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="913" end="923" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="970" end="977" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641001" start="1129" end="1162" title="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts" label="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q984344" start="1186" end="1196" title="Kay Fisker" label="Kay Fisker"/>
<link wikidata="Q640949" start="1201" end="1222" title="Steen Eiler Rasmussen" label="Steen Eiler Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312070" start="1268" end="1282" title="Gunnar Asplund" label="Gunnar Asplund"/>
<link wikidata="Q273572" start="1326" end="1339" title="Arne Jacobsen" label="Arne Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928794" start="1344" end="1359" title="Poul Henningsen" label="Poul Henningsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="1426" end="1444" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1463" end="1475" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="1484" end="1512" title="Occupation of Denmark" label="German Occupation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="1561" end="1572" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1640" end="1647" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1742" end="1748" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208310" start="2043" end="2056" title="Taliesin West" label="Taliesin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2065" end="2072" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634037" start="2088" end="2109" title="Charles and Ray Eames" label="Charles and Ray Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903509" start="2196" end="2213" title="Utzon&amp;#x27;s House in Hellebæk" label="house for himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2447" end="2452" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681336" start="2993" end="3014" title="Additive Architecture" label="Additive Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q635103" start="3254" end="3265" title="Architectural design competition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="3280" end="3298" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="3555" end="3568" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48471492" start="3730" end="3740" title="Emory Kemp" label="Emory Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q717683" start="3775" end="3783" title="Ove Arup" label="Ove Arup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525050" start="4073" end="4079" title="Joseph Cahill" label="Cahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="4094" end="4109" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q716737" start="4203" end="4224" title="Arup Group Limited" label="Ove Arup and Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q768144" start="5102" end="5114" title="Robert Askin" label="Robert Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241908" start="5245" end="5257" title="Davis Hughes" label="Davis Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362752" start="5286" end="5304" title="Elizabeth Farrelly" label="Elizabeth Farrelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="5440" end="5455" title="escalating cost" label="escalating cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="6080" end="6092" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="6857" end="6868" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="6881" end="6895" title="Pritzker Architecture Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q800141" start="7349" end="7364" title="Bagsværd Church" label="Bagsværd Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q454513" start="7692" end="7704" title="Steingraeber &amp;amp; Söhne" label="Steingraeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428102" start="7728" end="7740" title="Kingo Houses" label="Kingo Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="7744" end="7753" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496958" start="8316" end="8334" title="Fredensborg Houses" label="Fredensborg Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="8650" end="8664" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="8838" end="8852" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603766" start="9008" end="9032" title="Paustian House" label="Paustian Furniture Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409526" start="9390" end="9399" title="Kim Utzon" label="Kim Utzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434077" start="9423" end="9435" title="Utzon Center" label="Utzon Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="9751" end="9757" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q15156679" start="9765" end="9791" title="Kuwait National Assembly Building" label="National Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q522862" start="10191" end="10205" title="Karnak" label="Karnak temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q121330994" start="10276" end="10288" title="Jack Edwards (YouTuber)" label="Jack Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813091" start="10372" end="10382" title="Melli Bank, University of Tehran Branch" label="Melli Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="10395" end="10401" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="10782" end="10790" title="Mallorca" label="Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746698" start="10909" end="10919" title="Portopetro" label="Portopetro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029074" start="10927" end="10934" title="Can Lis" label="Can Lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029041" start="11670" end="11679" title="Can Feliz" label="Can Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434077" start="11976" end="11988" title="Utzon Center" label="Utzon Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="12623" end="12652" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150095" start="12772" end="12775" title="Jan Utzon" label="Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409526" start="12780" end="12783" title="Kim Utzon" label="Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12324510" start="12798" end="12801" title="Lin Utzon" label="Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717638" start="12970" end="12980" title="Alex Popov (architect)" label="Alex Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363242" start="13036" end="13047" title="Svaneke Water Tower" label="Water tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q605001" start="13051" end="13058" title="Svaneke" label="Svaneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903509" start="13086" end="13112" title="Utzon&amp;#x27;s House in Hellebæk" label="Architect&amp;#x27;s own house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025348" start="13114" end="13122" title="Hellebæk" label="Hellebæk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388444" start="13149" end="13154" title="Holte" label="Holte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428102" start="13172" end="13184" title="Kingo Houses" label="Kingo Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="13186" end="13195" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361122" start="13215" end="13232" title="Elineberg Housing" label="Elineberg Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411" start="13234" end="13245" title="Helsingborg" label="Helsingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="13294" end="13298" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="13318" end="13336" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496958" start="13364" end="13382" title="Fredensborg Houses" label="Fredensborg Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q565436" start="13405" end="13416" title="Fredensborg" label="Fredensborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813091" start="13434" end="13444" title="Melli Bank, University of Tehran Branch" label="Melli Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q737835" start="13446" end="13466" title="University of Tehran" label="University of Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="13520" end="13529" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q800141" start="13628" end="13643" title="Bagsværd Church" label="Bagsværd Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029074" start="13671" end="13678" title="Can Lis" label="Can Lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="13708" end="13715" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15156679" start="13731" end="13758" title="Kuwait National Assembly Building" label="National Assembly of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603766" start="13788" end="13812" title="Paustian House" label="Paustian Furniture Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029041" start="13842" end="13851" title="Can Feliz" label="Can Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="13853" end="13860" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533722" start="13876" end="13901" title="Skagen Odde Nature Centre" label="Skagen Odde Nature Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q215177" start="13903" end="13909" title="Skagen" label="Skagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891116" start="13973" end="14003" title="Esbjerg Performing Arts Centre" label="Esbjerg Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434077" start="14030" end="14042" title="Utzon Center" label="Utzon Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409526" start="14064" end="14073" title="Kim Utzon" label="Kim Utzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811806" start="15798" end="15857" title="Honorary Fellowship of the American Institute of Architects" label="Honorary Fellowship of the American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="15968" end="16012" title="Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia" label="Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094194" start="16048" end="16062" title="City of Sydney" label="City of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="16217" end="16243" title="honorary Doctor of Science" label="honorary Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="16291" end="16311" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="16383" end="16397" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="16895" end="16914" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912910" start="16929" end="16963" title="Australian Institute of Architects" label="Australian Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365502" start="17235" end="17253" title="C. F. Hansen Medal" label="C. F. Hansen Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373752" start="17261" end="17276" title="Royal Australian Institute of Architects Gold Medal" label="RAIA Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912910" start="17286" end="17326" title="Australian Institute of Architects" label="Royal Australian Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17334" end="17355" title="Royal Gold Medal#List of recipients" label="RIBA Royal Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17363" end="17404" title="The Daylight and Building Component Award#LIST OF RECEIPIENTS" label="The Daylight and Building Component Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17412" end="17429" title="Alvar Aalto Medal#Recipients of the Alvar Aalto Medal" label="Alvar Aalto Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071140" start="17437" end="17464" title="Nykredit Architecture Prize" label="Nykredit Architecture Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17472" end="17482" title="Wolf Prize in Arts#Laureates" label="Wolf Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17490" end="17503" title="Sonning Prize#Sonning Prize laureates" label="Sonning Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603698" start="17511" end="17547" title="Venice Biennale of Architecture" label="Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17555" end="17569" title="Pritzker Prize#Laureates" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q707962" start="17598" end="17614" title="Kenneth Frampton" label="Kenneth Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="18180" end="18189" title="Modern architecture" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787127" start="18207" end="18230" title="Architecture of Denmark" label="Architecture of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19225" end="19233" title="[Creative Commons license" label="CC-By-SA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37265" wikidata="Q157013" url="?curid=37265" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen">
<text>Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen () was a principality in southwestern Germany. Its rulers belonged to the senior Swabian branch of the House of Hohenzollern. The Swabian Hohenzollerns were elevated to princes in 1623. The small sovereign state with the capital city of Sigmaringen was annexed to the Kingdom of Prussia in 1850 following the abdication of its sovereign in the wake of the revolutions of 1848, then became part of the newly created Province of Hohenzollern.

==History==
The senior Swabian branch is less well known to history than the junior Franconian line, the latter of which became Burgraves of Nuremberg and later ruled Brandenburg and Prussia, and the German Empire.

The County of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was created in 1576, upon the partition of the County of Hohenzollern, a fief of the Holy Roman Empire. When the last count of Hohenzollern, Karl I (1512–1579) died, the territory was divided among his three sons:
* Eitel Friedrich IV of Hohenzollern-Hechingen (1545–1605)
* Charles II of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (1547–1606)
* Christoph of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch (1552–1592)
The princes of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen ruled over a small principality in south-western Germany, with a seat at Sigmaringen Castle. Unlike the Hohenzollerns of Brandenburg-Prussia, the Hohenzollerns of Sigmaringen remained Roman Catholic, along with their cousins of Hohenzollern-Hechingen (the senior line of the Swabian branch of the House of Hohenzollern) and Hohenzollern-Haigerloch.

The principality became a sovereign state in 1815 after the abolition of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 and an independent realm following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. Its ruler, Charles, was deposed in the revolutions of 1848. His son, Karl Anton, succeeded him, and turned to Prussia for aid. Prussian troops arrived in August 1849, and in a treaty signed in December Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was annexed by Prussia, effective in March 1850. The annexation of their state did not, however, mean the end of the importance of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.

The last prince, Karl Anton, served as Minister President of Prussia from 1858 to 1861. Karl Anton&#x27;s second son, Karl Eitel of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen became prince (1866–1881) and then King of Romania, under the name Carol (reigned 1881–1914). The house remained on the throne until the end of the Romanian monarchy in 1947. The last King of Romania, Michael, died on 5 December 2017.

Because the eldest Hechingen line of the Hohenzollerns became extinct in 1869 with the death of Constantine, Prince of Hohenzollern-Hechingen, the head of the Sigmaringen branch, Karl Anton, dropped his line&#x27;s suffix and took the title of Prince (&quot;Fürst&quot;) of (all) Hohenzollern.

French opposition to the candidacy of Carol&#x27;s elder brother Prince Leopold for the throne of Spain triggered the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), which led to the founding of the German Empire in January 1871.

==Territories, titles and styles==

===Southern Germany===
====Jurisdiction====
The head of the Swabian branch of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen ruled over the following territories:
* County of Hohenzollern (1061)
* Burgraviate of Nuremberg (1192)
* County of Veringen (1535)
* Lordship of Haigerloch (1634)
* Lordship of Wehrstein (1634)
* County of Bergh (1781)

From 1061 until 1806 five of these fiefs (not including Nuremberg) constituted an immediate territory of the Holy Roman Empire under the counts of Zollern, vassals of the Holy Roman Emperor.

From 1806 until 1813 the Hohenzollern lands were a realm of the Confederation of the Rhine, a short-lived state set up by Napoleon I Bonaparte. From 1815 until 1849 the principality was a sovereign country and a member of the German Confederation. In 1849 it lost its independence, and was incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia as the Province of Hohenzollern.
The German Confederation was succeeded in 1866 by the North German Confederation, which itself was succeeded by the German Empire in 1871. In 1918, the Kingdom of Prussia became the Free State of Prussia, and the German Empire was replaced by the Weimar Republic. In 1933 the republic was replaced by the Third Reich. After the defeat of the Nazis the province of Hohenzollern was merged with other territories into the state of Württemberg-Hohenzollern. This state was part of the Allied Occupation Zones in Germany until 1952. In that year, the state of Württemberg-Hohenzollern was merged into Baden-Württemberg, a state of the Federal Republic of Germany.

Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern, is the head of the princely Swabian line.

====Titles====
The head of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen is the historical heir to the titles of:
* Prince (&quot;Fürst&quot;) of Hohenzollern
* Burgrave (&quot;Burggraf&quot;) of Nuremberg
* Imperial Count (&quot;Reichsgraf&quot;) of Hohenzollern
* Count (&quot;Graf&quot;) of Sigmaringen
* Count (&quot;Graf&quot;) of Veringen
* Count (&quot;Graf&quot;) of Bergh
* Lord (&quot;Herr&quot;) of Haigerloch
* Lord (&quot;Herr&quot;) of Wehrstein

====Styles====
The historical titulature of rulers of the House of Hohenzollern was, in the German original: .

The English translation is: &quot;His Serene Highness (HSH) &quot;[name]&quot; by the Grace of God, Prince of Hohenzollern, Burgrave of Nuremberg, Count of Sigmaringen, Veringen and Berg, Lord of Haigerloch and Wehrstein&quot;.

===Romanian branch ===

The modern state of Romania was formed by union of the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1859, under the prince domnitor Alexandru Ioan Cuza. He was replaced by Karl Eitel of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in 1866, who ascended the throne as Carol I, Prince of Romania.

During the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78), Romania, which was a functionally independent vassal of the Ottoman Empire, proclaimed its full independence. After the commander of the Russian armies had requested Romania&#x27;s help, Carol accepted to enter the war with the condition of being appointed as commander of the armies that were besieging Plevna. After the end of the Romanian War of Independence in the 1878, at the Treaty of Berlin, Romania was subsequently recognized as an independent state by the Great Powers.

In return for reverting to the Russian Empire three southern Bessarabian districts that had been regained by Moldavia after the Crimean War in 1852, Dobruja was acquired.

In 1881, the principality was raised to a kingdom and Prince Carol became King Carol I. He reigned until his death in 1914, and was succeeded by his nephew, Ferdinand. Shortly after taking the throne, Ferdinand, a Roman Catholic like his predecessor, agreed to have his children reared in the Romanian Orthodox Church.

In 1918 Transylvania and Bessarabia were incorporated. In 1918–19, confirmed by the Treaty of Versailles of 1919 and the Treaty of Trianon of 1920, most of the Banat became part of Romania. Also, Bukovina was incorporated in 1918.

Ferdinand died in 1927. His eldest son, Crown Prince Carol, having renounced his rights, Carol&#x27;s only son Michael ascended the throne. In 1930, however, Carol reclaimed the throne and was crowned Carol II. Carol was forced to abdicate in 1940, and Michael re-mounted the throne. His reign, and that of the dynasty, ended when he was forced to abdicate by a communist regime in 1947.

On 10 May 2011, following lawsuits brought in Germany against his family by his German relatives regarding attribution of the title &quot;Prince of Hohenzollern-Veringen&quot; to his son-in-law, Radu Duda, Michael severed dynastic ties with the princely house of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, changed the name of his family to &quot;of Romania&quot;, and ceased the use of all princely titles borne by him and his family that derived from the German Hohenzollerns.

====Titles====
The head of the Romanian branch continued, since abolition of the monarchy, to use the hereditary title he bore while reigning:
* Michael I, King of Romania

During the reign of Carol II of Romania his son, Michael, was styled or, in English translation, &quot;His Highness The Grand Voivode of Alba Julia&quot;.

====Styles====
The Romanian original is: (or ; both forms are accepted by the Romanian Academy)

The English translation is: &quot;His Majesty (H.M.) N.N., King of Romania&quot;

==Coats of arms==

===Southern Germany===

====Major coat of arms====

The combined coat of arms of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen is:

* Escutcheon: quartering of the shield, parted per pale, twice parted per fess, with an inescutcheon
** first sixth: Burgraviate of Nuremberg (1214), on or (gold) a lion rampant sable (black) and a bordure of argent (silver) and gules (red)
** second sixth: Hereditary Chamberlain of the Holy Roman Empire (1504), on gules (red, two crossed scepters in or (gold) 
** third sixth: Lordship of Haigerloch and Wehrstein (1634), parted per fess gules (red) and argent (silver) 
** fourth sixth: Countship of Sigmaringen (1535), on gules (red) a deer or (gold) 
** fifth sixth: Countship of Veringen (1535), on or (gold) three deerhorns horizontally with twice four, and once three antlerpoints gules (red) 
** sixth sixth: County of Berg (1781), on argent (white) a lion rampant gules (red) and a bordure of sable (black) with roundels or (gold) 
** inescutcheon: Countship of Zollern (1061), quarterly sable (black) and argent (silver)
* helm: or (gold) a helmet barred and affronté (sovereign), crowned with a coronet of a German prince (Fürstenkrone)
* crest: sable (black) and argent (white) a head and shoulders of a German hound (Deutsche Bracke) (1317)
* wreath: sable (black) and argent (white)
* mantling: manteld sable (black), doubled argent (white) upon a crowned (Fürstenkrone) baldeqin gules (red), doubled ermine
* motto:
** until the 19th century: (We were always good Zollern)
** from the 19th century onwards: Nihil Sine Deo (Nothing without God)

====Family coat of arms====
The combined coat of arms with inclusion of the House coat of arms of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen is:

* Escutcheon: quartering of the shield, parted per pale, twice parted per fess, with an inescutcheon
** first sixth: Burgraviate of Nuremberg (1214), on or (gold) a lion rampant sable (black) and a bordure of argent (silver) and gules (red)
** second sixth: Hereditary Chamberlain of the Holy Roman Empire, on gules (red, two crossed scepters in or (gold) 
** third sixth: Lordship of Haigerloch and Wehrstein (1634), parted per fess gules (red) and argent (silver) 
** fourth sixth: Countship of Sigmaringen (1535), on gules (red) a deer or (gold)
** fifth sixth: Countship of Veringen (1535), on or (gold) three dearhorns horizontally with twice four, and once three antlerpoints gules (red) 
** sixth sixth: County of Berg (1781), on argent (white) a lion rampant gules (red) and a bordure of sable (black) with roundels or (gold) 
** inescutcheon: Countship of Zollern (1061), quarterly sable (black) and argent (silver)
* helm: seven particular helmets, equivalent to the seven particular coat of arms (Hohenzollern, Nuremberg, Sigmaringen, Veringen, Berg, Haigerloch and Wehrstein)
* crest: seven particular crests, equivalent to the seven particular coat of arms (Hohenzollern, Nuremberg, Sigmaringen, Veringen, Berg, Haigerloch and Wehrstein)
* wreath: sable (black) and argent (white)
* mantling: manteld sable (black), doubled argent (white)
* supporter: two German hounds
* compartment: grassy

===Romania===
The major coat of arms of the Kingdom of Romania consisted, from 1922 onwards, of:

* an escutcheon of the combination of the territories of:
** Wallachia 
** Moldavia 
** Dobruja 
** Transylvania 
** Bessarabia 
** Banat 
** Oltenia 
** Bukovina 
** an inescutcheon of the House of Hohenzollern: quarterly sable (black) and argent (silver)
* crest: The Steel Crown of Romania
* mantling: a crowned baldeqin gules (red), doubled ermine
* motto: Nihil Sine Deo (Nothing without God)
* supporter: two rampant lions
* compartment: ground

==Rulers==
Members of the House of Hohenzollern reigned as monarchs in Europe.

===Southern Germany===

==== Counts (Grafen) of Hohenzollern (1576–1623) ====

* Karl II, Count 1576–1606 (1547–1606), &quot;second surviving son of Karl I of Hohenzollern&quot;
** Johann, Count 1606–1623 (1578–1638), created Reichsfürst von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen 1623
==== Princes (Fürsten) of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (1623–1849) ====

* Johann, 1st Prince 1623–1638 (1578–1638)
** Meinrad I, 2nd Prince 1638–1681 (1605–1681)
*** Maximilian, 3rd Prince 1681–1689 (1636–1689)
**** Meinrad II, 4th Prince 1689–1715 (1673–1715)
***** Josef Friedrich Ernst, 5th Prince 1715–1769 (1702–1769)
****** Karl Friedrich, 6th Prince 1769–1785 (1724–1785)
******* Anton Aloys, 7th Prince 1785–1831 (1762–1831)
******** Karl, 8th Prince 1831–1848 (1785–1853), abdicated 1848
********* Karl Anton, 9th Prince 1848–1849 (1811–1885), ceded sovereignty to Prussia 1849
==== (1849–present) ====
Following cession of their sovereignty over the principality to their kinsmen the kings of Prussia in 1849, the heirs of Karl Anton continued to bear the same title, &quot;Prince (&quot;Fürst&quot;) of Hohenzollern&quot;:

* Karl Anton, Prince 1849–1885 (1811–1885), became Prince of Hohenzollern on the death of the last Prince of Hohenzollern-Hechingen in 1869
** Leopold, Prince 1885–1905 (1835–1905)
*** Wilhelm, Prince 1905–1927 (1864–1927)
**** Friedrich, Prince 1927–1965 (1891–1965)
***** Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince 1965–2010 (1924–2010)
****** Karl Friedrich, Prince 2010–present (born 1952)
******* Alexander, Hereditary Prince (born 1987)
****** Prince Albrecht of Hohenzollern (born 1954)
****** Prince Ferdinand of Hohenzollern (born 1960)
******* Prince Aloys of Hohenzollern (1999)
******* Prince Fidelis of Hohenzollern (born 2001)
***** &quot;Prince Johann Georg of Hohenzollern (1932–2016)&quot;
****** Prince Carl Christian of Hohenzollern (born 1962)
******* Prince Nicolas of Hohenzollern (born 1999)
****** Prince Hubertus of Hohenzollern (born 1966)
**** &quot;Franz Joseph, Prince of Hohenzollern-Emden (1891–1964)&quot;
***** &quot;Prince Emanuel of Hohenzollern-Emden (1929–1999)&quot;
****** Prince Carl Alexander of Hohenzollern-Emden (born 1970)
===Romania===

====Princes of Romania (1866–1881) ====
* Carol I 1866–1881

====King of Romania (1881–1947) ====
* Carol I 1881–1914
* Ferdinand 1914–1927
* Michael 1927–1930
* Carol II 1930–1940
* Michael 1940–1947

==See also==
* House of Hohenzollern
* Sigmaringen
* Sigmaringen Castle

==References==
==External links==
* Official website of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen – heraldic background information
* The official website of The Romanian Royal Family
* &quot;Das Fürstliche Haus Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen&quot; by Hartmut Platte (in German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="0" end="24" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="34" end="46" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="63" end="70" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106" end="120" title="House of Hohenzollern#Swabian branch" label="Swabian branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="128" end="149" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="262" end="273" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="278" end="285" title="Annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="293" end="311" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="381" end="400" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q819762" start="440" end="464" title="Province of Hohenzollern" label="Province of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="490" end="497" title="Swabia" label="Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="551" end="566" title="Burgraviate of Nuremberg#List of burgraves" label="Franconian line"/>
<link wikidata="Q568473" start="595" end="617" title="Burgraviate of Nuremberg" label="Burgraves of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="634" end="645" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="650" end="657" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="667" end="680" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="769" end="791" title="House of Hohenzollern#County of Zollern" label="County of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="795" end="799" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="807" end="824" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q464877" start="863" end="869" title="Karl I, Count of Hohenzollern" label="Karl I"/>
<link wikidata="Q479382" start="938" end="982" title="Eitel Friedrich IV, Count of Hohenzollern" label="Eitel Friedrich IV of Hohenzollern-Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q73995" start="997" end="1035" title="Charles II, Count of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Charles II of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084451" start="1050" end="1086" title="Christoph, Count of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch" label="Christoph of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q569546" start="1212" end="1230" title="Sigmaringen Castle" label="Sigmaringen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1323" end="1337" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q673865" start="1367" end="1389" title="Hohenzollern-Hechingen" label="Hohenzollern-Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316124" start="1463" end="1486" title="Hohenzollern-Haigerloch" label="Hohenzollern-Haigerloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1631" end="1646" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="1695" end="1714" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q58012" start="2071" end="2081" title="Karl Anton, Prince of Hohenzollern (died 1885)" label="Karl Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q621709" start="2093" end="2122" title="Minister President of Prussia" label="Minister President of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="2172" end="2210" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Karl Eitel of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="2246" end="2261" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="2412" end="2419" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q65290" start="2543" end="2588" title="Constantine, Prince of Hohenzollern-Hechingen" label="Constantine, Prince of Hohenzollern-Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="2814" end="2821" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2860" end="2879" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2926" end="2939" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3137" end="3159" title="House of Hohenzollern#County of Zollern" label="County of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q568473" start="3169" end="3193" title="Burgraviate of Nuremberg" label="Burgraviate of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82304" start="3213" end="3221" title="Veringenstadt" label="Veringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q505856" start="3243" end="3253" title="Haigerloch" label="Haigerloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q819693" start="3294" end="3309" title="Land van den Bergh" label="County of Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="3400" end="3409" title="Imperial immediacy" label="immediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3427" end="3444" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="3474" end="3480" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="3489" end="3507" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250464" start="3561" end="3566" title="realm" label="realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154741" start="3574" end="3600" title="Confederation of the Rhine" label="Confederation of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="3632" end="3652" title="Napoleon I Bonaparte" label="Napoleon I Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3698" end="3715" title="sovereign country" label="sovereign country"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="3736" end="3756" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3822" end="3840" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819762" start="3848" end="3872" title="Province of Hohenzollern" label="Province of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q150981" start="3928" end="3954" title="North German Confederation" label="North German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3990" end="4003" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="4056" end="4077" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Free State of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="4121" end="4136" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4179" end="4190" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q262733" start="4303" end="4327" title="Württemberg-Hohenzollern" label="Württemberg-Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="4356" end="4390" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied Occupation Zones in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="4471" end="4488" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4505" end="4532" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q78201" start="4535" end="4573" title="Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="4726" end="4732" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18244" start="4740" end="4745" title="Fürst" label="Fürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q960016" start="4771" end="4779" title="Burgrave" label="Burgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q258240" start="4818" end="4832" title="Imperial Count" label="Imperial Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q819693" start="4985" end="4990" title="Land van den Bergh" label="Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="4993" end="4997" title="Lord" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111770" start="5262" end="5281" title="by the Grace of God" label="by the Grace of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="5456" end="5463" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="5509" end="5517" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="5522" end="5531" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713794" start="5551" end="5566" title="Domnitor" label="prince domnitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="5567" end="5586" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Alexandru Ioan Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="5722" end="5749" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5811" end="5825" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q780367" start="6045" end="6061" title="Siege of Plevna" label="besieging Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778687" start="6084" end="6112" title="Romanian War of Independence" label="Romanian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="6133" end="6149" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="6218" end="6230" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6264" end="6278" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="6294" end="6304" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="6361" end="6372" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="6382" end="6389" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="6418" end="6430" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="6447" end="6451" title="king" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="6484" end="6491" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="6562" end="6571" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="6698" end="6722" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="6733" end="6745" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="6750" end="6760" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="6809" end="6829" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="6846" end="6863" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="6885" end="6890" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="6921" end="6929" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="7068" end="7075" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="7158" end="7166" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029911" start="7541" end="7550" title="Prince Radu of Romania" label="Radu Duda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="7872" end="7897" title="abolished monarchy" label="abolition of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="7964" end="7979" title="King of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="8001" end="8020" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="8030" end="8037" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="8107" end="8114" title="Voivode" label="Voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q901677" start="8215" end="8231" title="Romanian Academy" label="Romanian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="8400" end="8412" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="8461" end="8471" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="Escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q719061" start="8473" end="8483" title="Quartering (heraldry)" label="quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="8491" end="8497" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q568473" start="8576" end="8600" title="Burgraviate of Nuremberg" label="Burgraviate of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q849732" start="8657" end="8664" title="bordure" label="bordure"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="8668" end="8674" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="8676" end="8682" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="8688" end="8693" title="gules" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="8695" end="8698" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q536989" start="8717" end="8764" title="Aulic Council" label="Hereditary Chamberlain of the Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="8800" end="8807" title="Sceptre" label="scepter"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="8812" end="8814" title="or (heraldry)" label="or"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="8816" end="8820" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q505856" start="8839" end="8875" title="Haigerloch" label="Lordship of Haigerloch and Wehrstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="8950" end="8974" title="Sigmaringen" label="Countship of Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="9000" end="9004" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82304" start="9032" end="9053" title="Veringenstadt" label="Countship of Veringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="9136" end="9142" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="9178" end="9192" title="Berg (state)" label="County of Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="9221" end="9233" title="lion" label="lion rampant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265761" start="9282" end="9289" title="roundel (heraldry)" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9319" end="9339" title="House of Hohenzollern#County of Zollern" label="Countship of Zollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q910873" start="9394" end="9398" title="Helmet (heraldry)" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243409" start="9430" end="9438" title="Attitude (heraldry)" label="affronté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294983" start="9467" end="9474" title="coronet" label="coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="9511" end="9516" title="crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q38923" start="9577" end="9589" title="hound" label="German hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="9617" end="9623" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289089" start="9660" end="9668" title="mantling" label="mantling"/>
<link wikidata="Q384324" start="9776" end="9782" title="Ermine (heraldry)" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="9785" end="9790" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147462" start="9883" end="9897" title="Nihil Sine Deo" label="Nihil Sine Deo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="9962" end="9974" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="10064" end="10074" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="Escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q719061" start="10076" end="10086" title="Quartering (heraldry)" label="quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="10094" end="10100" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q568473" start="10179" end="10203" title="Burgraviate of Nuremberg" label="Burgraviate of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q849732" start="10260" end="10267" title="bordure" label="bordure"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="10271" end="10277" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10279" end="10285" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="10291" end="10296" title="gules" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="10298" end="10301" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="10396" end="10403" title="scepter" label="scepter"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="10408" end="10410" title="or (heraldry)" label="or"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10412" end="10416" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q505856" start="10435" end="10471" title="Haigerloch" label="Lordship of Haigerloch and Wehrstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="10546" end="10570" title="Sigmaringen" label="Countship of Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="10596" end="10600" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10627" end="10648" title="Veringen" label="Countship of Veringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="10731" end="10737" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="10773" end="10787" title="Berg (state)" label="County of Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="10816" end="10828" title="lion rampant" label="lion rampant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265761" start="10877" end="10884" title="roundel (heraldry)" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10914" end="10934" title="House of Hohenzollern#County of Zollern" label="Countship of Zollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q910873" start="10989" end="10993" title="Helmet (heraldry)" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="11152" end="11157" title="crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="11315" end="11321" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289089" start="11358" end="11366" title="mantling" label="mantling"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="11416" end="11425" title="supporter" label="supporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q251238" start="11447" end="11458" title="Compartment (heraldry)" label="compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173213" start="11492" end="11504" title="Coat of arms of Romania" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="11627" end="11636" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="11641" end="11649" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="11654" end="11661" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="11666" end="11678" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="11683" end="11693" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="11698" end="11703" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="11708" end="11715" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="11720" end="11728" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="11756" end="11777" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="11825" end="11830" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783760" start="11836" end="11858" title="Steel Crown of Romania" label="Steel Crown of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289089" start="11861" end="11869" title="mantling" label="mantling"/>
<link wikidata="Q384324" start="11911" end="11917" title="Ermine (heraldry)" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="11920" end="11925" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147462" start="11927" end="11941" title="Nihil Sine Deo" label="Nihil Sine Deo"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="11966" end="11975" title="supporter" label="supporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q251238" start="11997" end="12008" title="Compartment (heraldry)" label="compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="12077" end="12084" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q73995" start="12179" end="12186" title="Charles II, Count of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Karl II"/>
<link wikidata="Q459281" start="12279" end="12285" title="Johann, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Johann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411354" start="12324" end="12335" title="Reichsfürst" label="Reichsfürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q459281" start="12441" end="12447" title="Johann, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Johann"/>
<link wikidata="Q505204" start="12485" end="12494" title="Meinrad I, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Meinrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q472209" start="12533" end="12543" title="Maximilian I, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q551361" start="12583" end="12593" title="Meinrad II, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Meinrad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q472221" start="12634" end="12655" title="Joseph Friedrich Ernst, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Josef Friedrich Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q511038" start="12697" end="12711" title="Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Karl Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q571815" start="12754" end="12765" title="Anton Aloys, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Anton Aloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q675093" start="12809" end="12813" title="Charles, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q58012" start="12874" end="12884" title="Karl Anton, Prince of Hohenzollern (died 1885)" label="Karl Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q58012" start="13204" end="13214" title="Karl Anton, Prince of Hohenzollern (died 1885)" label="Karl Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="13345" end="13352" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424" start="13387" end="13394" title="William, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q66642" start="13430" end="13439" title="Frederick, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q69420" start="13476" end="13493" title="Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Friedrich Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q78201" start="13531" end="13545" title="Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Karl Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="13598" end="13615" title="Hereditary Prince" label="Hereditary Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q72770" start="13838" end="13873" title="Prince Johann Georg of Hohenzollern" label="Prince Johann Georg of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750064" start="14062" end="14104" title="Franz Joseph, Prince of Hohenzollern-Emden" label="Franz Joseph, Prince of Hohenzollern-Emden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="14310" end="14317" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="14368" end="14375" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="14388" end="14397" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="14410" end="14417" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="14430" end="14438" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="14451" end="14458" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="14485" end="14506" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="14509" end="14520" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q569546" start="14523" end="14541" title="Sigmaringen Castle" label="Sigmaringen Castle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37266" wikidata="Q57165" url="?curid=37266" title="Ferdinand I of Romania">
<text>Ferdinand I (Ferdinand Viktor Albert Meinrad; 24 August 1865 – 20 July 1927), nicknamed &quot;Întregitorul&quot; (&quot;the Unifier&quot;), was King of Romania from 10 October 1914 until his death in 1927. Ferdinand was the second son of Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern, and Infanta Antónia of Portugal, (daughter of Queen Maria II of Portugal and of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha-Kohary). His family was part of the Catholic branch of the Prussian royal family Hohenzollern.

In 1886, Ferdinand became heir presumptive to the Romanian throne, following the renunciation of his father (in 1880) and older brother. From the moment he settled in Romania, he continued his military career, gaining a series of honorary commands and being promoted to the rank of corps general. He married in 1893 Princess Marie of Edinburgh, granddaughter of both Queen Victoria and Emperor Alexander II.

Ferdinand became King of Romania on 10 October 1914, under the name Ferdinand I, following the death of his uncle, King Carol I. He ruled Romania during World War I, choosing to side with the Triple Entente against the Central Powers. This led to Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany removing his name from the royal house of Hohenzollern. At the war&#x27;s end, Romania emerged as a much-enlarged kingdom due to Bessarabia, Bukovina and Transylvania and parts of Banat, Crișana, and Maramureș becoming part of the Kingdom of Romania in 1920, and Ferdinand was crowned king of &quot;Greater Romania&quot; in a grand ceremony in 1922. In the years following the establishment of Greater Romania, Romanian society went through a series of major transformations, especially to the application of the agrarian reform and of the universal vote. In 1925, his eldest son, Prince Carol, gave up the rights of succession to the royal crown of Romania leading to a dynastic crisis, as the next prince in line of succession was Carol&#x27;s 4-year-old son, Prince Michael. This led Ferdinand to remove Prince Carol&#x27;s name from the royal house of Romania.

Ferdinand died from cancer in 1927 and was succeeded by his grandson Michael under a regency formed by three people: Prince Nicholas of Romania, the younger brother of Prince Carol; patriarch Miron Cristea; and president of the Supreme Court of Justice Gheorghe Buzdugan.

==Early life==

Prince Ferdinand Viktor Albert Meinrad of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was born in Sigmaringen in southwestern Germany. The name was later shortened simply to Hohenzollern after the extinction of the Hohenzollern-Hechingen branch in 1869. The princes of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen had ruled the principality until 1850, when it was annexed to Prussia.

Ferdinand I was the son of Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, and Infanta Antónia of Portugal (1845–1913), daughter of Queen Maria II of Portugal and Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, heir to the Hungarian magnates of Koháry on his mother&#x27;s side.

Following the renunciations, first of his father in 1880 and then of his elder brother Prince Wilhelm of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in 1886, young Ferdinand became the heir-presumptive to the throne of his childless uncle, King Carol I of Romania, who would reign until his death in October 1914. In 1889, the Romanian parliament recognized Ferdinand as a prince of Romania. The Romanian government did not require his conversion to Eastern Orthodoxy from Catholicism, as was the common practice prior to this date, thus allowing him to continue with his born creed, but it was required that his children be raised Orthodox, the state religion of Romania. For agreeing to this, Ferdinand was excommunicated from the Catholic Church, although this was later lifted.

Ferdinand&#x27;s mother&#x27;s first cousin Tsar Ferdinand I of Bulgaria sat on the throne of the neighbouring Bulgaria beginning in 1887, and was to become the greatest opponent of the kingdom of his Romanian cousins. The neighboring Emperor Francis Joseph, monarch of Austria-Hungary and as such, ruler of Transylvania, was Ferdinand&#x27;s grandmother&#x27;s first cousin.

Ferdinand, a complete stranger in his new home, started to get close to one of Queen Elisabeth&#x27;s ladies in waiting, Elena Văcărescu. Elisabeth, the Queen consort of Romania, very close to Elena herself, encouraged the romance, although she was perfectly aware of the fact that a marriage between the two was forbidden by the Romanian constitution (according to the 1866 Constitution of Romania, the heir-presumptive to the throne was not allowed to marry a Romanian).

The affair caused a sort of dynastic crisis in 1891. The result of this was the exile of both Elisabeth (in Neuwied) and Elena (in Paris), as well as a trip by Ferdinand through Europe in search of a suitable bride, whom he eventually found in Queen Victoria&#x27;s granddaughter, Princess Marie of Edinburgh.

==Marriage==

In Sigmaringen on 10 January 1893, Prince Ferdinand of Romania married his distant cousin, the Lutheran Princess Marie of Edinburgh, daughter of Anglican Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, and the Orthodox Grand Duchess Marie Alexandrovna of Russia. Marie and Ferdinand were third cousins in descent from Franz Frederick Anton, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld. Marie&#x27;s paternal grandparents were Victoria of the United Kingdom and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha; her maternal grandparents were Alexander II of Russia and Marie of Hesse and by Rhine. The reigning emperor of neighbouring Russia at the time of the marriage was Marie&#x27;s uncle, Tsar Alexander III, who would be succeeded by his eldest son, Marie&#x27;s first cousin, Tsar Nicholas II, the following year.

The royal Romanian marriage produced three sons (Carol, Nicholas, and Mircea – the last of whom died in infancy) and three daughters (Elisabeta, Maria – called &quot;Mignon&quot; – and Ileana), but it was unhappy. Indeed, the couple&#x27;s two youngest children, Ileana and Mircea, are widely believed to have been sired by Marie&#x27;s long-time lover, Barbu Știrbey.

==King of Romania==
On 10 October 1914, Ferdinand&#x27;s uncle, Carol I, died without surviving issue. Ferdinand succeeded him as King of Romania, reigning until his own death on 20 July 1927.

Ferdinand was appointed as the 1,174th Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece in Austria in 1909 and as the 868th Knight of the Order of the Garter in 1924.

===World War I===
Though a member of a cadet branch of Germany&#x27;s ruling Hohenzollern imperial family, Ferdinand presided over his country&#x27;s entry into World War I on the side of the Triple Entente against the Central Powers, on 27 August 1916. Thus he gained the sobriquet &quot;the Loyal&quot;, having kept the oath he swore before the Romanian Parliament in 1914: &quot;I will reign as a good Romanian.&quot;
As a consequence of this &quot;betrayal&quot; of his German origin, German Emperor Wilhelm II had Ferdinand&#x27;s name erased from the Hohenzollern House register.

Despite the setbacks after the entry into war, when Dobruja and Wallachia were occupied by the Central Powers, Romania fought in 1917 and stopped the German advance into Moldavia. When the new Bolshevik government of Russia sued for peace in 1918, Romania was surrounded by the Central Powers and forced to conclude a peace treaty of its own; however, Ferdinand refused to sign and ratify the Treaty of Bucharest. Allied forces then advanced on the Thessaloniki front and they knocked Bulgaria out of the war. Ferdinand ordered the re-mobilization of the Romanian Army, and Romania re-entered the war on the side of the Triple Entente.

===After the war===

The outcome of Romania&#x27;s war effort was the union of Bessarabia, Bukovina, and Transylvania with the Kingdom of Romania in 1918. Ferdinand became the ruler of a greatly enlarged Romanian state in 1918–1920 following the victory of the Entente over the Central Powers, a war between the Kingdom of Romania and the new Hungarian Soviet Republic, and the Russian Civil War. He was crowned king of &quot;Greater Romania&quot; in a spectacular ceremony on 15 October 1922 in the courtyard of the newly consecrated &quot;Coronation Cathedral&quot; in the historic princely seat of Alba Iulia in Transylvania.

A new period of Romanian history began on the day of the Union of Transylvania with Romania (Great Union Day, &quot;Marea Unire&quot;). This period would come to an end with international treaties, in the years leading to World War II, which ceded parts of Romania to its neighbors. As such, they are widely seen as an attempt to provoke the country into taking sides and joining the war.

Domestic political life during his reign was dominated by the conservative National Liberal Party, which was led by the brothers Ion and Vintilă Brătianu. The acquisition of Transylvania had the unintended effect of enlarging the electoral base of the opposition, whose principal parties united in January 1925 – October 1926 to form the National Peasant Party.

==Death==
Ferdinand died from cancer in Sinaia in 1927, and was succeeded by his grandson Michael under a regency (King Michael&#x27;s father having renounced his rights to the throne in December 1925). The regency had three members, one of whom was Ferdinand&#x27;s second son, Prince Nicholas.

Moldovan sculptor Veaceslav Jiglitchi installed stools (busts) of the king in different cities of Moldova (Bălți, Curătura, Rezina, Verejeni, Orhei, Nisporeni, Varnița) in 2015-23.

==Arms and honours==
He received the following honours:
==Ancestry==
==References==

* Wolbe, Eugen:&quot;Ferdinand I – Întemeietorul României Mari&quot; (Ferdinand I, founder of Greater Romania), Humanitas, 2006.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="0" end="11" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="144" end="159" title="King of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="238" end="269" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q255704" start="275" end="302" title="Infanta Antónia of Portugal" label="Infanta Antónia of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221145" start="317" end="343" title="Queen Maria II of Portugal" label="Queen Maria II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60721" start="351" end="399" title="Ferdinand II of Portugal" label="Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha-Kohary"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="406" end="412" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="429" end="437" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="452" end="459" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="474" end="486" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424" start="611" end="624" title="William, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="older brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="805" end="832" title="Marie of Romania" label="Princess Marie of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="856" end="870" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="875" end="895" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Emperor Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="915" end="930" title="King of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="1013" end="1025" title="Carol I of Romania" label="King Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1051" end="1062" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="1090" end="1104" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="1117" end="1131" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="1145" end="1151" title="German Emperor" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1152" end="1173" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="1303" end="1313" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="1315" end="1323" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="1328" end="1340" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="1354" end="1359" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q268034" start="1361" end="1368" title="Crișana" label="Crișana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="1374" end="1383" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1405" end="1423" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="1473" end="1488" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="1755" end="1767" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Prince Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="1936" end="1950" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Prince Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q529045" start="2157" end="2183" title="Prince Nicholas of Romania" label="Prince Nicholas of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268352" start="2232" end="2245" title="Miron Cristea" label="Miron Cristea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15370879" start="2293" end="2310" title="Gheorghe Buzdugan" label="Gheorghe Buzdugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="2408" end="2419" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q673865" start="2525" end="2547" title="Hohenzollern-Hechingen" label="Hohenzollern-Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="2618" end="2630" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2666" end="2673" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="2703" end="2746" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q255704" start="2752" end="2779" title="Infanta Antónia of Portugal" label="Infanta Antónia of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221145" start="2805" end="2831" title="Queen Maria II of Portugal" label="Queen Maria II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60721" start="2836" end="2877" title="Ferdinand II of Portugal" label="Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q251614" start="2913" end="2919" title="Koháry" label="Koháry"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424" start="3035" end="3077" title="Prince Wilhelm of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Prince Wilhelm of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="3174" end="3192" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="3638" end="3652" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="3761" end="3784" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="3947" end="3969" title="Emperor Francis Joseph" label="Emperor Francis Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="3982" end="3997" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="4020" end="4032" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57629" start="4168" end="4183" title="Elisabeth of Wied" label="Queen Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q292539" start="4210" end="4225" title="Elena Văcărescu" label="Elena Văcărescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q739225" start="4459" end="4487" title="1866 Constitution of Romania" label="1866 Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967" start="4671" end="4678" title="Neuwied" label="Neuwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4694" end="4699" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="4807" end="4821" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="4853" end="4871" title="Marie of Edinburgh" label="Marie of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="4983" end="4991" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="4992" end="5019" title="Princess Marie of Edinburgh" label="Princess Marie of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="5033" end="5041" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="5042" end="5074" title="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158154" start="5093" end="5135" title="Grand Duchess Marie Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Marie Alexandrovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455554" start="5192" end="5243" title="Franz Frederick Anton, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld" label="Franz Frederick Anton, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5285" end="5315" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Victoria of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="5320" end="5354" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="5387" end="5409" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155585" start="5414" end="5441" title="Marie of Hesse and by Rhine" label="Marie of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="5539" end="5557" title="Tsar Alexander III" label="Tsar Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5628" end="5644" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q235595" start="5852" end="5858" title="Princess Ileana of Romania" label="Ileana"/>
<link wikidata="Q613397" start="6021" end="6034" title="Barbu Știrbey" label="Barbu Știrbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="6101" end="6108" title="Carol I" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="6270" end="6276" title="Knight" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="6284" end="6310" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="6361" end="6380" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6446" end="6453" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="6468" end="6480" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6552" end="6563" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="6583" end="6597" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="6610" end="6624" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="6738" end="6757" title="Romanian Parliament" label="Romanian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="6880" end="6894" title="German Emperor" label="German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="6895" end="6905" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="7030" end="7037" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="7042" end="7051" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7148" end="7156" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="7171" end="7180" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="7202" end="7224" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="sued for peace in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q165755" start="7294" end="7319" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1918)" label="a peace treaty of its own"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="7427" end="7439" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="7533" end="7546" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="7694" end="7704" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="7706" end="7714" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="7720" end="7732" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="7742" end="7760" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="7911" end="7914" title="Hungarian-Romanian War of 1919" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="7927" end="7945" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="7958" end="7983" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="7993" end="8010" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257623" start="8156" end="8176" title="Coronation Cathedral, Alba Iulia" label="Coronation Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="8216" end="8226" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="8302" end="8336" title="Union of Transylvania with Romania" label="Union of Transylvania with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360641" start="8338" end="8353" title="Great Union Day" label="Great Union Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="8710" end="8732" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="8764" end="8767" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827008" start="8772" end="8788" title="Vintilă Brătianu" label="Vintilă Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q213296" start="9038" end="9044" title="Sinaia" label="Sinaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="9088" end="9095" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9104" end="9111" title="regency" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="9133" end="9139" title="Carol II of Romania" label="father"/>
<link wikidata="Q529045" start="9277" end="9292" title="Prince Nicholas of Romania" label="Prince Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9313" end="9332" title=":ro:Veaceslav_Jiglițchi" label="Veaceslav Jiglitchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="9402" end="9407" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281181" start="9419" end="9425" title="Rezina" label="Rezina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449915" start="9427" end="9435" title="Verejeni" label="Verejeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q423258" start="9437" end="9442" title="Orhei" label="Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089107" start="9444" end="9453" title="Nisporeni" label="Nisporeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331113" start="9455" end="9462" title="Varnița, Anenii Noi" label="Varnița"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37268" wikidata="Q1998874" url="?curid=37268" title="Cephalic index">
<text>The cephalic index or cranial index is a number obtained by taking the maximum width (biparietal diameter or BPD, side to side) of the head of an organism, multiplying it by 100 and then dividing it by their maximum length (occipitofrontal diameter or OFD, front to back). The index was once used to categorize human beings in the first half of the 20th century, but today it is used to categorize dogs and cats.

==Historic use in anthropology==
===Early anthropology===

The cephalic index was used by anthropologists in the early 20th century as a tool to categorize human populations. It was used to describe an individual&#x27;s appearance and for estimating the age of fetuses for legal and obstetrical reasons.

The cephalic index was defined by Swedish professor of anatomy Anders Retzius (1796–1860) and first used in physical anthropology to classify ancient human remains found in Europe. The theory became closely associated with the development of racial anthropology in the 19th and early 20th centuries, when historians attempted to use ancient remains to model population movements in terms of racial categories. American anthropologist Carleton S. Coon also used the index in the 1960s, by which time it had been largely discredited.

In the cephalic index model, human beings were characterized by having either a dolichocephalic (long-headed), mesaticephalic (moderate-headed), or brachycephalic (short-headed) cephalic index or cranial index.
===Indices===

Cephalic indices are grouped as in the following table:

Technically, the measured factors are defined as the maximum width of the bones that surround the head above the supramastoid crest (behind the cheekbones), and the maximum length from the most easily noticed part of the glabella (between the eyebrows) to the most easily noticed point on the back part of the head.

===Controversy===

The usefulness of the cephalic index was questioned by the Italian anthropologist Giuseppe Sergi, who argued that cranial morphology provided a better means to model racial ancestry. Also, Franz Boas studied the children of immigrants to the United States in 1910 to 1912, noting that the children&#x27;s cephalic index differed significantly from their parents&#x27;, implying that local environmental conditions had a significant effect on the development of head shape.

Boas argued that if craniofacial features were so malleable in a single generation, then the cephalic index was of little use for defining race and mapping ancestral populations. Scholars such as Earnest Hooton continued to argue that both environment and heredity were involved. Boas did not himself claim it was totally plastic.

In 2002, a paper by Sparks and Jantz re-evaluated some of Boas&#x27;s original data using new statistical techniques and concluded that there was a &quot;relatively high genetic component&quot; of head shape. Ralph Holloway of Columbia University argues that the new research raises questions about whether the variations in skull shape have &quot;adaptive meaning and whether, in fact, normalizing selection might be at work on the trait, where both extremes, hyperdolichocephaly and hyperbrachycephaly, are at a slight selective disadvantage.&quot;

In 2003, anthropologists Clarence C. Gravlee, H. Russell Bernard, and William R. Leonard reanalyzed Boas&#x27;s data and concluded that most of Boas&#x27;s original findings were correct. Moreover, they applied new statistical, computer-assisted methods to Boas&#x27;s data and discovered more evidence for cranial plasticity. In a later publication, Gravlee, Bernard and Leonard reviewed Sparks&#x27;s and Jantz&#x27;s analysis. They argue that Sparks and Jantz misrepresented Boas&#x27;s claims, and that Sparks&#x27;s and Jantz&#x27;s data support Boas. For example, they point out that Sparks and Jantz look at changes in cranial size in relation to how long an individual has been in the United States in order to test the influence of the environment. Boas, however, looked at changes in cranial size in relation to how long the mother had been in the United States. They argue that Boas&#x27;s method is more useful, because the prenatal environment is a crucial developmental factor.

Jantz and Sparks responded to Gravlee et al., reiterating that Boas&#x27; findings lacked biological meaning, and that the interpretation of Boas&#x27; results common in the literature was biologically inaccurate. In a later study, the same authors concluded that the effects Boas observed were likely the result of population-specific environmental effects such as changes in cultural practices for cradling infants, rather than the effects of a general &quot;American environment&quot; which caused populations in America to converge to a common cranial type, as Boas had suggested.

==Vertical cephalic index==
The vertical cephalic index, also known as the length-height index, was a less-commonly measured head ratio. In the vertical cephalic index model, humans beings were characterized by having either a chamaecranic (low-skulled), orthocranic (medium high-skulled), or hypsicranic (high-skulled) cephalic index or cranial index.

== Medicine ==
The cephalic index is also used in medicine, especially in the planning and effectiveness analysis of cranial deformity corrections. The index is a useful tool in assessing the morphology of cranial deformities in clinical settings. The index is used while looking at the fetal head shape, and can change in certain situations (ex. breech presentation, ruptured membranes, twin pregnancy). It can be measured for prenatal infants in the womb using obstetric ultrasound, and a value of 78.3% ± 8% (±2 standard deviations) is considered normal.

== Modern use in animal breeding ==
The cephalic index is used in the categorisation of animals, especially breeds of dogs and cats. 

===Brachycephalic animals===


A brachycephalic skull is relatively broad and short (typically with the breadth at least 80% of the length). Dog breeds such as the pug are sometimes classified as &quot;extreme brachycephalic&quot;. Because of health issues brachycephaly is regarded in some countries as &quot;qualzucht&quot;, which literally translates to &quot;torture breeding&quot; as it often leads to brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome. 

====List of brachycephalic dogs====

* Affenpinscher
* American Bulldog
* American Bully
* Boston Terrier
* Boxer
* Brussels Griffon
* Bulldog
* Bullmastiff
* Cane Corso
* Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
* Apple-headed Chihuahua
* Chow Chow
* Dogo Argentino
* Dogue de Bordeaux
* English Mastiff
* English Bulldog
* Fila Brasileiro
* French Bulldog
* Japanese Chin 
* King Charles Spaniel
* Lhasa Apso
* Lowchen
* Neapolitan Mastiff
* Newfoundland
* Olde English Bulldogge
* Pekingese
* Perro de Presa Canario
* Pit bull
* Pug
* Pyrenean Mastiff
* Shar-Pei
* Shih Tzu
* Tibetan Spaniel
* Tosa
====List of brachycephalic cats====

* British Shorthair
* Burmese cat
* Exotic Shorthair
* Himalayan cat
* Persian cat
* Scottish Fold
* White tiger
==== List of brachycephalic pigs====

* Middle White
* Neijiang

==== List of brachycephalic rabbits ====

* Lionhead rabbit
* Lop rabbit
* Netherland Dwarf rabbit
* Dwarf Papillon rabbit
* Dwarf Hotot rabbit
* Jersey Wooly rabbit
* American Fuzzylop rabbit

====Other====
* Elephant
* Giant panda
* Ross seal
* Spectacled bear
* Walrus
* Wombat

===Mesaticephalic animals===
A mesaticephalic skull is of intermediate length and width. Mesaticephalic skulls are not markedly brachycephalic or dolichocephalic. When dealing with animals, especially dogs, the more appropriate and commonly used term is not &quot;mesocephalic&quot;, but rather &quot;mesaticephalic&quot;, which is a ratio of head to nasal cavity. The breeds below exemplify this category.

====List of mesaticephalic canines====
* African Wild Dog
* Alaskan Malamute
* almost all spaniels
* almost all spitz, except for the Chow Chow
* American Eskimo Dog
* American Foxhound
* Appenzeller Sennenhund
* Australian Cattle Dog
* Australian Shepherd
* Basenji
* Beagle
* Bearded Collie
* Beauceron
* Belgian Malinois
* Belgian Sheepdog
* Bernese Mountain Dog
* Bichon Frisé
* Black and Tan Coonhound
* Border Collie
* Cardigan Welsh Corgi
* Chesapeake Bay Retriever
* pear- and deer-headed Chihuahuas
* Chinese Crested
* Chinook
* Curly-Coated Retriever
* Dalmatian
* Dhole
* English Foxhound
* Field Spaniel
* Finnish Lapphund
* Finnish Spitz
* Flat-Coated Retriever
* German Shorthaired Pointer
* German Wirehaired Pointer 
* German Spitz
* Golden Retriever
* Irish Setter
* Komondor
* Labrador Retriever
* Miniature Pinscher
* Pomeranian
* Poodle (Miniature and Toy)
* most terriers
* Mudi
* Pembroke Welsh Corgi
* Puli
* Rottweiler
* Samoyed
* Siberian Husky
* St. Bernard
* Vizsla
* Weimaraner
* Wirehaired Vizsla
* Xoloitzcuintle
====List of mesaticephalic cats====

Note: Almost all domestic felines are mesaticephalic (“medium-headed”)

* Abyssinian
* American Shorthair
* American Bobtail
* Bengal cat
* Birman
* Bombay cat
* Burmese cat
* Chartreux
* Chausie
* Colorpoint Shorthair
* Cymric cat
* Egyptian Mau
* Felid hybrids
* &quot;Felis&quot;, or small cats
* Maine Coon
* Manx
* Munchkin cat
* Norwegian forest cat 
* Ocicat
* Pallas&#x27;s cat
* Ragdoll
* Russian Blue
* Russian White, Black and Tabby
* Selkirk Rex
* Siberian cat
* Somali
* Toyger
* Turkish Angora
* Turkish Van

====List of mesaticephalic rabbits====
* Dutch rabbit
* Mini Rex
* Polish rabbit
* New Zealand rabbit
* American Sable

====Other====
* Aardwolf
* Alligator
* American black bear
* Brown bear
* Brown hyena
* Fur seal
* Guinea pig
* Leopard seal
* Raccoon
* Sea lion
* Sloth bear
* Spotted hyena
* Striped hyena
* Sun bear
* Tasmanian devil

===Dolichocephalic animals===

A dolichocephalic skull is relatively long-headed (typically with the breadth less than 80% or 75% of the length).

Note: Almost all representatives of the infraphylum Gnathostomata (with rare exceptions) are dolichocephalic.

====List of dolichocephalic canids====
Note: Almost all canidae are dolichocephalic
* Afghan Hound
* Airedale Terrier
* Azawakh
* Basset Hound
* Bedlington Terrier
* Bloodhound
* Borzoi
* Bull terrier
* Cesky Terrier
* Coyote
* Dachshund
* Doberman Pinscher
* Dingo
* Fox Terrier
* Galgo Español
* German Shepherd Dog
* Great Dane
* Greyhound
* Irish Terrier
* Irish Wolfhound
* Italian Greyhound
* Kangaroo hound
* Kanni
* Kerry Blue Terrier
* Khalag Tazi
* Long dog
* Lurcher
* Manchester Terrier
* Miniature Bull Terrier
* Peruvian Inca Orchid
* Pharaoh Hound
* Poodle (Standard)
* Rampur Greyhound
* Rough Collie
* Russian Black Terrier
* Saluki
* Schnauzer
* Scottish Deerhound
* Scottish Terrier
* Sealyham Terrier
* Serbian Hound
* Shetland Sheepdog
* Silken Windhound
* Sloughi
* Smooth Collie
* Taigan
* Welsh Terrier
* Whippet
* Wolf


====List of dolichocephalic felines====
* Balinese
* Devon Rex
* Donskoy
* Jaguar
* Javanese
* Leopard
* Lion
* Ocelot
* Oriental Bicolor and Tricolor
* Oriental Longhair
* Oriental Shorthair
* &quot;Panthera&quot; hybrid
* Peterbald
* Sabertooth cats
* Savannah
* Siamese
* Snow leopard
* Sphynx
* Tiger


====List of dolichocephalic leporids====
* English Spot
* English Lop
* Belgian Hare
* All true hares

====Other====

* Baboon
* Bontebok
* Crocodile
* Cow
* Dinosaur (including birds)
* Dolphin
* Domestic horse
* Donkey
* Gharial
* Grevy&#x27;s zebra
* Hartebeest
* Hyrax
* Kangaroo
* Mule
* Onager
* Plains zebra
* Polar bear
* Thylacine
* Warthog
* Whale
* Wild boar
* Wildebeest
== See also ==
* Cephalic index in cats and dogs
* Craniometry
* Phrenology
* Human skull

== References ==
== External links ==
* Cephalic index
* Brachycephalic Experienced Veterinarians Database </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1998874" start="4" end="18" title="Cephalic index" label="cephalic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998874" start="22" end="35" title="Cephalic index" label="cranial index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402036" start="86" end="105" title="biparietal diameter" label="biparietal diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="146" end="154" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="248" title="occipitofrontal diameter" label="occipitofrontal diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="675" end="680" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="753" end="760" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="774" end="781" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490699" start="782" end="796" title="Anders Retzius" label="Anders Retzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="827" end="848" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="961" end="980" title="racial anthropology" label="racial anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q325049" start="1153" end="1169" title="Carleton S. Coon" label="Carleton S. Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16313" start="1648" end="1666" title="Temporal bone" label="supramastoid crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295" start="1756" end="1764" title="Frontal bone" label="glabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088839" start="1953" end="1967" title="Giuseppe Sergi" label="Giuseppe Sergi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="2060" end="2070" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q517619" start="2541" end="2555" title="Earnest Hooton" label="Earnest Hooton"/>
<link wikidata="Q813687" start="5509" end="5528" title="Breech birth" label="breech presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176918" start="5530" end="5548" title="Rupture of membranes" label="ruptured membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="5550" end="5564" title="Twin" label="twin pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402036" start="5625" end="5645" title="Obstetric ultrasonography" label="obstetric ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="5677" end="5696" title="Standard deviation" label="standard deviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38698" start="6020" end="6023" title="pug" label="pug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953365" start="6263" end="6305" title="brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome" label="brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254" start="6348" end="6361" title="Affenpinscher" label="Affenpinscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q37604" start="6364" end="6380" title="American Bulldog" label="American Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570" start="6383" end="6397" title="American Bully" label="American Bully"/>
<link wikidata="Q37550" start="6400" end="6414" title="Boston Terrier" label="Boston Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38496" start="6417" end="6422" title="Boxer (dog)" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38889" start="6425" end="6441" title="Brussels Griffon" label="Brussels Griffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="6444" end="6451" title="Bulldog" label="Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080" start="6454" end="6465" title="Bullmastiff" label="Bullmastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q21082" start="6468" end="6478" title="Cane Corso" label="Cane Corso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38072" start="6481" end="6510" title="Cavalier King Charles Spaniel" label="Cavalier King Charles Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q653" start="6526" end="6535" title="Chihuahua (dog)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q29013" start="6538" end="6547" title="Chow Chow" label="Chow Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37909" start="6550" end="6564" title="Dogo Argentino" label="Dogo Argentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q37878" start="6567" end="6584" title="Dogue de Bordeaux" label="Dogue de Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q38418" start="6587" end="6602" title="English Mastiff" label="English Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="6605" end="6620" title="English Bulldog" label="English Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37808" start="6623" end="6638" title="Fila Brasileiro" label="Fila Brasileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29149" start="6641" end="6655" title="French Bulldog" label="French Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6658" end="6672" title="Japanese Chin " label="Japanese Chin "/>
<link wikidata="Q38132" start="6675" end="6695" title="King Charles Spaniel" label="King Charles Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352" start="6698" end="6708" title="Lhasa Apso" label="Lhasa Apso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38027" start="6711" end="6718" title="Lowchen" label="Lowchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38529" start="6721" end="6739" title="Neapolitan Mastiff" label="Neapolitan Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38706" start="6742" end="6754" title="Newfoundland (dog)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38168" start="6757" end="6779" title="Olde English Bulldogge" label="Olde English Bulldogge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38959" start="6782" end="6791" title="Pekingese" label="Pekingese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37750" start="6794" end="6816" title="Perro de Presa Canario" label="Perro de Presa Canario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144318" start="6819" end="6827" title="Pit bull" label="Pit bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q38698" start="6830" end="6833" title="Pug" label="Pug"/>
<link wikidata="Q38766" start="6836" end="6852" title="Pyrenean Mastiff" label="Pyrenean Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38972" start="6855" end="6863" title="Shar-Pei" label="Shar-Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q39357" start="6866" end="6874" title="Shih Tzu" label="Shih Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39181" start="6877" end="6892" title="Tibetan Spaniel" label="Tibetan Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38991" start="6895" end="6899" title="Tosa (dog)" label="Tosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="6939" end="6956" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42573" start="6959" end="6970" title="Burmese cat" label="Burmese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42555" start="6973" end="6989" title="Exotic Shorthair" label="Exotic Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42959" start="6992" end="7005" title="Himalayan cat" label="Himalayan cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42610" start="7008" end="7019" title="Persian cat" label="Persian cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42636" start="7022" end="7035" title="Scottish Fold" label="Scottish Fold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7038" end="7049" title="White tiger#Defects" label="White tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841650" start="7090" end="7102" title="Middle White" label="Middle White"/>
<link wikidata="Q496257" start="7159" end="7174" title="Lionhead rabbit" label="Lionhead rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q389915" start="7177" end="7187" title="Lop rabbit" label="Lop rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9677" start="7190" end="7213" title="Netherland Dwarf rabbit" label="Netherland Dwarf rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7216" end="7237" title="Dwarf Papillon rabbit" label="Dwarf Papillon rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967612" start="7240" end="7258" title="Dwarf Hotot rabbit" label="Dwarf Hotot rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184979" start="7261" end="7280" title="Jersey Wooly rabbit" label="Jersey Wooly rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7283" end="7307" title="American Fuzzylop rabbit" label="American Fuzzylop rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="7325" end="7333" title="Elephant" label="Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33602" start="7336" end="7347" title="Giant panda" label="Giant panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q837610" start="7350" end="7359" title="Ross seal" label="Ross seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q137641" start="7362" end="7377" title="Spectacled bear" label="Spectacled bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="7380" end="7386" title="Walrus" label="Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23175" start="7389" end="7395" title="Wombat" label="Wombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="7846" end="7862" title="African Wild Dog" label="African Wild Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q21206" start="7865" end="7881" title="Alaskan Malamute" label="Alaskan Malamute"/>
<link wikidata="Q39115" start="7895" end="7902" title="spaniel" label="spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q854787" start="7917" end="7922" title="spitz" label="spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37699" start="7951" end="7970" title="American Eskimo Dog" label="American Eskimo Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37514" start="7973" end="7990" title="American Foxhound" label="American Foxhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37697" start="7993" end="8015" title="Appenzeller Sennenhund" label="Appenzeller Sennenhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q37595" start="8018" end="8039" title="Australian Cattle Dog" label="Australian Cattle Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37629" start="8042" end="8061" title="Australian Shepherd" label="Australian Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q37871" start="8064" end="8071" title="Basenji" label="Basenji"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="8074" end="8080" title="Beagle" label="Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37619" start="8083" end="8097" title="Bearded Collie" label="Bearded Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37720" start="8100" end="8109" title="Beauceron" label="Beauceron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37624" start="8112" end="8128" title="Belgian Malinois" label="Belgian Malinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q37624" start="8131" end="8147" title="Belgian Sheepdog" label="Belgian Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37608" start="8150" end="8170" title="Bernese Mountain Dog" label="Bernese Mountain Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37600" start="8173" end="8185" title="Bichon Frisé" label="Bichon Frisé"/>
<link wikidata="Q37537" start="8188" end="8211" title="Black and Tan Coonhound" label="Black and Tan Coonhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37710" start="8214" end="8227" title="Border Collie" label="Border Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29072" start="8230" end="8250" title="Cardigan Welsh Corgi" label="Cardigan Welsh Corgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29084" start="8253" end="8277" title="Chesapeake Bay Retriever" label="Chesapeake Bay Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q653" start="8302" end="8311" title="Chihuahua (dog)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q37892" start="8315" end="8330" title="Chinese Crested" label="Chinese Crested"/>
<link wikidata="Q37722" start="8333" end="8340" title="Chinook (dog)" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q38375" start="8343" end="8365" title="Curly-Coated Retriever" label="Curly-Coated Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504" start="8368" end="8377" title="Dalmatian (dog)" label="Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="8380" end="8385" title="Dhole" label="Dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q37789" start="8388" end="8404" title="English Foxhound" label="English Foxhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q29177" start="8407" end="8420" title="Field Spaniel" label="Field Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29188" start="8423" end="8439" title="Finnish Lapphund" label="Finnish Lapphund"/>
<link wikidata="Q29195" start="8442" end="8455" title="Finnish Spitz" label="Finnish Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29200" start="8458" end="8479" title="Flat-Coated Retriever" label="Flat-Coated Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q38084" start="8482" end="8508" title="German Shorthaired Pointer" label="German Shorthaired Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37811" start="8511" end="8536" title="German Wirehaired Pointer" label="German Wirehaired Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38655" start="8540" end="8552" title="German Spitz" label="German Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38686" start="8555" end="8571" title="Golden Retriever" label="Golden Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q38761" start="8574" end="8586" title="Irish Setter" label="Irish Setter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38675" start="8589" end="8597" title="Komondor" label="Komondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="8600" end="8618" title="Labrador Retriever" label="Labrador Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q38990" start="8621" end="8639" title="Miniature Pinscher" label="Miniature Pinscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q39579" start="8642" end="8652" title="Pomeranian (dog)" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38904" start="8655" end="8661" title="Poodle" label="Poodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38984" start="8689" end="8696" title="terrier" label="terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38690" start="8700" end="8704" title="Mudi" label="Mudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38783" start="8707" end="8727" title="Pembroke Welsh Corgi" label="Pembroke Welsh Corgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38864" start="8730" end="8734" title="Puli dog" label="Puli"/>
<link wikidata="Q39093" start="8737" end="8747" title="Rottweiler" label="Rottweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q39002" start="8750" end="8757" title="Samoyed (dog)" label="Samoyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q39295" start="8760" end="8774" title="Siberian Husky" label="Siberian Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q38090" start="8777" end="8788" title="St. Bernard (dog)" label="St. Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q38819" start="8791" end="8797" title="Vizsla" label="Vizsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q38965" start="8800" end="8810" title="Weimaraner" label="Weimaraner"/>
<link wikidata="Q39608" start="8813" end="8830" title="Wirehaired Vizsla" label="Wirehaired Vizsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q38856" start="8833" end="8847" title="Xoloitzcuintle" label="Xoloitzcuintle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998874" start="8923" end="8937" title="mesaticephalic" label="mesaticephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955" start="8959" end="8969" title="Abyssinian (cat)" label="Abyssinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962" start="8972" end="8990" title="American Shorthair" label="American Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874" start="8993" end="9009" title="American Bobtail" label="American Bobtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q42583" start="9012" end="9022" title="Bengal cat" label="Bengal cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42563" start="9025" end="9031" title="Birman" label="Birman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42566" start="9034" end="9044" title="Bombay cat" label="Bombay cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42573" start="9047" end="9058" title="Burmese cat" label="Burmese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42588" start="9061" end="9070" title="Chartreux" label="Chartreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q42546" start="9073" end="9080" title="Chausie" label="Chausie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115865" start="9083" end="9103" title="Colorpoint Shorthair" label="Colorpoint Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42578" start="9106" end="9116" title="Cymric cat" label="Cymric cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295" start="9119" end="9131" title="Egyptian Mau" label="Egyptian Mau"/>
<link wikidata="Q845320" start="9134" end="9146" title="Felid hybrid" label="Felid hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q228283" start="9156" end="9161" title="Felis" label="Felis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42659" start="9185" end="9195" title="Maine Coon" label="Maine Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675" start="9198" end="9202" title="Manx (cat)" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q686698" start="9205" end="9217" title="Munchkin cat" label="Munchkin cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42667" start="9220" end="9240" title="Norwegian forest cat" label="Norwegian forest cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42685" start="9244" end="9250" title="Ocicat" label="Ocicat"/>
<link wikidata="Q166794" start="9253" end="9270" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s cat" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42688" start="9273" end="9280" title="Ragdoll" label="Ragdoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q42654" start="9283" end="9295" title="Russian Blue" label="Russian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035968" start="9298" end="9328" title="Russian White, Black and Tabby" label="Russian White, Black and Tabby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42642" start="9331" end="9342" title="Selkirk Rex" label="Selkirk Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42630" start="9345" end="9357" title="Siberian cat" label="Siberian cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42715" start="9360" end="9366" title="Somali cat" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323" start="9369" end="9375" title="Toyger" label="Toyger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720" start="9378" end="9392" title="Turkish Angora" label="Turkish Angora"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="9395" end="9406" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624960" start="9449" end="9461" title="Dutch rabbit" label="Dutch rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865077" start="9464" end="9472" title="Mini Rex" label="Mini Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613509" start="9475" end="9488" title="Polish rabbit" label="Polish rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q116659036" start="9491" end="9509" title="New Zealand rabbit" label="New Zealand rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894452" start="9512" end="9526" title="American Sable" label="American Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q185295" start="9544" end="9552" title="Aardwolf" label="Aardwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q530397" start="9555" end="9564" title="Alligator" label="Alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="9567" end="9586" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="9589" end="9599" title="Brown bear" label="Brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q28157482" start="9602" end="9613" title="Brown hyena" label="Brown hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043473" start="9616" end="9624" title="Fur seal" label="Fur seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="9627" end="9637" title="Guinea pig" label="Guinea pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q186663" start="9640" end="9652" title="Leopard seal" label="Leopard seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="9655" end="9662" title="Raccoon" label="Raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="9665" end="9673" title="Sea lion" label="Sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q145016" start="9676" end="9686" title="Sloth bear" label="Sloth bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q178089" start="9689" end="9702" title="Spotted hyena" label="Spotted hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q188657" start="9705" end="9718" title="Striped hyena" label="Striped hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q144923" start="9721" end="9729" title="Sun bear" label="Sun bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q134964" start="9732" end="9747" title="Tasmanian devil" label="Tasmanian devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="9948" end="9961" title="Gnathostomata" label="Gnathostomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080" start="10093" end="10105" title="Afghan Hound" label="Afghan Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37617" start="10108" end="10124" title="Airedale Terrier" label="Airedale Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37859" start="10127" end="10134" title="Azawakh" label="Azawakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37716" start="10137" end="10149" title="Basset Hound" label="Basset Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37582" start="10152" end="10170" title="Bedlington Terrier" label="Bedlington Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098" start="10173" end="10183" title="Bloodhound" label="Bloodhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37866" start="10186" end="10192" title="Borzoi" label="Borzoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38322" start="10195" end="10207" title="Bull terrier" label="Bull terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38642" start="10210" end="10223" title="Cesky Terrier" label="Cesky Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="10226" end="10232" title="Coyote" label="Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="10235" end="10244" title="Dachshund" label="Dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q38358" start="10247" end="10264" title="Doberman Pinscher" label="Doberman Pinscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q38584" start="10267" end="10272" title="Dingo" label="Dingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39220" start="10275" end="10286" title="Fox Terrier" label="Fox Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37920" start="10289" end="10302" title="Galgo Español" label="Galgo Español"/>
<link wikidata="Q38280" start="10305" end="10324" title="German Shepherd" label="German Shepherd Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414" start="10327" end="10337" title="Great Dane" label="Great Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="10340" end="10349" title="Greyhound" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38644" start="10352" end="10365" title="Irish Terrier" label="Irish Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38668" start="10368" end="10383" title="Irish Wolfhound" label="Irish Wolfhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38503" start="10386" end="10403" title="Italian Greyhound" label="Italian Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182968" start="10406" end="10420" title="Kangaroo dog" label="Kangaroo hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38958" start="10423" end="10428" title="Kanni" label="Kanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q38025" start="10431" end="10449" title="Kerry Blue Terrier" label="Kerry Blue Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080" start="10452" end="10463" title="Khalag Tazi" label="Khalag Tazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38018" start="10466" end="10474" title="Long dog" label="Long dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37989" start="10477" end="10484" title="Lurcher" label="Lurcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q38387" start="10487" end="10505" title="Manchester Terrier" label="Manchester Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37967" start="10508" end="10530" title="Miniature Bull Terrier" label="Miniature Bull Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38874" start="10533" end="10553" title="Peruvian Hairless Dog" label="Peruvian Inca Orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q38808" start="10556" end="10569" title="Pharaoh Hound" label="Pharaoh Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38904" start="10572" end="10578" title="Poodle" label="Poodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38179" start="10592" end="10608" title="Rampur Greyhound" label="Rampur Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38650" start="10611" end="10623" title="Rough Collie" label="Rough Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38634" start="10626" end="10647" title="Russian Black Terrier" label="Russian Black Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39108" start="10650" end="10656" title="Saluki" label="Saluki"/>
<link wikidata="Q38421" start="10659" end="10668" title="Schnauzer" label="Schnauzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37929" start="10671" end="10689" title="Scottish Deerhound" label="Scottish Deerhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39035" start="10692" end="10708" title="Scottish Terrier" label="Scottish Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39068" start="10711" end="10727" title="Sealyham Terrier" label="Sealyham Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37574" start="10730" end="10743" title="Serbian Hound" label="Serbian Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058" start="10746" end="10763" title="Shetland Sheepdog" label="Shetland Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39207" start="10766" end="10782" title="Silken Windhound" label="Silken Windhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q37925" start="10785" end="10792" title="Sloughi" label="Sloughi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38790" start="10795" end="10808" title="Smooth Collie" label="Smooth Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39239" start="10811" end="10817" title="Taigan" label="Taigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39041" start="10820" end="10833" title="Welsh Terrier" label="Welsh Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39122" start="10836" end="10843" title="Whippet" label="Whippet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="10846" end="10850" title="Wolf" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9665" start="10895" end="10903" title="Balinese (cat)" label="Balinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42570" start="10906" end="10915" title="Devon Rex" label="Devon Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303" start="10918" end="10925" title="Donskoy (cat)" label="Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="10928" end="10934" title="Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42661" start="10937" end="10945" title="Javanese cat" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="10948" end="10955" title="Leopard" label="Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="10958" end="10962" title="Lion" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33261" start="10965" end="10971" title="Ocelot" label="Ocelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102323" start="10974" end="10990" title="Oriental Bicolor" label="Oriental Bicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099338" start="11006" end="11023" title="Oriental Longhair" label="Oriental Longhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42696" start="11026" end="11044" title="Oriental Shorthair" label="Oriental Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q759721" start="11047" end="11074" title="Panthera hybrid" label="&amp;quot;Panthera&amp;quot; hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42663" start="11077" end="11086" title="Peterbald" label="Peterbald"/>
<link wikidata="Q778615" start="11089" end="11104" title="Machairodontinae" label="Sabertooth cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q42670" start="11107" end="11115" title="Savannah (cat)" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="11118" end="11125" title="Siamese (cat)" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="11128" end="11140" title="Snow leopard" label="Snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42712" start="11143" end="11149" title="Sphynx (cat)" label="Sphynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="11152" end="11157" title="Tiger" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q656138" start="11203" end="11215" title="English Spot" label="English Spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693283" start="11218" end="11229" title="English Lop" label="English Lop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588394" start="11232" end="11244" title="Belgian Hare" label="Belgian Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="11256" end="11260" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q159429" start="11280" end="11286" title="Baboon" label="Baboon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009881" start="11289" end="11297" title="Bontebok" label="Bontebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="11300" end="11309" title="Crocodile" label="Crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="11312" end="11315" title="Cow" label="Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="11318" end="11326" title="Dinosaur" label="Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="11338" end="11342" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="11347" end="11354" title="Dolphin" label="Dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="11357" end="11371" title="Domestic horse" label="Domestic horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="11374" end="11380" title="Donkey" label="Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134" start="11383" end="11390" title="Gharial" label="Gharial"/>
<link wikidata="Q219565" start="11393" end="11411" title="Grevy&amp;#x27;s zebra" label="Grevy&amp;#x27;s zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q622880" start="11414" end="11424" title="Hartebeest" label="Hartebeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q53099" start="11427" end="11432" title="Hyrax" label="Hyrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="11435" end="11443" title="Kangaroo" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="11446" end="11450" title="Mule" label="Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q180960" start="11453" end="11459" title="Onager" label="Onager"/>
<link wikidata="Q245305" start="11462" end="11474" title="Plains zebra" label="Plains zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="11477" end="11487" title="Polar bear" label="Polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="11490" end="11499" title="Thylacine" label="Thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645260" start="11502" end="11509" title="Warthog" label="Warthog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="11512" end="11517" title="Whale" label="Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="11520" end="11529" title="Wild boar" label="Wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609" start="11532" end="11542" title="Wildebeest" label="Wildebeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063275" start="11560" end="11591" title="Cephalic index in cats and dogs" label="Cephalic index in cats and dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q240389" start="11594" end="11605" title="Craniometry" label="Craniometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="11608" end="11618" title="Phrenology" label="Phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="11621" end="11632" title="Human skull" label="Human skull"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37274" wikidata="Q11690" url="?curid=37274" title="Wall Street">
<text>Wall Street is a street in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan in New York City. It runs eight city blocks between Broadway in the west and South Street and the East River in the east. The term &quot;Wall Street&quot; has become a metonym for the financial markets of the United States as a whole, the American financial services industry, New York–based financial interests, or the Financial District. Anchored by Wall Street, New York has been described as the world&#x27;s principal fintech and financial center.

The street was originally known in Dutch as &quot;Het Cingel&quot; (&quot;the Belt&quot;) when it was part of New Amsterdam during the 17th century. An actual city wall existed on the street from 1653 to 1699. During the 18th century, the location served as a slave market and securities trading site, and from 1703 onward, the location of New York&#x27;s city hall, which became Federal Hall. In the early 19th century, both residences and businesses occupied the area, but increasingly the latter predominated, and New York&#x27;s financial industry became centered on Wall Street. During the 20th century, several early skyscrapers were built on Wall Street, including 40 Wall Street, once the world&#x27;s tallest building. The street is near multiple subway stations and ferry terminals.

The Wall Street area is home to the New York Stock Exchange, the world&#x27;s largest stock exchange by total market capitalization, as well as the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and commercial banks and insurance companies. Several other stock and commodity exchanges have also been located in Lower Manhattan near Wall Street, including the New York Mercantile Exchange and other commodity futures exchanges, along with the NYSE American. Many brokerage firms owned offices nearby to support the business they did on the exchanges. The economic impacts of Wall Street activities extend worldwide. 

==History==
===Early years===

In the original records of New Amsterdam, the Dutch always called the street &quot;Het Cingel&quot; (&quot;the Belt&quot;), which was also the name of the original outer barrier street, wall, and canal of Amsterdam. After the English conquest of New Netherland in 1664, they renamed the settlement &quot;New York&quot; and in tax records from April 1665 (still in Dutch) they refer to the street as &quot;Het Cingel ofte Stadt Wall&quot; (&quot;the Belt or the City Wall&quot;). This use of both names for the street also appears as late as 1691 on the Miller Plan of New York. New York Governor Thomas Dongan may have issued the first official designation of Wall Street in 1686, the same year he issued a new charter for New York. Confusion over the origins of the name Wall Street appeared in modern times because in the 19th and early 20th century some historians mistakenly thought the Dutch had called it &quot;de Waal Straat&quot;, which to Dutch ears sounds like Walloon Street. However, in 17th century New Amsterdam, de Waal Straat (Wharf or Dock Street) was a section of what is today&#x27;s Pearl Street.
The original wall was constructed under orders from Director General of the Dutch West India Company, Peter Stuyvesant, at the start of the first Anglo-Dutch war soon after New Amsterdam was incorporated in 1653. Fearing an over land invasion of English troops from the colonies in New England (at the time Manhattan was easily accessible by land because the Harlem Ship Canal had not been dug), he ordered a ditch and wooden palisade to be constructed on the northern boundary of the New Amsterdam settlement. The wall was built of dirt and wooden planks, measuring long and tall and was built using the labor of both Black slaves and white colonists. In fact Stuyvesant had ordered that &quot;the citizens, without exception, shall work on the constructions… by immediately digging a ditch from the East River to the North River, 4 to 5 feet deep and 11 to 12 feet wide...&quot; And that &quot;the soldiers and other servants of the Company, together with the free Negroes, no one excepted, shall complete the work on the fort by constructing a breastwork, and the farmers are to be summoned to haul the sod.&quot;

The first Anglo-Dutch War ended in 1654 without hostilities in New Amsterdam, but over time the &quot;werken&quot; (meaning the works or city fortifications) were reinforced and expanded to protect against potential incursions from Native Americans, pirates, and the English. The English also expanded and improved the wall after their 1664 takeover (a cause of the Second Anglo-Dutch War), as did the Dutch from 1673 to 1674 when they briefly retook the city during the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and by the late 1600s the wall encircled most of the city and had two large stone bastions on the northern side. The Dutch named these bastions &quot;Hollandia&quot; and &quot;Zeelandia&quot; after the ships that carried their invasion force. The wall started at Hanover Square on Pearl Street, which was the shoreline at that time, crossed the Indian path that the Dutch called &quot;Heeren Wegh&quot;, now called Broadway, and ended at the other shoreline (today&#x27;s Trinity Place), where it took a turn south and ran along the shore until it ended at the old fort. There was a gate at Broadway (the &quot;Land Gate&quot;) and another at Pearl Street, the &quot;Water Gate.&quot; The wall and its fortifications were eventually removed in 1699—it had outlived its usefulness because the city had grown well beyond the wall. A new City Hall was built at Wall and Nassau in 1700 using the stones from the bastions as materials for the foundation.

Slavery had been introduced to Manhattan in 1626, but it was not until December 13, 1711, that the New York City Common Council made a market at the foot of Wall Street the city&#x27;s first official slave market for the sale and rental of enslaved Black people and Indians. The market operated from 1711 to 1762 at the corner of Wall and Pearl Streets, and consisted of a wooden structure with a roof and open sides, although walls may have been added over the years; it could hold approximately 50 people. New York&#x27;s municipal authorities directly benefited from the sale of slaves by implementing taxes on every person who was bought and sold there.

In these early days, local merchants and traders would gather at disparate spots to buy and sell shares and bonds, and over time divided themselves into two classes—auctioneers and dealers. In the late 18th century, there was a buttonwood tree at the foot of Wall Street under which traders and speculators would gather to trade securities. The benefit was being in proximity to each other. In 1792, traders formalized their association with the Buttonwood Agreement which was the origin of the New York Stock Exchange. The idea of the agreement was to make the market more &quot;structured&quot; and &quot;without the manipulative auctions&quot;, with a commission structure. Persons signing the agreement agreed to charge each other a standard commission rate; persons not signing could still participate but would be charged a higher commission for dealing.

In 1789, Wall Street was the scene of the United States&#x27; first presidential inauguration when George Washington took the oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall on April 30, 1789. This was also the location of the passing of the Bill of Rights. Alexander Hamilton, who was the first Treasury secretary and &quot;architect of the early United States financial system&quot;, is buried in the cemetery of Trinity Church, as is Robert Fulton, famed for his steamboats.

===19th century===
In the first few decades, both residences and businesses occupied the area, but increasingly, business predominated. &quot;There are old stories of people&#x27;s houses being surrounded by the clamor of business and trade and the owners complaining that they can&#x27;t get anything done,&quot; according to a historian named Burrows. The opening of the Erie Canal in the early 19th century meant a huge boom in business for New York City, since it was the only major eastern seaport which had direct access by inland waterways to ports on the Great Lakes. Wall Street became the &quot;money capital of America&quot;.

Historian Charles R. Geisst suggested that there has constantly been a &quot;tug-of-war&quot; between business interests on Wall Street and authorities in Washington, D.C., the capital of the United States by then. Generally during the 19th century Wall Street developed its own &quot;unique personality and institutions&quot; with little outside interference.

In the 1840s and 1850s, most residents moved further uptown to Midtown Manhattan because of the increased business use at the lower tip of the island. The Civil War greatly expanded the northern economy, bringing greater prosperity to cities like New York which &quot;came into its own as the nation&#x27;s banking center&quot; connecting &quot;Old World capital and New World ambition&quot;, according to one account. J. P. Morgan created giant trusts and John D. Rockefeller&#x27;s Standard Oil moved to New York City. Between 1860 and 1920, the economy changed from &quot;agricultural to industrial to financial&quot; and New York maintained its leadership position despite these changes, according to historian Thomas Kessner. New York was second only to London as the world&#x27;s financial capital.

In 1884, Charles Dow began tracking stocks, initially beginning with 11 stocks, mostly railroads. He looked at average prices for these eleven. Some of the companies included in Dow&#x27;s original calculations were American Tobacco Company, General Electric, Laclede Gas Company, National Lead Company, Tennessee Coal &amp; Iron, and United States Leather Company. When the average &quot;peaks and troughs&quot; went up consistently, he deemed it a bull market condition; if averages dropped, it was a bear market. He added up prices, and divided by the number of stocks to get his Dow Jones average. Dow&#x27;s numbers were a &quot;convenient benchmark&quot; for analyzing the market and became an accepted way to look at the entire stock market. In 1889 the original stock report, &quot;Customers&#x27; Afternoon Letter&quot;, became &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;. Named in reference to the actual street, it became an influential international daily business newspaper published in New York City. After October 7, 1896, it began publishing Dow&#x27;s expanded list of stocks. A century later, there were 30 stocks in the average.

===20th century===
==== Early part ====
Business writer John Brooks in his book &quot;Once in Golconda&quot; considered the start of the 20th century period to have been Wall Street&#x27;s heyday. The address of 23 Wall Street, the headquarters of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, known as &quot;The Corner&quot;, was &quot;the precise center, geographical as well as metaphorical, of financial America and even of the financial world&quot;.

Wall Street has had changing relationships with government authorities. In 1913, for example, when authorities proposed a $4 stock transfer tax, stock clerks protested. At other times, city and state officials have taken steps through tax incentives to encourage financial firms to continue to do business in the city. A post office was built at 60 Wall Street in 1905. During the World War I years, occasionally there were fund-raising efforts for projects such as the National Guard.

On September 16, 1920, close to the corner of Wall and Broad Street, the busiest corner of the Financial District and across the offices of the Morgan Bank, a powerful bomb exploded. It killed 38 and seriously injured 143 people. The perpetrators were never identified or apprehended. The explosion did, however, help fuel the Red Scare that was underway at the time. A report from &quot;The New York Times&quot;:

The area was subjected to numerous threats; one bomb threat in 1921 led to detectives sealing off the area to &quot;prevent a repetition of the Wall Street bomb explosion&quot;.

====Regulation====

September 1929 was the peak of the stock market. October 3, 1929, was when the market started to slip, and it continued throughout the week of October 14.
In October 1929, renowned Yale economist Irving Fisher reassured worried investors that their &quot;money was safe&quot; on Wall Street. A few days later, on October 24, stock values plummeted. The stock market crash of 1929 ushered in the Great Depression, in which a quarter of working people were unemployed, with soup kitchens, mass foreclosures of farms, and falling prices. During this era, development of the Financial District stagnated, and Wall Street &quot;paid a heavy price&quot; and &quot;became something of a backwater in American life&quot;.

During the New Deal years, as well as the 1940s, there was much less focus on Wall Street and finance. The government clamped down on the practice of buying equities based only on credit, but these policies began to ease. From 1946 to 1947, stocks could not be purchased &quot;on margin&quot;, meaning that an investor had to pay 100% of a stock&#x27;s cost without taking on any loans. However, this margin requirement was reduced four times before 1960, each time stimulating a mini-rally and boosting volume, and when the Federal Reserve reduced the margin requirements from 90% to 70%. These changes made it somewhat easier for investors to buy stocks on credit. The growing national economy and prosperity led to a recovery during the 1960s, with some down years during the early 1970s in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. Trading volumes climbed; in 1967, according to &quot;Time Magazine&quot;, volume hit 7.5 million shares a day which caused a &quot;traffic jam&quot; of paper with &quot;batteries of clerks&quot; working overtime to &quot;clear transactions and update customer accounts&quot;.

In 1973, the financial community posted a collective loss of $245 million, which spurred temporary help from the government. Reforms were instituted; the Securities &amp; Exchange Commission eliminated fixed commissions, which forced &quot;brokers to compete freely with one another for investors&#x27; business&quot;. In 1975, the SEC threw out the NYSE&#x27;s &quot;Rule 394&quot; which had required that &quot;most stock transactions take place on the Big Board&#x27;s floor&quot;, in effect freeing up trading for electronic methods. In 1976, banks were allowed to buy and sell stocks, which provided more competition for stockbrokers. Reforms had the effect of lowering prices overall, making it easier for more people to participate in the stock market. Broker commissions for each stock sale lessened, but volume increased.

The Reagan years were marked by a renewed push for capitalism and business, with national efforts to de-regulate industries such as telecommunications and aviation. The economy resumed upward growth after a period in the early 1980s of languishing. A report in &quot;The New York Times&quot; described that the flushness of money and growth during these years had spawned a drug culture of sorts, with a rampant acceptance of cocaine use although the overall percent of actual users was most likely small. A reporter wrote:

In 1987, the stock market plunged, and, in the relatively brief recession following, the surrounding area lost 100,000 jobs according to one estimate. Since telecommunications costs were coming down, banks and brokerage firms could move away from the Financial District to more affordable locations. One of the firms looking to move away was the NYSE. In 1998, the NYSE and the city struck a $900 million deal which kept the NYSE from moving across the river to Jersey City; the deal was described as the &quot;largest in city history to prevent a corporation from leaving town&quot;.

===21st century===
In 2001, the &quot;Big Board&quot;, as some termed the NYSE, was described as the world&#x27;s &quot;largest and most prestigious stock market&quot;. When the World Trade Center was destroyed on September 11, 2001, the attacks &quot;crippled&quot; the communications network and destroyed many buildings in the Financial District, although the buildings on Wall Street itself saw only little physical damage. One estimate was that 45% of Wall Street&#x27;s &quot;best office space&quot; had been lost. The NYSE was determined to re-open on September 17, almost a week after the attack. During this time Rockefeller Group Business Center opened additional offices at 48 Wall Street. Still, after September 11, the financial services industry went through a downturn with a sizable drop in year-end bonuses of $6.5 billion, according to one estimate from a state comptroller&#x27;s office.

To guard against a vehicular bombing in the area, authorities built concrete barriers, and found ways over time to make them more aesthetically appealing by spending $5000 to $8000 apiece on bollards. Parts of Wall Street, as well as several other streets in the neighborhood, were blocked off by specially designed bollards:

&quot;The Guardian&quot; reporter Andrew Clark described the years of 2006 to 2010 as &quot;tumultuous&quot;, in which the heartland of America was &quot;mired in gloom&quot; with high unemployment around 9.6%, with average house prices falling from $230,000 in 2006 to $183,000, and foreboding increases in the national debt to $13.4 trillion, but that despite the setbacks, the American economy was once more &quot;bouncing back&quot;. What had happened during these heady years? Clark wrote:

The first months of 2008 was a particularly troublesome period which caused Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke to &quot;work holidays and weekends&quot; and which did an &quot;extraordinary series of moves&quot;. It bolstered U.S. banks and allowed Wall Street firms to borrow &quot;directly from the Fed&quot; through a vehicle called the Fed&#x27;s Discount Window, a sort of lender of last resort. These efforts were highly controversial at the time, but from the perspective of 2010, it appeared the Federal exertions had been the right decisions. 

By 2010, Wall Street firms, in Clark&#x27;s view, were &quot;getting back to their old selves as engine rooms of wealth, prosperity and excess&quot;. A report by Michael Stoler in &quot;The New York Sun&quot; described a &quot;phoenix-like resurrection&quot; of the area, with residential, commercial, retail and hotels booming in the &quot;third largest business district in the country&quot;. 

At the same time, the investment community was worried about proposed legal reforms, including the &quot;Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act&quot; which dealt with matters such as credit card rates and lending requirements. The NYSE closed two of its trading floors in a move towards transforming itself into an electronic exchange. Beginning in September 2011, demonstrators disenchanted with the financial system protested in parks and plazas around Wall Street.

On October 29, 2012, Wall Street was disrupted when New York and New Jersey were inundated by Hurricane Sandy. Its storm surge, a local record, caused massive street flooding nearby. The NYSE was closed for weather-related reasons, the first time since Hurricane Gloria in September 1985 and the first two-day weather-related shutdown since the Blizzard of 1888.

==Architecture==

Wall Street&#x27;s architecture is generally rooted in the Gilded Age. The older skyscrapers often were built with elaborate facades, which have not been common in corporate architecture for decades. There are numerous landmarks on Wall Street, some of which were erected as the headquarters of banks. These include:
* Federal Hall National Memorial (26 Wall Street), built in 1833–1842. The building, which previously housed the United States Custom House and then the Subtreasury, is now a national monument.
* 55 Wall Street, erected in 1836–1841 as the four-story Merchants Exchange, was turned into the United States Custom House in the late 19th century. An expansion in 1907–1910 turned it into the eight-story National City Bank Building.
* 14 Wall Street, a 32-story skyscraper with a 7-story stepped pyramid, built in 1910–1912 with an expansion in 1931–1933. It was originally the Bankers Trust Company Building.
* 23 Wall Street, a four-story headquarters built in 1914, was known as the &quot;House of Morgan&quot; and served for decades as the J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. bank&#x27;s headquarters and, by some accounts, was considered an important address in American finance. Cosmetic damage from the 1920 Wall Street bombing is still visible on the Wall Street side of this building.
* 48 Wall Street, a 32-story skyscraper built in 1927–1929 as the Bank of New York &amp; Trust Company Building.
* 40 Wall Street, a 71-story skyscraper built in 1929–1930 as the Bank of Manhattan Company Building; it later became the Trump Building.
* 1 Wall Street, a 50-story skyscraper built in 1929–1931 with an expansion in 1963–1965. It was previously known as the Irving Trust Company Building and the Bank of New York Building.
* 75 Wall Street, built in 1987. It was built to be the U.S. headquarters of Barclays although several firms leased space in the building after it opened. It was converted in 2006–2009 into a mixed-use building with condominiums and a hotel. 
* 60 Wall Street, built in 1988. It was formerly the J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. headquarters before becoming the U.S. headquarters of Deutsche Bank. It is the last remaining major investment bank headquarters on Wall Street.

Another key anchor for the area is the New York Stock Exchange Building at the corner of Broad Street. It houses the New York Stock Exchange, which is by far the world&#x27;s largest stock exchange per market capitalization of its listed companies, at US$28.5 trillion as of June 30, 2018. City authorities realize its importance, and believed that it has &quot;outgrown its neoclassical temple at the corner of Wall and Broad streets&quot;, and in 1998, offered substantial tax incentives to try to keep it in the Financial District. Plans to rebuild it were delayed by the September 11 attacks. The exchange still occupies the same site. The exchange is the locus for a large amount of technology and data. For example, to accommodate the three thousand people who work directly on the exchange floor requires 3,500 kilowatts of electricity, along with 8,000 phone circuits on the trading floor alone, and of fiber-optic cable below ground.

==Importance==
===As an economic engine===
====In the New York economy====
Finance professor Charles R. Geisst wrote that the exchange has become &quot;inextricably intertwined into New York&#x27;s economy&quot;. Wall Street pay, in terms of salaries and bonuses and taxes, is an important part of the economy of New York City, the tri-state metropolitan area, and the United States. Anchored by Wall Street, New York City has been called the world&#x27;s most economically powerful city and leading financial center. As such, a falloff in Wall Street&#x27;s economy could have &quot;wrenching effects on the local and regional economies&quot;. In 2008, after a downturn in the stock market, the decline meant $18 billion less in taxable income, with less money available for &quot;apartments, furniture, cars, clothing and services&quot;.

Estimates vary about the number and quality of financial jobs in the city. One estimate was that Wall Street firms employed close to 200,000 persons in 2008. Another estimate was that in 2007, the financial services industry which had a $70 billion profit became 22 percent of the city&#x27;s revenue. Another estimate (in 2006) was that the financial services industry makes up 9% of the city&#x27;s work force and 31% of the tax base. An additional estimate from 2007 by Steve Malanga of the Manhattan Institute was that the securities industry accounts for 4.7 percent of the jobs in New York City but 20.7 percent of its wages, and he estimated there were 175,000 securities-industries jobs in New York (both Wall Street area and midtown) paying an average of $350,000 annually. Between 1995 and 2005, the sector grew at an annual rate of about 6.6% annually, a respectable rate, but that other financial centers were growing faster. Another estimate, made in 2008, was that Wall Street provided a fourth of all personal income earned in the city, and 10% of New York City&#x27;s tax revenue. The city&#x27;s securities industry, enumerating 163,400 jobs in August 2013, continues to form the largest segment of the city&#x27;s financial sector and an important economic engine, accounting in 2012 for 5 percent of private sector jobs in New York City, 8.5 percent (US$3.8 billion) of the city&#x27;s tax revenue, and 22 percent of the city&#x27;s total wages, including an average salary of US$360,700.

The seven largest Wall Street firms in the 2000s were Bear Stearns, JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers. During the recession of 2008–10, many of these firms, including Lehman, went out of business or were bought up at firesale prices by other financial firms. In 2008, Lehman filed for bankruptcy, Bear Stearns was bought by JPMorgan Chase forced by the U.S. government, and Merrill Lynch was bought by Bank of America in a similar shot-gun wedding. These failures marked a catastrophic downsizing of Wall Street as the financial industry goes through restructuring and change. Since New York&#x27;s financial industry provides almost one-fourth of all income produced in the city, and accounts for 10% of the city&#x27;s tax revenues and 20% of the state&#x27;s, the downturn has had huge repercussions for government treasuries. New York&#x27;s mayor Michael Bloomberg reportedly over a four-year period dangled over $100 million in tax incentives to persuade Goldman Sachs to build a 43-story headquarters in the Financial District near the destroyed World Trade Center site. In 2009, things looked somewhat gloomy, with one analysis by the Boston Consulting Group suggesting that 65,000 jobs had been permanently lost because of the downturn. But there were signs that Manhattan property prices were rebounding with price rises of 9% annually in 2010, and bonuses were being paid once more, with average bonuses over $124,000 in 2010.

====Versus Midtown Manhattan====
A requirement of the New York Stock Exchange was that brokerage firms had to have offices &quot;clustered around Wall Street&quot; so clerks could deliver physical paper copies of stock certificates each week. There were some indications that midtown had been becoming the locus of financial services dealings even by 1911. But as technology progressed, in the middle and later decades of the 20th century, computers and telecommunications replaced paper notifications, meaning that the close proximity requirement could be bypassed in more situations. Many financial firms found that they could move to Midtown Manhattan, only away, and still operate effectively. For example, the former investment firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette was described as a &quot;Wall Street firm&quot; but had its headquarters on Park Avenue in Midtown. A report described the migration from Wall Street:

Nevertheless, a key magnet for the Wall Street remains the New York Stock Exchange Building. Some &quot;old guard&quot; firms such as Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch (bought by Bank of America in 2009), have remained &quot;fiercely loyal to the Financial District&quot; location, and new ones such as Deutsche Bank have chosen office space in the district. So-called &quot;face-to-face&quot; trading between buyers and sellers remains a &quot;cornerstone&quot; of the NYSE, with a benefit of having all of a deal&#x27;s players close at hand, including investment bankers, lawyers, and accountants.

====In the New Jersey economy====

After Wall Street firms started to expand westward in the 1980s into New Jersey, the direct economic impacts of Wall Street activities have gone beyond New York City. The employment in the financial services industry, mostly in the &quot;back office&quot; roles, has become an important part of New Jersey&#x27;s economy. In 2009, the Wall Street employment wages were paid in the amount of almost $18.5 billion in the state. The industry contributed $39.4 billion or 8.4 percent to the New Jersey&#x27;s gross domestic product in the same year. The most significant area with Wall Street employment is in Jersey City. In 2008, the &quot;Wall Street West&quot; employment contributed to one third of the private sector jobs in Jersey City. Within the Financial Service cluster, there were three major sectors: more than 60 percent were in the securities industry; 20 percent were in banking; and 8 percent in insurance.

Additionally, New Jersey has become the main technology infrastructure to support the Wall Street operations. A substantial amount of securities traded in the United States are executed in New Jersey as the data centers of electronic trading in the U.S. equity market for all major stock exchanges are located in North and Central Jersey. A significant amount of securities clearing and settlement workforce is also in the state. This includes the majority of the workforce of Depository Trust Company, the primary U.S. securities depository; and the Depository Trust &amp; Clearing Corporation, the parent company of National Securities Clearing Corporation, the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation and Emerging Markets Clearing Corporation. Having a direct tie to Wall Street employment can be problematic for New Jersey, however. The state lost 7.9 percent of its employment base from 2007 to 2010 in the financial services sector in the fallout of the subprime mortgage crisis.

====Competing financial centers====
Of the street&#x27;s importance as a financial center, &quot;New York Times&quot; analyst Daniel Gross wrote:

An example is the alternative trading platform known as BATS, based in Kansas City, which came &quot;out of nowhere to gain a 9 percent share in the market for trading United States stocks&quot;. The firm has computers in the U.S. state of New Jersey, and only two salespeople in New York City; the remaining 33 employees work in a center in Kansas.

===In the public imagination===
====As a financial symbol====
Wall Street in a conceptual sense represents financial and economic power. To Americans, it can sometimes represent elitism and power politics, and its role has been a source of controversy throughout the nation&#x27;s history, particularly beginning around the Gilded Age period in the late 19th century. Wall Street became the symbol of a country and economic system that many Americans see as having developed through trade, capitalism, and innovation.

The term &quot;Wall Street&quot; has become a metonym for the financial markets of the United States as a whole, the American financial services industry, or New York–based financial interests. Wall Street has become synonymous with financial interests, often used negatively. During the subprime mortgage crisis from 2007 to 2010, Wall Street financing was blamed as one of the causes, although most commentators blame an interplay of factors. The U.S. government with the Troubled Asset Relief Program bailed out the banks and financial backers with billions of taxpayer dollars, but the bailout was often criticized as politically motivated, and was criticized by journalists as well as the public. Analyst Robert Kuttner in the &quot;Huffington Post&quot; criticized the bailout as helping large Wall Street firms such as Citigroup while neglecting to help smaller community development banks such as Chicago&#x27;s ShoreBank. One writer in the &quot;Huffington Post&quot; looked at FBI statistics on robbery, fraud, and crime and concluded that Wall Street was the &quot;most dangerous neighborhood in the United States&quot; if one factored in the $50 billion fraud perpetrated by Bernie Madoff.

When large firms such as Enron, WorldCom, and Global Crossing were found guilty of fraud, Wall Street was often blamed, even though these firms had headquarters around the nation and not in Wall Street. Many complained that the resulting Sarbanes-Oxley legislation dampened the business climate with regulations that were &quot;overly burdensome&quot;. Interest groups seeking favor with Washington lawmakers, such as car dealers, have often sought to portray their interests as allied with &quot;Main Street&quot; rather than &quot;Wall Street&quot;, although analyst Peter Overby on &quot;National Public Radio&quot; suggested that car dealers have written over $250 billion in consumer loans and have real ties with &quot;Wall Street&quot;.

When the United States Treasury bailed out large financial firms, to ostensibly halt a downward spiral in the nation&#x27;s economy, there was tremendous negative political fallout, particularly when reports came out that monies supposed to be used to ease credit restrictions were being used to pay bonuses to highly paid employees. Analyst William D. Cohan argued that it was &quot;obscene&quot; how Wall Street reaped &quot;massive profits and bonuses in 2009&quot; after being saved by &quot;trillions of dollars of American taxpayers&#x27; treasure&quot; despite Wall Street&#x27;s &quot;greed and irresponsible risk-taking&quot;. &quot;Washington Post&quot; reporter Suzanne McGee called for Wall Street to make a sort of public apology to the nation, and expressed dismay that people such as Goldman Sachs chief executive Lloyd Blankfein hadn&#x27;t expressed contrition despite being sued by the SEC in 2009. McGee wrote that &quot;Bankers aren&#x27;t the sole culprits, but their too-glib denials of responsibility and the occasional vague and waffling expression of regret don&#x27;t go far enough to deflect anger.&quot;
But chief banking analyst at Goldman Sachs, Richard Ramsden, is &quot;unapologetic&quot; and sees &quot;banks as the dynamos that power the rest of the economy&quot;. Ramsden believes &quot;risk-taking is vital&quot; and said in 2010:

Others in the financial industry believe that they have been unfairly castigated by the public and by politicians. For example, Anthony Scaramucci reportedly told President Barack Obama in 2010 that he felt like a piñata, &quot;whacked with a stick&quot; by &quot;hostile politicians&quot;. The financial misdeeds of various figures throughout American history sometimes casts a dark shadow on financial investing as a whole, and include names such as William Duer, Jim Fisk and Jay Gould (the latter two believed to have been involved with an effort to collapse the U.S. gold market in 1869) as well as modern figures such as Bernard Madoff who &quot;bilked billions from investors&quot;.

In addition, images of Wall Street and its figures have loomed large. The 1987 Oliver Stone film &quot;Wall Street&quot; created the iconic figure of Gordon Gekko who used the phrase &quot;greed is good&quot;, which caught on in the cultural parlance. Gekko is reportedly based on multiple real-life individuals on Wall Street, including corporate raider Carl Icahn, disgraced stock trader Ivan Boesky, and investor Michael Ovitz. In 2009, Stone commented how the film had had an unexpected cultural influence, not causing them to turn away from corporate greed, but causing many young people to choose Wall Street careers because of the film. A reporter repeated other lines from the film: &quot;I&#x27;m talking about liquid. Rich enough to have your own jet. Rich enough not to waste time. Fifty, a hundred million dollars, Buddy. A player.&quot; Wall Street firms have, however, also contributed to projects such as Habitat for Humanity, as well as done food programs in Haiti, trauma centers in Sudan, and rescue boats during floods in Bangladesh.

====In popular culture====

* Herman Melville&#x27;s classic short story &quot;Bartleby, the Scrivener&quot; (first published in 1853 and republished in revised edition in 1856) is subtitled &quot;A Story of Wall Street&quot; and portrays the alienating forces at work within the confines of Wall Street.
* Many events of Tom Wolfe&#x27;s 1987 novel &quot;The Bonfire of the Vanities&quot; center on Wall Street and its culture.
* The film &quot;Wall Street&quot; (1987) and its sequel &quot;Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps&quot; (2010) exemplify many popular conceptions of Wall Street as a center of shady corporate dealings and insider trading.
* In the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe, the Ferengi are said to make regular pilgrimages to Wall Street, which they worship as a holy site of commerce and business.
* On January 26, 2000, the band Rage Against the Machine filmed the music video for &quot;Sleep Now in the Fire&quot; on Wall Street, which was directed by Michael Moore. The New York Stock Exchange closed early that day, at 2:52 p.m.
* In the 2012 film &quot;The Dark Knight Rises&quot;, Bane attacks the Gotham City Stock Exchange. Scenes were filmed in and around the New York Stock Exchange, with the J.P. Morgan Building at Wall Street and Broad Street standing in for the Exchange.
* The 2013 film &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; is a dark comedy about Jordan Belfort, a New York stockbroker who ran Stratton Oakmont, a firm from Lake Success, New York, that engaged in securities fraud and corruption on Wall Street from 1987 to 1998.

====Personalities associated with the street====
Many people associated with Wall Street have become famous; although in most cases their reputations are limited to members of the stock brokerage and banking communities, others have gained national and international fame. For some, like hedge fund manager Ray Dalio, their fame is due to skillful investment strategies, financing, reporting, legal or regulatory activities, while others such as Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken and Bernie Madoff are remembered for their notable failures or scandal.

==Transportation==

With Wall Street being historically a commuter destination, a plethora of transportation infrastructure has been developed to serve it. Pier 11 near Wall Street&#x27;s eastern end is a busy terminal for New York Waterway, NYC Ferry, New York Water Taxi, and SeaStreak. The Downtown Manhattan Heliport also serves Wall Street.

There are three New York City Subway stations under Wall Street:
* Wall Street station at William Street ()
* Wall Street station at Broadway ()
* Broad Street station at Broad Street, with an entrance at Wall Street ()

No bus route runs on Wall Street. The two routes intersecting are the on Water Street and the downtown on Broadway. 

From 1934 to the mid-1980s, Wall Street Skyport served as a seaplane base that was primarily used by suburban commuters.

==See also==

* Main Street
* K Street (Washington, D.C.) 
* American business history
* Dow Jones Industrial Average
* Economy of New York City
* List of Financial Districts
* Wall Street Historic District (Manhattan)

==References==
===Notes===
===Other sources===

* Atwood, Albert W. and Erickson, Erling A. &quot;Morgan, John Pierpont, (April 17, 1837 – March 31, 1913),&quot; in &quot;Dictionary of American Biography, Volume 7&quot; (1934)
* Caplan, Sheri J. &quot;Petticoats and Pinstripes: Portraits of Women in Wall Street&#x27;s History&quot;. Praeger, 2013. 
* Carosso, Vincent P. &quot;The Morgans: Private International Bankers, 1854–1913.&quot; Harvard University Press, 1987. 888 pp. 
* Carosso, Vincent P. &quot;Investment Banking in America: A History&quot; Harvard University Press (1970)
* Chernow, Ron. &quot;The House of Morgan: An American Banking Dynasty and the Rise of Modern Finance&quot;, (2001) 
* Fraser, Steve. &quot;Every Man a Speculator: A History of Wall Street in American Life&quot; HarperCollins (2005)
* Geisst, Charles R. &quot;Wall Street: A History from Its Beginnings to the Fall of Enron.&quot; Oxford University Press, 2004. online edition 
* Jaffe, Stephen H. &amp; Lautin, Jessica. &quot;Capital of Capital: Money, Banking, and Power in New York City, 1784–2012&quot; (2014)
* Moody, John. &quot;The Masters of Capital: A Chronicle of Wall Street&quot; Yale University Press, (1921) online edition
* Morris, Charles R. &quot;The Tycoons: How Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller, Jay Gould, and J. P. Morgan Invented the American Supereconomy&quot; (2005) 
* Perkins, Edwin J. &quot;Wall Street to Main Street: Charles Merrill and Middle-class Investors&quot; (1999)
* Sobel, Robert. &quot;The Big Board: A History of the New York Stock Market&quot; (1962)
* Sobel, Robert. &quot;The Great Bull Market: Wall Street in the 1920s&quot; (1968)
* Sobel, Robert. &quot;Inside Wall Street: Continuity &amp; Change in the Financial District&quot; (1977)
* Strouse, Jean. &quot;Morgan: American Financier.&quot; Random House, 1999. 796 pp. 
* Finkelman, Paul. &quot;Encyclopedia of African American History 1896 to the present.&quot; Oxford University Press Inc, (2009)
* Kindleberger, Charles. &quot;The world in Depression 1929–1939.&quot; Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, (1973)
* Gordon, John Steele. &quot;The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000&quot;. Scribner, (1999)
==External links==

* New York Songlines: Wall Street, a virtual walking tour</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="0" end="11" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="31" end="49" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="53" end="68" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="72" end="85" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348006" start="101" end="111" title="city block" label="city block"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="121" end="129" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106669" start="146" end="158" title="South Street (Manhattan)" label="South Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="167" end="177" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="237" end="244" title="Metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q208697" start="253" end="269" title="financial market" label="financial market"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611650" start="308" end="344" title="Financial services in the United States" label="American financial services industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319025" start="492" end="499" title="fintech" label="fintech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="504" end="520" title="financial center" label="financial center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="558" end="563" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="633" end="646" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289824" start="783" end="795" title="slave market" label="slave market"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="800" end="823" title="Security (finance)" label="securities trading site"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="903" end="915" title="Federal Hall" label="Federal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326897" start="1140" end="1157" title="early skyscrapers" label="early skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="1195" end="1209" title="40 Wall Street" label="40 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="1279" end="1285" title="New York City Subway" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303352" start="1299" end="1314" title="Passenger terminal (maritime)" label="ferry terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="1353" end="1376" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="1395" end="1417" title="List of stock exchanges" label="largest stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="1427" end="1448" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q115860" start="1465" end="1497" title="Federal Reserve Bank of New York" label="Federal Reserve Bank of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="1569" end="1578" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q120233" start="1663" end="1691" title="New York Mercantile Exchange" label="New York Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q846626" start="1746" end="1759" title="NYSE American" label="NYSE American"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="1979" end="1992" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2157" end="2166" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153839" start="2186" end="2212" title="conquest of New Netherland" label="conquest of New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789018" start="2548" end="2561" title="Thomas Dongan, 2nd Earl of Limerick" label="Thomas Dongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="2923" end="2930" title="Walloons" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356321" start="3055" end="3067" title="Pearl Street (Manhattan)" label="Pearl Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="3145" end="3169" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q161536" start="3171" end="3187" title="Peter Stuyvesant" label="Peter Stuyvesant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151913" start="3215" end="3230" title="First Anglo-Dutch War" label="Anglo-Dutch war"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3351" end="3362" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3376" end="3385" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804303" start="3428" end="3445" title="Harlem Ship Canal" label="Harlem Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q90685" start="3495" end="3503" title="palisade" label="palisade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="3688" end="3700" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="Black slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="4419" end="4435" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="4553" end="4575" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q120866407" start="4631" end="4637" title="Reconquest of New Netherland" label="retook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="4658" end="4679" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649425" start="4944" end="4958" title="Hanover Square (Manhattan)" label="Hanover Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="5096" end="5104" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q633264" start="5242" end="5250" title="Fort Amsterdam" label="old fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597808" start="5548" end="5554" title="Nassau Street (Manhattan)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933136" start="5632" end="5659" title="History of slavery in New York (state)" label="Slavery had been introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q122452268" start="5832" end="5844" title="Slave markets and slave jails in the United States" label="slave market"/>
<link wikidata="Q157739" start="6519" end="6529" title="American sycamore" label="buttonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331589" start="6737" end="6757" title="Buttonwood Agreement" label="Buttonwood Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="6786" end="6809" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="7252" end="7269" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="7312" end="7324" title="Federal Hall" label="Federal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="7393" end="7407" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="7409" end="7427" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q866896" start="7566" end="7580" title="Trinity Church (Manhattan)" label="Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="7588" end="7601" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="7617" end="7626" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="8003" end="8013" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="8193" end="8204" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8423" end="8439" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="8693" end="8710" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8785" end="8794" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="9049" end="9061" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="9087" end="9106" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="9114" end="9126" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9389" end="9395" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q472182" start="9445" end="9456" title="Charles Dow" label="Charles Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q467075" start="9652" end="9676" title="American Tobacco Company" label="American Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="9678" end="9694" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981024" start="9696" end="9715" title="Laclede Gas Company" label="Laclede Gas Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954692" start="9717" end="9738" title="National Lead Company" label="National Lead Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700040" start="9740" end="9765" title="Tennessee Coal &amp;amp; Iron" label="Tennessee Coal &amp;amp; Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890702" start="9771" end="9800" title="United States Leather Company" label="United States Leather Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="9886" end="9897" title="bull market" label="bull market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="9939" end="9950" title="Bear Market" label="bear market"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="10019" end="10036" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones average"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="10171" end="10183" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="10279" end="10302" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223379" start="10633" end="10644" title="John Brooks (writer)" label="John Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815111" start="10789" end="10803" title="23 Wall Street" label="23 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="10825" end="10851" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J. P. Morgan &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135927" start="11146" end="11158" title="transfer tax" label="transfer tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q247887" start="11361" end="11375" title="60 Wall Street" label="60 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11396" end="11407" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="11485" end="11499" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613951" start="11557" end="11569" title="Broad Street (Manhattan)" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815111" start="11646" end="11657" title="23 Wall Street" label="Morgan Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q891873" start="11661" end="11683" title="Wall Street bombing" label="powerful bomb exploded"/>
<link wikidata="Q622454" start="11829" end="11838" title="Red Scare" label="Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11890" end="11908" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="12297" end="12301" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q312739" start="12312" end="12325" title="Irving Fisher" label="Irving Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="12469" end="12495" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="stock market crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12511" end="12527" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="12842" end="12850" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q625360" start="13108" end="13117" title="Margin (finance)" label="on margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="13356" end="13371" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="13646" end="13657" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13712" end="13725" title="Time Magazine" label="Time Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="14090" end="14126" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities &amp;amp; Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="14286" end="14290" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="NYSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182927" start="14562" end="14573" title="stockbroker" label="stockbroker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="14772" end="14784" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan years"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="14819" end="14829" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="14834" end="14842" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="14900" end="14918" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="14923" end="14931" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15035" end="15053" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389669" start="15142" end="15154" title="drug culture" label="drug culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="15194" end="15201" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160117" start="15503" end="15517" title="brokerage firm" label="brokerage firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="15755" end="15766" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="16057" end="16089" title="Collapse of the World Trade Center" label="World Trade Center was destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="16093" end="16111" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204312" start="16501" end="16534" title="Rockefeller Group Business Center" label="Rockefeller Group Business Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q630074" start="16564" end="16578" title="48 Wall Street" label="48 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148389" start="16978" end="16985" title="bollard" label="bollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="17120" end="17132" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="17686" end="17701" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q201795" start="17711" end="17723" title="Ben Bernanke" label="Ben Bernanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519334" start="18353" end="18369" title="The New York Sun" label="The New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180654" start="18937" end="18950" title="Occupy Wall Street" label="demonstrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="19135" end="19150" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045816" start="19294" end="19310" title="Hurricane Gloria" label="Hurricane Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170652" start="19386" end="19402" title="Blizzard of 1888" label="Blizzard of 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="19482" end="19492" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="19742" end="19772" title="Federal Hall National Memorial" label="Federal Hall National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889698" start="19853" end="19879" title="United States Custom House (New York City)" label="United States Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017327" start="19893" end="19904" title="Subtreasury" label="Subtreasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="19915" end="19932" title="national monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097619" start="19936" end="19950" title="55 Wall Street" label="55 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="20141" end="20159" title="Citibank" label="National City Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806742" start="20172" end="20186" title="14 Wall Street" label="14 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q806739" start="20315" end="20328" title="Bankers Trust" label="Bankers Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815111" start="20349" end="20363" title="23 Wall Street" label="23 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="20481" end="20502" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q891873" start="20638" end="20657" title="Wall Street bombing" label="Wall Street bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q630074" start="20719" end="20733" title="48 Wall Street" label="48 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="20832" end="20846" title="40 Wall Street" label="40 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="20896" end="20921" title="Manhattan Company" label="Bank of Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q209017" start="20970" end="20983" title="1 Wall Street" label="1 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074831" start="21089" end="21101" title="Irving Trust" label="Irving Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q111018600" start="21156" end="21170" title="75 Wall Street" label="75 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="21231" end="21239" title="Barclays" label="Barclays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="21346" end="21355" title="Mixed-use development" label="mixed-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="21370" end="21381" title="Condominium (living space)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q247887" start="21399" end="21413" title="60 Wall Street" label="60 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="21526" end="21539" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q24084031" start="21657" end="21689" title="New York Stock Exchange Building" label="New York Stock Exchange Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613951" start="21707" end="21719" title="Broad Street (Manhattan)" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="21735" end="21758" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="21780" end="21815" title="List of stock exchanges" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="21820" end="21841" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="21993" end="22005" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="22529" end="22546" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="22875" end="22888" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="22894" end="22921" title="Tri-State area (NY-NJ-CT)" label="tri-state metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="22931" end="22944" title="Economy of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="23062" end="23078" title="financial center" label="financial center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615017" start="23876" end="23889" title="Steven Malanga" label="Steve Malanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749265" start="23897" end="23916" title="Manhattan Institute" label="Manhattan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="24966" end="24978" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="24980" end="24994" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="24996" end="25005" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="25007" end="25020" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="25022" end="25036" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="25038" end="25051" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="25056" end="25071" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="25267" end="25279" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="25294" end="25308" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="25323" end="25338" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="25344" end="25357" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="25372" end="25387" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="25822" end="25839" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="25965" end="25977" title="headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="25985" end="26003" title="Financial District (Manhattan)" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q135635" start="26113" end="26136" title="Boston Consulting Group" label="Boston Consulting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="27046" end="27063" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295353" start="27150" end="27182" title="Donaldson, Lufkin &amp;amp; Jenrette" label="Donaldson, Lufkin &amp;amp; Jenrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="27259" end="27270" title="Park Avenue" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="27274" end="27281" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q24084031" start="27394" end="27426" title="New York Stock Exchange Building" label="New York Stock Exchange Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="27469" end="27482" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="27487" end="27500" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="27512" end="27527" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="27636" end="27649" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="27888" end="27906" title="Investment banking" label="investment bankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="27908" end="27914" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q326653" start="27921" end="27931" title="accountant" label="accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="28039" end="28049" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="28475" end="28497" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="28576" end="28587" title="Jersey City" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="28674" end="28688" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="28813" end="28832" title="Security (finance)" label="securities industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="28853" end="28857" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="28879" end="28888" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="29098" end="29109" title="data center" label="data center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9050707" start="29204" end="29209" title="North Jersey" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="29214" end="29228" title="Central Jersey" label="Central Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099549" start="29265" end="29273" title="Clearing (finance)" label="clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553237" start="29278" end="29288" title="Settlement (finance)" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077330" start="29422" end="29432" title="Depository bank" label="depository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191721" start="29442" end="29485" title="Depository Trust &amp;amp; Clearing Corporation" label="Depository Trust &amp;amp; Clearing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="29845" end="29869" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="subprime mortgage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29969" end="29983" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217357" start="29998" end="30010" title="Daniel Gross (journalist)" label="Daniel Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q795469" start="30075" end="30079" title="BATS Global Markets" label="BATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="30090" end="30101" title="Kansas City" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="30245" end="30255" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="30259" end="30269" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="30694" end="30704" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="30935" end="30942" title="metonym" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611650" start="31006" end="31042" title="Financial services in the United States" label="American financial services industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="31177" end="31201" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="subprime mortgage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097742" start="31363" end="31392" title="Troubled Asset Relief Program" label="Troubled Asset Relief Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435608" start="31599" end="31613" title="Robert Kuttner" label="Robert Kuttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="31627" end="31642" title="Huffington Post" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279879" start="31809" end="31818" title="ShoreBank" label="ShoreBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="31876" end="31879" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="32055" end="32060" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="32076" end="32089" title="Bernie Madoff" label="Bernie Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="32117" end="32122" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="32124" end="32132" title="WorldCom" label="WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q597681" start="32138" end="32153" title="Global Crossing" label="Global Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="32330" end="32344" title="Sarbanes-Oxley" label="Sarbanes-Oxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="32480" end="32500" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington lawmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="32683" end="32704" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="32846" end="32868" title="United States Treasury" label="United States Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007450" start="33179" end="33195" title="William D. Cohan" label="William D. Cohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="33479" end="33494" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="33636" end="33649" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359151" start="33666" end="33681" title="Lloyd Blankfein" label="Lloyd Blankfein"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="33741" end="33744" title="Securities and Exchange Commission" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="33998" end="34011" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773428" start="34333" end="34351" title="Anthony Scaramucci" label="Anthony Scaramucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="34378" end="34390" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q673051" start="34419" end="34425" title="piñata" label="piñata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691329" start="34657" end="34669" title="William Duer (Continental Congressman)" label="William Duer"/>
<link wikidata="Q323705" start="34671" end="34679" title="James Fisk (financier)" label="Jim Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q709595" start="34684" end="34693" title="Jay Gould" label="Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="34832" end="34846" title="Bernard Madoff" label="Bernard Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="34975" end="34987" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332348" start="34999" end="35010" title="Wall Street (1987 film)" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584003" start="35046" end="35058" title="Gordon Gekko" label="Gordon Gekko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="35816" end="35836" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="35871" end="35876" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="35896" end="35901" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="35937" end="35947" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="35980" end="35995" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q780407" start="36029" end="36052" title="Bartleby, the Scrivener" label="Bartleby, the Scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="36272" end="36281" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401130" start="36306" end="36333" title="The Bonfire of the Vanities" label="The Bonfire of the Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q332348" start="36396" end="36407" title="Wall Street (1987 film)" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36442" end="36473" title="Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps" label="Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="36581" end="36596" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="36613" end="36622" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q830038" start="36643" end="36650" title="Ferengi" label="Ferengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="36796" end="36820" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742438" start="36854" end="36875" title="Sleep Now in the Fire" label="Sleep Now in the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="36920" end="36933" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q189330" start="37024" end="37045" title="The Dark Knight Rises" label="The Dark Knight Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q158940" start="37053" end="37057" title="Bane (comics)" label="Bane"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="37070" end="37081" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="37274" end="37297" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="37309" end="37320" title="black comedy" label="dark comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183674" start="37327" end="37341" title="Jordan Belfort" label="Jordan Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622274" start="37374" end="37390" title="Stratton Oakmont" label="Stratton Oakmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q302894" start="37404" end="37426" title="Lake Success, New York" label="Lake Success, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q160117" start="37691" end="37706" title="brokerage firm" label="stock brokerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297378" start="37818" end="37827" title="Ray Dalio" label="Ray Dalio"/>
<link wikidata="Q704997" start="37957" end="37968" title="Ivan Boesky" label="Ivan Boesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q918376" start="37970" end="37984" title="Michael Milken" label="Michael Milken"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="37989" end="38002" title="Bernie Madoff" label="Bernie Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191690" start="38214" end="38221" title="Pier 11/Wall Street" label="Pier 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956135" start="38281" end="38298" title="New York Waterway" label="New York Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q26987418" start="38300" end="38309" title="NYC Ferry" label="NYC Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856246" start="38311" end="38330" title="New York Water Taxi" label="New York Water Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439820" start="38336" end="38345" title="SeaStreak" label="SeaStreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575175" start="38351" end="38378" title="Downtown Manhattan Heliport" label="Downtown Manhattan Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="38421" end="38441" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611956" start="38472" end="38491" title="Wall Street station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="Wall Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018910" start="38495" end="38509" title="William Street (Manhattan)" label="William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183775" start="38515" end="38534" title="Wall Street station (IRT Lexington Avenue Line)" label="Wall Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="38538" end="38546" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q768988" start="38552" end="38572" title="Broad Street station (BMT Nassau Street Line)" label="Broad Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613951" start="38576" end="38588" title="Broad Street (Manhattan)" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q119775423" start="38772" end="38791" title="Wall Street Skyport" label="Wall Street Skyport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006835" start="38882" end="38893" title="Main Street" label="Main Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6342989" start="38896" end="38923" title="K Street (Washington, D.C.)" label="K Street (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040617" start="38927" end="38952" title="American business history" label="American business history"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="38955" end="38983" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059873" start="38986" end="39010" title="Economy of New York City" label="Economy of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244996" start="39013" end="39040" title="List of financial districts" label="List of Financial Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962614" start="39043" end="39084" title="Wall Street Historic District (Manhattan)" label="Wall Street Historic District (Manhattan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24302" start="39676" end="39688" title="Ron Chernow" label="Chernow, Ron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349905" start="40582" end="40595" title="Robert Sobel" label="Sobel, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171550" start="40862" end="40875" title="Jean Strouse" label="Strouse, Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113079" start="41214" end="41233" title="John Steele Gordon" label="Gordon, John Steele"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41241" end="41313" title="The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000" label="The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37275" wikidata="Q206833" url="?curid=37275" title="Denise Richards">
<text>Denise Lee Richards (born February 17, 1971) is an American actress, television personality, and model. She rose to prominence with roles in the science fiction film &quot;Starship Troopers&quot; (1997), the erotic thriller film &quot;Wild Things&quot; (1998), and the James Bond film &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; (1999). Her performance as Bond girl Christmas Jones, though criticized, granted Richards her mainstream breakthrough.

Richards has appeared in films such as the comedies &quot;Drop Dead Gorgeous&quot; (1999), &quot;Undercover Brother&quot; (2002), &quot;Scary Movie 3&quot; (2003), &quot;Love Actually&quot; (2003), and &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot; (2012), the slasher &quot;Valentine&quot; (2001), the dramas &quot;Edmond&quot; (2005) and &quot;Jolene&quot; (2008), and the musical thriller &quot;American Satan&quot; (2017). Her television roles include the sitcom &quot;Blue Mountain State&quot; (2010–2011), the mystery thriller series &quot;Twisted&quot; (2013–2014), and the soap opera &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; (2019–2022).

Richards has starred on reality series such as &quot;Denise Richards: It&#x27;s Complicated&quot; (2008–2009), &quot;The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills&quot; (2019–2020, 2023–2024), and the upcoming series &quot;Denise Richards &amp; Her Wild Things&quot; (2025). In 2011, she published a memoir, &quot;The Real Girl Next Door&quot;, which became a &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller.

==Early life==
Richards was born in Downers Grove, Illinois, to Joni (née Braden), a coffee shop owner, and Irv Richards, a telephone engineer. Her mother died of cancer in November 2007. She has said that her ancestry includes German and French heritage. Richards has a younger sister, Michelle. She grew up in both Downers Grove and Mokena, Illinois. As a child, she was the &quot;only girl on the baseball team&quot;.

When Richards was 15 years old, her family moved to Oceanside, California. In 1989, she graduated from El Camino High School. She was voted best looking in her high school yearbook. Richards was raised Catholic. After her high school graduation, she began working as a model and traveled to cities such as Paris, New York, and Tokyo to do photo shoots and commercials.

==Career==

=== 1990s ===
Richards began her career as a teenager in modeling and appeared in print ads for Bonne Bell cosmetics in 1991. She also appeared on the cover of &quot;Teen&quot; magazine; in an instructional video, &quot;Modeling: What It Takes&quot;; and later in Max Factor&#x27;s Premiere 2K advertising campaign.

In the 1990s, Richards appeared in several films and television shows such as &quot;Loaded Weapon 1&quot; (1993), &quot;Tammy and the T-Rex&quot; (1994), &quot;Lookin&#x27; Italian&quot; (1994), and guest starring in episodes of &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot;, &quot;Married... with Children&quot; and &quot;Doogie Howser, M.D.&quot; In 1993, she portrayed Ben Affleck&#x27;s character&#x27;s girlfriend named Jodi Collins, in the short-lived drama series &quot;Against the Grain.&quot; Richards made guest appearances in several television shows, including &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; (1992), &quot;Seinfeld&quot; (1993), &quot;Lois &amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman&quot; (1994), and a guest-arc in &quot;Melrose Place&quot; (1996). In 1995, Richards appeared in a made-for-TV movie &quot;In the Blink of an Eye&quot;, alongside Veronica Hamel and Mimi Rogers.

Her first starring role in a wide theatrical release was &quot;Starship Troopers&quot; in 1997 for which Richards was nominated for the Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Female Newcomer. The film grossed a total of $121.2 million worldwide. In 2012, &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; ranked the film at number 20 on its list of the 100 Best Films of the 1990s. She followed this with a role in the erotic thriller film &quot;Wild Things&quot; (1998) alongside Kevin Bacon, Matt Dillon and Neve Campbell. &quot;Variety&quot; praised Richards&#x27;s transition from good-girl-type roles to manipulative villainess and the review continued to include her as part of &quot;an ensemble that appears to be enjoying the challenge of offbeat roles and unusual material. There&#x27;s not a wrong note struck by the game group of players.&quot; In 2016, &quot;Glamour&quot; praised the film&#x27;s female characters by describing Richards and Neve Campbell as &quot;two of the most well-rounded, fascinating, and exciting characters to ever grace the screen.&quot;

Richards was cast as the nuclear physicist Christmas Jones in the James Bond film &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; (1999). Though she considered her role &quot;brainy&quot;, &quot;athletic&quot;, and having depth of character, she was criticized as not credible in the role. Her outfit, which often comprised a low-cut tank top and tight shorts, elicited unfavorable comments. Richards stated that a lot of viewers &quot;made fun of&quot; the character&#x27;s attire but that &quot;These Bond girls are so outrageous and if I did really look like a scientist, the Bond fans would have been disappointed.&quot; Richards was nominated for the Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favourite Actress – Action, for the film. Later that year, Richards starred alongside Kirsten Dunst in the beauty pageant satire, &quot;Drop Dead Gorgeous&quot;. The film has gained new fans with time and is regarded as a cult film. Richards, playing a spoiled princess, was praised for her performance by &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; for being &quot;as rightly nasty as she is pretty&quot;.

=== 2000s ===
In 2001, she guest-starred in &quot;Friends&quot; as Ross and Monica Geller&#x27;s cousin, Cassie Geller in the episode &quot;The One with Ross and Monica&#x27;s Cousin&quot;. Later that year, she appeared in four episodes of &quot;Spin City&quot; as Jennifer Duncan, a love interest of Charlie Sheen&#x27;s character. She starred as Sheen&#x27;s character&#x27;s ex-girlfriend two years later in two episodes of &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot;. Richards appeared in numerous films such as &quot;Valentine&quot; (2001), &quot;Good Advice&quot; (2001), &quot;Undercover Brother&quot; (2002), &quot;The Third Wheel&quot; (2002) and &quot;You Stupid Man&quot; (2002). She played Annie Logan in the horror comedy film &quot;Scary Movie 3&quot; (2003), which was a commercial success and grossed $220 million worldwide. The film&#x27;s plot significantly parodies the films &quot;The Ring&quot;, &quot;Signs&quot;, &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot;. Richards made a brief appearance in the British romantic comedy &quot;Love Actually&quot; (2003)&quot;.&quot; In 2004, she appeared in two films, &quot;Whore&quot; and &quot;Elvis Has Left the Building&quot;.

In 2005, Richards had a lead role as publicist Jolene in the short-lived UPN soap opera &quot;Sex, Love &amp; Secrets&quot;. The series focused on rich young adults living in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, and their secrets involving sex and love. She starred in the ensemble drama film &quot;Edmond&quot; (2005) alongside William H. Macy and Mena Suvari. In 2008, she reunited with her &quot;Wild Things&quot; on-screen mother Theresa Russell in the drama film &quot;Jolene&quot; (2008)&quot;.&quot; Her reality show &quot;Denise Richards: It&#x27;s Complicated&quot; debuted on E! on May 26, 2008. The series followed the daily lives of Richards, her daughters Sam and Lola, and her married younger sister Michelle and father Irv. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; published a review and wrote that &quot;&quot;It&#x27;s Complicated&quot; is one of those &quot;celebs, they&#x27;re just like us!&quot; shows in which we&#x27;re expected to enjoy watching a famous pampered person doing things we don&#x27;t want to do either.&quot; The series concluded after two seasons on July 26, 2009.

Richards appeared on the 8th season of dance competition television series &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;, paired with Maksim Chmerkovskiy. She was the second contestant eliminated on March 24, 2009. She landed the role of Autumn Bliss in the romantic comedy film &quot;Deep in the Valley&quot; (2009) alongside Kim Kardashian and Chris Pratt.

=== 2010s ===
In 2010, she joined Paramount Network&#x27;s sitcom &quot;Blue Mountain State&quot; as Debra Simon&quot;.&quot; The series is about a fictional university, Blue Mountain State, and its football team, the &quot;Mountain Goats&quot;. It portrays certain aspects of American university life, including American football, sex, drinking, and partying. In February 2012, it was reported that &quot;Blue Mountain State&quot; would not be renewed for a fourth season. Over the years, due in large part to being streamable on Netflix, the series has developed a cult following. In July 2011, Richards published a memoir &quot;The Real Girl Next Door&quot;, a New York Times Best Seller. Richards decided to write a book because she &quot;wanted to do something inspirational for other people going through challenging times,&quot; she told &quot;HuffPost&quot; in 2011. In September 2011, Richards reportedly turned down $100,000 to appear as an ex-girlfriend at Charlie Sheen&#x27;s funeral in &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot;. A month later, she began filming a guest spot for an episode for the sixth season of NBC comedy series &quot;30 Rock&quot;. Richards was part of TV Guide Network&#x27;s show, &quot;Hollywood Moms&#x27; Club&quot;, which aired in November 2011.

Richards played Kate Needleman in the comedy film &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot; (2012), which grossed $67 million at the box office. &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot; was filmed in Atlanta in early 2012 and was released through 34th Street Films and Lionsgate. In 2012, Richards joined the cast of ABC Family&#x27;s mystery-thriller television series &quot;Twisted&quot;. In 2015, she appeared in two films, &quot;Operation: Neighborhood Watch!&quot; and &quot;Christmas Trade&quot;. In 2016, she made a guest appearance as herself in The CW&#x27;s &quot;Jane the Virgin&quot;, in the episode &quot;Chapter Fifty-One.&quot; She portrayed Kat Faust in the musical thriller film &quot;American Satan&quot; (2017), for which Richards was nominated for the Festival Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Feature Film at the Northeast Film Festival. Later that year, Richards portrayed Temple Hampton in an episode of Bravo&#x27;s comedy-drama series &quot;Girlfriends&#x27; Guide to Divorce&quot;. She starred in the supernatural horror film &quot;The Toybox&quot; (2018) opposite Mischa Barton. The film is about a family who go on a summer road trip in a used RV and get stranded in the desert by a supernatural force that is slowly killing them off. She portrayed Karen in the faith-based film &quot;The Prayer Box&quot; (2018), released on October 20, 2018.In August 2018, Richards announced that she would be joining the Bravo reality series, &quot;The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills&quot;, for the show&#x27;s ninth season, which premiered on February 12, 2019. &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; described her addition to the series by saying: &quot;She might be one of the most famous people to join the &quot;Housewives&quot; franchise, someone who was a legitimate household name before becoming a reality star. Now, that doesn&#x27;t always translate to on-screen gold, but it is a nice little coup for Bravo.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that Richards &quot;brought a refreshing and occasionally disarming dose of reality&quot; to the series. On May 31, 2019, &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; wrote that &quot;Richards&#x27;s appearance on the show is the best kind of surprise, one that reveals that a celebrity is not who we may have assumed them to be. She&#x27;s an extremely warm, loving parent, without a hint of narcissism or vapidity about her.&quot; Fox News called her &quot;an instant fan favorite&quot; when she joined the show in 2019.
In 2019, she joined the cast of CBS&#x27;s soap opera &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; as Shauna Fulton. &quot;Shauna is a fun-loving, hard-working single mother from Las Vegas who aspires to live life to its absolute fullest,&quot; executive producer and headwriter Bradley Bell told &quot;People&quot; magazine. In July 2019, it was announced that Richards had joined the cast of Fox Broadcasting&#x27;s comedy-drama television series &quot;BH90210&quot; in a guest role, playing a fictionalized version of herself. She portrayed overly-ambitious mother Candice in Lifetime television film &quot;The Secret Lives of Cheerleaders&quot;, released on September 2, 2019. &quot;I think the story&#x27;s about this girl that&#x27;s trying to fit in and makes some bad choices and then, knowing right from wrong, decided to make a better choice,&quot; Richards told &quot;Parade&quot;. On November 4, 2019, Richards appeared as a guest model on the game show &quot;The Price Is Right&quot;. Richards played Valerie in the Christmas film &quot;My Adventures with Santa&quot; (2019) opposite Patrick Muldoon. The film was released in limited theaters on November 15, 2019.

=== 2020s ===
Richards returned for &quot;The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills&quot;&#x27; tenth season, which premiered on April 15, 2020. On September 10, 2020, her representative confirmed that Richards is leaving the series after two seasons. In late 2020, Richards traveled to Spain to begin filming adventure drama series &quot;Glow &amp; Darkness&quot;, portraying the role of Countess of Champagne. In 2020, she appeared in five films: &quot;Money Plane, Switched, Reality Queen!, Alpha Code&quot; and &quot;Timecrafters: The Treasure of Pirate&#x27;s Cove.&quot; The heist film &quot;Money Plane&quot; was released to video-on-demand services on July 10, 2020, by Quiver Distribution. In &quot;Switched,&quot; released on September 4, 2020, Richards portrayed Victoria Sharp, the mother of a school bully. On August 28, 2021, she played Amanda in Lifetime&#x27;s thriller film &quot;Killer Cheer Mom&quot;. The film follows a high school junior named Riley, who moved to a new town with her dad and stepmom, Amanda (Richards).

On November 15, 2024, Fox announced that Richards is one of fifteen contestants to appear in the third season of reality quasi-military training television series &quot;Special Forces: World&#x27;s Toughest Test&quot;.

In March 2025, Richards will star and executive produce &quot;Denise Richards &amp; Her Wild Things&quot;, a reality television series focusing on her and her family for Bravo. The series was initially set to launch on E!.

== Other activities ==

=== Business ===
Richards launched her self-titled fragrance in spring 2012. In November 2019, Richards announced that she has developed a skincare line with CBme Beauty.

===Modeling===
During her career, Richards has been on the cover of numerous magazines, including &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; (Poland, Greece, US and Germany), &quot;Redbook&quot;, &quot;Details&quot;, &quot;Esquire&quot;, &quot;Self,&quot; &quot;Shape&quot;, &quot;GQ&quot;, &quot;Bella&quot; and &quot;Empire.&quot; In December 2004, she posed for a nude pictorial in &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine, five months after giving birth. Richards posed semi-nude for the July 2006 issue of &quot;Jane&quot; magazine to raise money for the Clothes Off Our Back Foundation. She has appeared in television commercials for Pepsi, Head &amp; Shoulders, Secret, J.C. Penney and Librero. Richards walked the runway at the &quot;Max Factor Salutes Hollywood&quot; fashion show on March 14, 2007, in Hollywood.

In 2010, Richards walked the runway for Ali Landry and Annie Kate Pons&#x27;s fashion line, Belle Parish&#x27;s fashion show. In 2012, Richards appeared in an infomercial for abdominal muscle toner &quot;The Flex Belt&quot; alongside Adrianne Curry, Lisa Rinna and Janet Evans. In 2013, she became the brand ambassador for Oro Gold Cosmetics. In 2017, she appeared in furniture brand Urban Home&#x27;s commercials and advertising campaigns. Richard has appeared in Blues Traveler&#x27;s music video for &quot;Canadian Rose&quot; and Snoop Dogg&#x27;s music video for &quot;Undercova Funk&quot;. In September 2019, she walked the runway for Kyle Richards&#x27;s and Shahida Clayton&#x27;s new clothing brand at New York Fashion Week.

=== Philanthropy ===

Outside of work, Richards dedicates much of her time to philanthropy. She has supported numerous charities, including Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Feeding America, Much Love Animal Rescue, Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, Best Friends Animal Society and Children&#x27;s Hospital Los Angeles. Richards has also appeared in the NOH8 Campaign and has spoken in support of gay marriage.

Richards has worked with Best Friends Animal Society on several projects, including its Pup My Ride program, which transports small dogs from high-kill animal shelters to other parts of the US where there is a greater demand for small dogs. She promoted Best Friends Animal Society&#x27;s Save Them All campaign in 2014. &quot;I&#x27;ve been involved with Best Friends Animal Society since 2009 and I&#x27;ve seen firsthand the differences they&#x27;ve made and the countless lives they&#x27;ve saved,&quot; Richards said. She has regularly appeared on &quot;Access Hollywood&quot;&#x27;s monthly pet segment showcasing shelter dogs rescued by Best Friends and available for adoption. While assisting with relief efforts in New York following Hurricane Sandy, she worked together with North Shore Animal League, and adopted a puppy from a Long Island shelter.

She has walked the runway for charity fashion shows, such as Susan G. Komen&#x27;s 8th Annual Fashion For The Cure, Clothes Off Your Back Benefit and The Heart Truth&#x27;s Red Dress Fall 2011 Collections. In January 2012, she launched her first collaboration with fashion subscription service ShoeDazzle to design the &quot;Eloise&quot; heel and raised over $15,000 for the Kidney Cancer Association. In December 2012, she designed two shoes for ShoeDazzle as part of their Celebrity Shoe Design Program for Charity. Profits from the shoe sales went to the Kidney Cancer Association. After Richards lost her mother to kidney cancer, she dedicated her time to raising awareness and helping the Kidney Cancer Association. In November 2015, Richards and her daughters spent Thanksgiving volunteering and serving food for homeless families.

In June 2018, she joined The Will Rogers Motion Picture Pioneers Foundation&#x27;s summer theatrical PSA campaign to benefit Brave Beginnings, which funds vital neonatal equipment to U.S. hospitals. Richards filmed a public service announcement that was played at movie theaters nationwide.

== Media image ==
Richards&#x27;s appearance has often been the subject of media attention. In 1999, she was ranked #9 in &quot;Maxim&quot;&#x27;s 50 Sexiest Women. In 2001, she was voted #2 in &quot;FHM&quot;&#x27;s 100 Sexiest Women, #5 in &quot;FHM&quot;&#x27;s 100 Sexiest Women and #19 in AskMen.com&#x27;s 50 Most Beautiful Women. She was named one of the &quot;100 Hottest Women of All-Time&quot; by &quot;Men&#x27;s Health&quot;. In 2002, Richards was ranked at number 21 in &quot;Stuff&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;102 Sexiest Women in the World.&quot; In 2011, &quot;Men&#x27;s Health&quot; ranked her at number 61 on their list of &quot;100 Hottest Women of All Time.&quot; &quot;Shape&quot; magazine ranked her at number 7 on their list of &quot;10 of Our Fave Bond Girls: Then and Now.&quot;

==Personal life==
Richards became engaged to actor Charlie Sheen on December 26, 2001, and they were married on June 15, 2002, at the estate of &quot;Spin City&quot; creator Gary David Goldberg. They have two children together. In March 2005, while pregnant with their second child, Richards filed for divorce from Sheen. She sought a restraining order against Sheen, alleging death threats against her. On April 19, 2006, Richards filed formal legal papers seeking a divorce from Sheen under the laws of the state of California. The divorce was finalized on November 30, 2006; Sheen was ordered to stay 300 feet away from his ex-wife and their daughters, except during supervised visits. In May 2010, Sheen surrendered legal custody of Sam and Lola to Richards. They previously had joint legal custody of their daughters. According to a source, Richards wanted sole legal custody, given Sheen&#x27;s &quot;marital turmoil, sobriety issues, and criminal problems&quot; and he did not fight it. Under their divorce agreement, she had primary physical custody and he had visitation rights.

By mid-2012, Richards and Sheen were on good terms, often spending time together with their children. In 2012, Sheen made a cameo appearance in her movie &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection,&quot; while Richards appeared in Sheen&#x27;s television series &quot;Anger Management&quot;. In a move supported by Sheen, in May 2013, Richards was awarded temporary custody of the twin sons born in 2009 to Sheen and his wife Brooke Mueller, after the children were removed from Mueller&#x27;s home by child protective services due to concerns over drug use.

In June 2011, Richards adopted a third daughter, Eloise Joni Richards, as a single parent. Her middle name honors Richards&#x27;s deceased mother. Richards adopted her at birth, following a two-year adoption process. Eloise has a rare chromosomal disorder, Chromosome 8, Monosomy 8p, which affects her speech. Richards has worked on learning sign language to communicate with her daughter.

In December 2017, Richards began dating Aaron Phypers before his divorce with Nicolette Sheridan was finalized. On September 8, 2018, Richards and Phypers married in Malibu, California. In May 2019, Richards announced that Phypers was adopting her youngest daughter, Eloise.

Richards joined OnlyFans as a content creator in June 2022, as a gesture of support for her daughter Sam, who had attracted criticism for launching her own account. She said that she believed &quot;the creators of [OnlyFans] really took the best of every platform of social media and put it into one site,&quot; because as a creator, &quot;you own your content. The other sites, they can sell your content.&quot; Richards earns a significant income via the site. Her friend, Tori Spelling, later admitted to subscribing with a pseudonymous account and spending over $400 on content and tips in two days.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
=== Music videos ===
== Bibliography ==
* Richards, Denise. &quot;The Real Girl Next Door.&quot; Gallery Books, 2011.

== Awards and nominations ==

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206833" start="0" end="19" title="Denise Richards" label="Denise Lee Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q478626" start="172" end="189" title="Starship Troopers (film)" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133610" start="235" end="246" title="Wild Things (film)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="269" end="279" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="291" end="314" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="348" end="357" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="358" end="373" title="Christmas Jones" label="Christmas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q698492" start="499" end="517" title="Drop Dead Gorgeous (film)" label="Drop Dead Gorgeous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093198" start="538" end="556" title="Undercover Brother" label="Undercover Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q635937" start="577" end="590" title="Scary Movie 3" label="Scary Movie 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="611" end="624" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235276" start="649" end="680" title="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection" label="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q693745" start="713" end="722" title="Valentine (film)" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436011" start="748" end="766" title="Edmond (film)" label="&amp;quot;Edmond&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269895" start="778" end="796" title="Jolene (film)" label="&amp;quot;Jolene&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905166" start="836" end="850" title="American Satan" label="American Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q885807" start="911" end="930" title="Blue Mountain State" label="Blue Mountain State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721463" start="984" end="991" title="Twisted (TV series)" label="Twisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="1036" end="1062" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="1107" end="1121" title="reality television" label="reality series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1136" end="1174" title="Denise Richards: It&amp;#x27;s Complicated" label="Denise Richards: It&amp;#x27;s Complicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759591" start="1200" end="1236" title="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" label="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555550" start="1297" end="1334" title="Denise Richards &amp;amp; Her Wild Things" label="Denise Richards &amp;amp; Her Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="1434" end="1472" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007011" start="1511" end="1534" title="Downers Grove, Illinois" label="Downers Grove, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="1560" end="1571" title="Coffeehouse" label="coffee shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359062" start="1810" end="1826" title="Mokena, Illinois" label="Mokena, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q488924" start="1949" end="1970" title="Oceanside, California" label="Oceanside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350881" start="2000" end="2021" title="El Camino High School (Oceanside, California)" label="El Camino High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089011" start="2069" end="2077" title="yearbook" label="yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2099" end="2107" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2203" end="2208" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2210" end="2218" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2224" end="2229" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942162" start="2375" end="2385" title="Bonne Bell" label="Bonne Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694271" start="2445" end="2449" title="Teen (magazine)" label="Teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="2543" end="2553" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761818" start="2573" end="2593" title="advertising campaign" label="advertising campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q922512" start="2680" end="2695" title="Loaded Weapon 1" label="Loaded Weapon 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467299" start="2716" end="2735" title="Tammy and the T-Rex" label="Tammy and the T-Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182643" start="2756" end="2776" title="Lookin&amp;#x27; Italian" label="Lookin&amp;#x27; Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026823" start="2831" end="2848" title="Saved by the Bell" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208647" start="2862" end="2886" title="Married... with Children" label="Married... with Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q937913" start="2903" end="2922" title="Doogie Howser, M.D." label="Doogie Howser, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q483118" start="2952" end="2963" title="Ben Affleck" label="Ben Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691076" start="3057" end="3074" title="Against the Grain (TV series)" label="Against the Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="3159" end="3179" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="Beverly Hills, 90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="3200" end="3208" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3229" end="3277" title="Lois &amp;amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" label="Lois &amp;amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q550238" start="3317" end="3330" title="Melrose Place" label="Melrose Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q272761" start="3441" end="3455" title="Veronica Hamel" label="Veronica Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q233054" start="3460" end="3471" title="Mimi Rogers" label="Mimi Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q478626" start="3537" end="3554" title="Starship Troopers (film)" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906822" start="3610" end="3641" title="Blockbuster Entertainment Award" label="Blockbuster Entertainment Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="3741" end="3755" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133610" start="3903" end="3914" title="Wild Things (film)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="3938" end="3949" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="3951" end="3962" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193482" start="3967" end="3980" title="Neve Campbell" label="Neve Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="3988" end="3995" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="4079" end="4089" title="villainess" label="villainess"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="4328" end="4335" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="4577" end="4592" title="Christmas Jones" label="Christmas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="4600" end="4610" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="4622" end="4645" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906822" start="5178" end="5209" title="Blockbuster Entertainment Awards" label="Blockbuster Entertainment Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="5300" end="5313" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q698492" start="5350" end="5368" title="Drop Dead Gorgeous (film)" label="Drop Dead Gorgeous"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="5436" end="5445" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="5526" end="5543" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="5658" end="5665" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q747424" start="5675" end="5679" title="Ross Geller" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q719866" start="5684" end="5697" title="Monica Geller" label="Monica Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q50403591" start="5748" end="5790" title="The One with Ross and Monica&amp;#x27;s Cousin" label="The One with Ross and Monica&amp;#x27;s Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="5854" end="5863" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q103939" start="5909" end="5922" title="Charlie Sheen" label="Charlie Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="6041" end="6059" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q693745" start="6117" end="6126" title="Valentine (movie)" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537484" start="6147" end="6158" title="Good Advice (film)" label="Good Advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093198" start="6179" end="6197" title="Undercover Brother" label="Undercover Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618511" start="6218" end="6233" title="The Third Wheel (film)" label="The Third Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q569467" start="6257" end="6271" title="You Stupid Man" label="You Stupid Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q635937" start="6341" end="6354" title="Scary Movie 3" label="Scary Movie 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q212804" start="6496" end="6504" title="The Ring (2002 film)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q22432" start="6518" end="6523" title="Signs (2002 film)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="6537" end="6556" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6604" end="6611" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="6634" end="6647" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531546" start="6716" end="6721" title="Whore (2004 film)" label="Whore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334320" start="6738" end="6765" title="Elvis Has Left the Building" label="Elvis Has Left the Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="6847" end="6850" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406564" start="6868" end="6891" title="Sex, Love &amp;amp; Secrets" label="Sex, Love &amp;amp; Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143552" start="6949" end="6973" title="Silver Lake, Los Angeles" label="Silver Lake, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436011" start="7062" end="7068" title="Edmond (film)" label="Edmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q224159" start="7092" end="7107" title="William H. Macy" label="William H. Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223303" start="7112" end="7123" title="Mena Suvari" label="Mena Suvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q253467" start="7197" end="7212" title="Theresa Russell" label="Theresa Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269895" start="7237" end="7243" title="Jolene (film)" label="Jolene"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7293" end="7331" title="Denise Richards: It&amp;#x27;s Complicated" label="Denise Richards: It&amp;#x27;s Complicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="7349" end="7351" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7508" end="7528" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215619" start="7885" end="7895" title="Dancing with the Stars (American season 8)" label="8th season"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="7905" end="7916" title="Reality competition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="7941" end="7963" title="Dancing with the Stars (American TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600142" start="7983" end="8002" title="Maksim Chmerkovskiy" label="Maksim Chmerkovskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005986" start="8134" end="8152" title="Deep in the Valley" label="Deep in the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q186304" start="8176" end="8190" title="Kim Kardashian" label="Kim Kardashian"/>
<link wikidata="Q503706" start="8195" end="8206" title="Chris Pratt" label="Chris Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="8243" end="8260" title="Paramount Network" label="Paramount Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q885807" start="8281" end="8300" title="Blue Mountain State" label="Blue Mountain State"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="8408" end="8416" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="8740" end="8747" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="8776" end="8790" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="8873" end="8899" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="New York Times Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="9060" end="9068" title="HuffPost" label="HuffPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="9215" end="9233" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9326" end="9329" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="9350" end="9357" title="30 Rock" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q74836076" start="9386" end="9402" title="TV Guide Network" label="TV Guide Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235276" start="9542" end="9573" title="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection" label="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9691" end="9698" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860124" start="9738" end="9755" title="Tyler Perry Studios" label="34th Street Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="9760" end="9769" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="9808" end="9818" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721463" start="9867" end="9874" title="Twisted (TV series)" label="Twisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="10045" end="10051" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913682" start="10065" end="10080" title="Jane the Virgin" label="Jane the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905166" start="10193" end="10207" title="American Satan" label="American Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152936" start="10331" end="10354" title="Northeast Film Festival" label="Northeast Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="10424" end="10429" title="Bravo (American TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994143" start="10463" end="10497" title="Girlfriends&amp;#x27; Guide to Divorce" label="Girlfriends&amp;#x27; Guide to Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q50649913" start="10555" end="10565" title="The Toybox" label="The Toybox"/>
<link wikidata="Q207458" start="10588" end="10601" title="Mischa Barton" label="Mischa Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731660" start="10810" end="10824" title="The Prayer Box" label="The Prayer Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="10933" end="10938" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759591" start="10961" end="10997" title="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" label="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="11083" end="11094" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="11412" end="11417" title="Bravo (American TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11431" end="11449" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="11590" end="11605" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="11878" end="11886" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="12000" end="12003" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="12028" end="12054" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="12141" end="12150" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="12265" end="12271" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="12356" end="12372" title="Fox Broadcasting" label="Fox Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q64210970" start="12417" end="12424" title="BH90210" label="BH90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="12541" end="12549" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189399" start="12841" end="12847" title="Parade (magazine)" label="Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231565" start="12934" end="12952" title="The Price Is Right (American game show)" label="The Price Is Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q984378" start="13059" end="13074" title="Patrick Muldoon" label="Patrick Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="13423" end="13428" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q98549048" start="13591" end="13602" title="Money Plane" label="Money Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q496523" start="13717" end="13727" title="heist film" label="heist film"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616434" start="13814" end="13833" title="Quiver Distribution" label="Quiver Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="14200" end="14203" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14347" end="14389" title="Special Forces: World&amp;#x27;s Toughest Test" label="Special Forces: World&amp;#x27;s Toughest Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555550" start="14460" end="14497" title="Denise Richards &amp;amp; Her Wild Things" label="Denise Richards &amp;amp; Her Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="14568" end="14573" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="14617" end="14619" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="14922" end="14934" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="14981" end="14988" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626407" start="15002" end="15009" title="Details (magazine)" label="Details"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="15023" end="15030" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11001035" start="15044" end="15048" title="Self (magazine)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q327416" start="15062" end="15067" title="Shape (magazine)" label="Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="15081" end="15083" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883342" start="15097" end="15102" title="Bella (British magazine)" label="Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="15119" end="15125" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="15167" end="15171" title="nude" label="nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="15172" end="15181" title="pictorial" label="pictorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="15191" end="15198" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151058" start="15305" end="15309" title="Jane (magazine)" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="15428" end="15433" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q555900" start="15435" end="15455" title="Head &amp;amp; Shoulders" label="Head &amp;amp; Shoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443934" start="15457" end="15463" title="Secret (deodorant brand)" label="Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="15465" end="15476" title="J. C. Penney" label="J.C. Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="15530" end="15540" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="15600" end="15609" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q261953" start="15652" end="15662" title="Ali Landry" label="Ali Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="15771" end="15782" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q234423" start="15846" end="15860" title="Adrianne Curry" label="Adrianne Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q239576" start="15862" end="15872" title="Lisa Rinna" label="Lisa Rinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q49286" start="15877" end="15888" title="Janet Evans" label="Janet Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q886047" start="16077" end="16091" title="Blues Traveler" label="Blues Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="16145" end="16155" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19802960" start="16185" end="16199" title="Undercova Funk (Give Up the Funk)" label="Undercova Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853959" start="16252" end="16265" title="Kyle Richards" label="Kyle Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113829" start="16322" end="16343" title="New York Fashion Week" label="New York Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229989" start="16486" end="16521" title="Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption" label="Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992396" start="16523" end="16565" title="Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation" label="Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006911" start="16567" end="16582" title="Feeding America" label="Feeding America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896668" start="16654" end="16681" title="Best Friends Animal Society" label="Best Friends Animal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072787" start="16686" end="16722" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Los Angeles" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935348" start="16758" end="16771" title="NOH8 Campaign" label="NOH8 Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="16801" end="16813" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896668" start="16841" end="16868" title="Best Friends Animal Society" label="Best Friends Animal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411287" start="16968" end="16982" title="animal shelter" label="animal shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200690" start="17375" end="17391" title="Access Hollywood" label="Access Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="17559" end="17574" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056662" start="17601" end="17626" title="North Shore Animal League America" label="North Shore Animal League"/>
<link wikidata="Q246898" start="17738" end="17752" title="Susan G. Komen for the Cure" label="Susan G. Komen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739165" start="17827" end="17842" title="The Heart Truth" label="The Heart Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499960" start="17971" end="17981" title="ShoeDazzle" label="ShoeDazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="18449" end="18461" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="18936" end="18941" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="19008" end="19011" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921999" start="19073" end="19090" title="FHM&amp;#x27;s 100 Sexiest Women (UK)" label="100 Sexiest Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866663" start="19102" end="19112" title="AskMen.com" label="AskMen.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q384671" start="19221" end="19238" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Health (magazine)" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771851" start="19297" end="19302" title="Stuff (magazine)" label="Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q327416" start="19498" end="19503" title="Shape (magazine)" label="Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q103939" start="19664" end="19677" title="Charlie Sheen" label="Charlie Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="19763" end="19772" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q932508" start="19787" end="19806" title="Gary David Goldberg" label="Gary David Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235276" start="20862" end="20893" title="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection" label="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q537952" start="20965" end="20981" title="Anger Management (TV series)" label="Anger Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115348" start="21123" end="21137" title="Brooke Mueller" label="Brooke Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097775" start="21199" end="21224" title="child protective services" label="child protective services"/>
<link wikidata="Q572848" start="21514" end="21526" title="Chromosome 8" label="Chromosome 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q229440" start="21726" end="21744" title="Nicolette Sheridan" label="Nicolette Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="21814" end="21832" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61707579" start="21940" end="21948" title="OnlyFans" label="OnlyFans"/>
<link wikidata="Q229050" start="22399" end="22412" title="Tori Spelling" label="Tori Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456994" start="22670" end="22683" title="Gallery Books" label="Gallery Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37277" wikidata="Q1499814" url="?curid=37277" title="Rubidium–strontium dating">
<text>The rubidium–strontium dating method (Rb–Sr) is a radiometric dating technique, used by scientists to determine the age of rocks and minerals from their content of specific isotopes of rubidium (87Rb) and strontium (87Sr, 86Sr). One of the two naturally occurring isotopes of rubidium, 87Rb, decays to 87Sr with a half-life of 49.23 billion years. The radiogenic daughter, 87Sr, produced in this decay process is the only one of the four naturally occurring strontium isotopes that was not produced exclusively by stellar nucleosynthesis predating the formation of the Solar System. Over time, decay of 87Rb increases the amount of radiogenic 87Sr while the amount of other Sr isotopes remains unchanged.

The ratio 87Sr/86Sr in a mineral sample can be accurately measured using a mass spectrometer. If the amount of Sr and Rb isotopes in the sample when it formed can be determined, the age can be calculated from the increase in 87Sr/86Sr. Different minerals that crystallized from the same silicic melt will all have the same initial 87Sr/86Sr as the parent melt. However, because Rb substitutes for K in minerals and these minerals have different K/Ca ratios, the minerals will have had different starting Rb/Sr ratios, and the final 87Sr/86Sr ratio will not have increased as much in the minerals poorer in Rb. Typically, Rb/Sr increases in the order plagioclase, hornblende, K-feldspar, biotite, muscovite. Therefore, given sufficient time for significant production (ingrowth) of radiogenic 87Sr, measured 87Sr/86Sr values will be different in the minerals, increasing in the same order. Comparison of different minerals in a rock sample thus allows scientists to infer the original 87Sr/86Sr ratio and determine the age of the rock.

In addition, Rb is a highly incompatible element that, during partial melting of the mantle, prefers to join the magmatic melt rather than remain in mantle minerals. As a result, Rb is enriched in crustal rocks relative to the mantle, and 87Sr/86Sr is higher for crust rock than mantle rock. This allows scientists to distinguish magma produced by melting of crust rock from magma produced by melting of mantle rock, even if subsequent magma differentiation produces similar overall chemistry. Scientists can also estimate from 87Sr/86Sr when crust rock was first formed from magma extracted from the mantle, even if the rock is subsequently metamorphosed or even melted and recrystallized. This provides clues to the age of the Earth&#x27;s continents.

Development of this process was aided by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann, who later went on to discover nuclear fission in December 1938.

==Example==

For example, consider the case of an igneous rock such as a granite that contains several major Sr-bearing minerals including plagioclase feldspar, K-feldspar, hornblende, biotite, and muscovite. Each of these minerals has a different initial rubidium/strontium ratio dependent on their potassium content, the concentration of Rb and K in the melt and the temperature at which the minerals formed. Rubidium substitutes for potassium within the lattice of minerals at a rate proportional to its concentration within the melt.

The ideal scenario according to Bowen&#x27;s reaction series would see a granite melt begin crystallizing a cumulate assemblage of plagioclase and hornblende (i.e.; tonalite or diorite), which is low in K (and hence Rb) but high in Sr (as this substitutes for Ca), which proportionally enriches the melt in K and Rb. This then causes orthoclase and biotite, both K rich minerals into which Rb can substitute, to precipitate. The resulting Rb–Sr ratios and Rb and Sr abundances of both the whole rocks and their component minerals will be markedly different. This, thus, allows a different rate of radiogenic Sr to evolve in the separate rocks and their component minerals as time progresses.

==Calculating the age==

The age of a sample is determined by analysing several minerals within multiple subsamples from different parts of the original sample. The 87Sr/86Sr ratio for each subsample is plotted against its 87Rb/86Sr ratio on a graph called an isochron. If these form a straight line then the subsamples are consistent, and the age probably reliable. The slope of the line dictates the age of the sample.

Given the universal law of radioactive decay and the following rubidium beta decay: &lt;chem&gt;^{87}_{37}Rb -&gt;[{\beta^-}]~^{87}_{38}Sr ~+e^-\ + \bar{\nu}_e&lt;/chem&gt;, we obtain the expression which describes the growth of strontium-87 from the decay of rubidium-87:formula_1&lt;chem&gt;\lambda&lt;/chem&gt; being the decay constant of rubidium. Furthermore, we consider the number of &lt;chem&gt;^{86}_{38}Sr&lt;/chem&gt; as a constant, since it is stable and not radiogenic. Hence, formula_2is the isochron equation. After measurements of Rubidum and Strontium concentration in the mineral we can easily determine the age, the t value, of the sample.

== Sources of error ==
Rb–Sr dating relies on correctly measuring the Rb–Sr ratio of a mineral or whole rock sample, plus deriving an accurate 87Sr/86Sr ratio for the mineral or whole rock sample.

Several preconditions must be satisfied before a Rb–Sr date can be considered as representing the time of emplacement or formation of a rock.
* The system must have remained closed to Rb and Sr diffusion from the time at which the rock formed or fell below the closure temperature (generally considered to be 650 °C);
* The minerals which are taken from a rock to construct an isochron must have formed in chemical equilibrium with one another or in the case of sediments, be deposited at the same time;
* The rock must not have undergone any metasomatism which could have disturbed the Rb–Sr system either thermally or chemically

One of the major drawbacks (and, conversely, the most important use) of utilizing Rb and Sr to derive a radiometric date is their relative mobility, especially in hydrothermal fluids. Rb and Sr are relatively mobile alkaline elements and as such are relatively easily moved around by the hot, often carbonated hydrothermal fluids present during metamorphism or magmatism.

Conversely, these fluids may metasomatically alter a rock, introducing new Rb and Sr into the rock (generally during potassic alteration or calcic (albitisation) alteration. Rb–Sr can then be used on the altered mineralogy to date the time of this alteration, but not the date at which the rock formed.

Thus, assigning &quot;age significance&quot; to a result requires studying the metasomatic and thermal history of the rock, any metamorphic events, and any evidence of fluid movement. A Rb–Sr date which is at variance with other geochronometers may not be useless, it may be providing data on an event which is not representing the age of formation of the rock.

==Uses==
===Geochronology===
The Rb–Sr dating method has been used extensively in dating terrestrial and lunar rocks, and meteorites. If the initial amount of Sr is known or can be extrapolated, the age can be determined by measurement of the Rb and Sr concentrations and the 87Sr/86Sr ratio. The dates indicate the true age of the minerals only if the rocks have not been subsequently altered.

The important concept in isotopic tracing is that Sr derived from any mineral through weathering reactions will have the same 87Sr/86Sr as the mineral. Although this is a potential source of error for terrestrial rocks, it is irrelevant for lunar rocks and meteorites, as there are no chemical weathering reactions in those environments.

===Isotope geochemistry===
Initial 87Sr/86Sr ratios are a useful tool in archaeology, forensics and paleontology because the 87Sr/86Sr of a skeleton, sea shell or indeed a clay artefact is directly comparable to the source rocks upon which it was formed or upon which the organism lived. Thus, by measuring the current-day 87Sr/86Sr ratio (and often the 143Nd–144Nd ratios as well) the geological fingerprint of an object or skeleton can be measured, allowing migration patterns to be determined.

===Strontium isotope stratigraphy===
Strontium isotope stratigraphy relies on recognised variations in the 87Sr/86Sr ratio of seawater over time. The application of Sr isotope stratigraphy is generally limited to carbonate samples for which the Sr seawater curve is well defined. This is well known for the Cenozoic time-scale but, due to poorer preservation of carbonate sequences in the Mesozoic and earlier, it is not completely understood for older sequences. In older sequences diagenetic alteration combined with greater uncertainties in estimating absolute ages due to lack of overlap between other geochronometers (for example U–Th) leads to greater uncertainties in the exact shape of the Sr isotope seawater curve.

==See also==
* Radiometric dating

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
*CSIRO Petroleum – Global Sr Seawater Isotope Evolution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1499814" start="4" end="29" title="Rubidium–strontium dating" label="rubidium–strontium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="88" end="97" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="116" end="119" title="Radiometric dating" label="age"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="185" end="193" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="205" end="214" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="314" end="323" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750292" start="352" end="362" title="Radiogenic nuclide" label="radiogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="1151" end="1152" title="Potassium" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663708" start="1770" end="1790" title="incompatible element" label="incompatible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="2072" end="2077" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q498203" start="2178" end="2199" title="magma differentiation" label="magma differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="2545" end="2552" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="2554" end="2563" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60859" start="2568" end="2584" title="Fritz Strassmann" label="Fritz Strassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="2616" end="2631" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="2701" end="2713" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="2724" end="2731" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="2802" end="2810" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21813710" start="2812" end="2822" title="orthoclase" label="K-feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057300" start="2824" end="2834" title="hornblende" label="hornblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="2836" end="2843" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="2849" end="2858" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q848628" start="3222" end="3250" title="Bowen&amp;#x27;s reaction series" label="Bowen&amp;#x27;s reaction series"/>
<link wikidata="Q576788" start="3298" end="3306" title="cumulate rocks" label="cumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q650147" start="3355" end="3363" title="tonalite" label="tonalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q187408" start="3367" end="3374" title="diorite" label="diorite"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4143" end="4151" title=":File:Isochron.jpg" label="isochron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="4315" end="4349" title="Radioactive decay" label="universal law of radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="4377" end="4387" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q574576" start="4629" end="4643" title="Exponential decay" label="decay constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404917" start="5424" end="5443" title="closure temperature" label="closure temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q223488" start="5540" end="5548" title="isochron dating" label="isochron"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="5706" end="5718" title="metasomatism" label="metasomatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="5958" end="5970" title="hydrothermal" label="hydrothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="6094" end="6103" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="6316" end="6328" title="albite" label="albitisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="7643" end="7654" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="7656" end="7665" title="Forensic science" label="forensics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="7670" end="7682" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q668593" start="8703" end="8707" title="uranium–thorium dating" label="U–Th"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="8809" end="8827" title="Radiometric dating" label="Radiometric dating"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37278" wikidata="Q185239" url="?curid=37278" title="Galago">
<text>Galagos , also known as bush babies or nagapies (meaning &quot;night monkeys&quot; in Afrikaans), are small nocturnal primates native to continental, sub-Sahara Africa, and make up the family Galagidae (also sometimes called Galagonidae). They are considered a sister group of the Lorisidae.

According to some accounts, the name &quot;bush baby&quot; comes from either the animal&#x27;s cries or its appearance. The Ghanaian name &quot;aposor&quot; is given to them because of their firm grip on branches.

In both variety and abundance, the bush babies are the most successful strepsirrhine primates in Africa, according to the African Wildlife Foundation.

== Taxonomic classification and phylogeny ==
Galagos are currently grouped into six genera. &quot;Euoticus&quot; is a basal sister taxon to all the other galagids. The &#x27;dwarf&#x27; galagids recently grouped under the genus &quot;Galagoides&quot; have been found, based on genetic data, and supported by analysis of vocalisations and morphology, to actually consist of two clades, which are not sister taxa, in eastern and western/central Africa (separated by the rift valley). The latter are basal to all the other non-&quot;Euoticus&quot; galagids. The former group is sister to &quot;Galago&quot; and has been elevated to full genus status as &quot;Paragalago&quot;. The genera &quot;Otolemur&quot; and &quot;Sciurocheirus&quot; are also sisters.

Family Galagidae - galagos, or bushbabies
* Genus &quot;Euoticus&quot;, needle-clawed bushbabies
**Southern needle-clawed bushbaby, &quot;E. elegantulus&quot;
**Northern needle-clawed bushbaby, &quot;E. pallidus&quot;
*Genus &quot;Galago&quot;, lesser galagos, or lesser bushbabies
**&quot;Galago senegalensis&quot; group
***Somali bushbaby, &quot;G. gallarum&quot;
***Mohol bushbaby, &quot;G. moholi&quot;
***Senegal bushbaby, &quot;G. senegalensis&quot;
**&quot;Galago matschiei&quot; group
***Dusky bushbaby, &quot;G. matschiei&quot;
*Genus &quot;Galagoides&quot;, western dwarf galagos
**Prince Demidoff&#x27;s bushbaby, &quot;Gs. demidovii&quot;
**Angolan dwarf galago, &quot;Gs. kumbirensis&quot;
**Thomas&#x27;s bushbaby, &quot;Gs. thomasi&quot;
*Genus †&quot;Laetolia&quot;
**†&quot;Laetolia sadimanensis&quot;
*Genus &quot;Otolemur&quot;, greater galagos, or thick-tailed bushbabies
**Brown greater galago, &quot;O. crassicaudatus&quot;
**Northern greater galago, &quot;O. garnettii&quot;
**Silvery greater galago, &quot;O. monteiri&quot;
*Genus &quot;Paragalago&quot;, eastern dwarf galagos
**&quot;Paragalago zanzibaricus&quot; group
***Kenya coast galago, &quot;P. cocos&quot;
***Grant&#x27;s bushbaby, &quot;P. granti&quot;
***Zanzibar bushbaby, &quot;P. zanzibaricus&quot;
**&quot;Paragalago orinus&quot; group
***Uluguru bushbaby, &quot;P. orinus&quot;
***Rondo bushbaby, &quot;P. rondoensis&quot;
*Genus &quot;Sciurocheirus&quot;, squirrel galagos
**Bioko Allen&#x27;s bushbaby, &quot;S. alleni&quot;
**Cross River bushbaby, &quot;S. cameronensis&quot;
**Gabon bushbaby, &quot;S. gabonensis&quot;
**Makandé squirrel galago, &quot;S. makandensis&quot;

The phylogeny of Galagidae according to Masters &quot;et al.&quot;, 2017 is as follows:

== Characteristics ==

Galagos have large eyes, allowing them good night vision, in addition to other characteristics, like strong hind limbs, acute hearing, and long tails that help them balance. Their ears are bat-like and allow them to track insects in the dark. They catch insects on the ground or snatch them out of the air. They are fast, agile creatures. As they bound through the thick bushes, they fold their delicate ears back to protect them. They also fold them during rest. They have nails on most of their digits, except for the second toe of the hind foot, which bears a grooming claw. Their diet is a mixture of insects and other small animals, fruit, and tree gums. They have pectinate (comb-like) incisors called toothcombs, and the dental formula: They are active at night.

After a gestation period of 110–133 days, young galagos are born with half-closed eyes and are initially unable to move about independently. After a few (6–8) days, the mother carries the infant in her mouth, and places it on branches while feeding. Females may have singles, twins, or triplets, and may become very aggressive. Each newborn weighs less than . For the first three days, the infant is kept in constant contact with the mother. The young are fed by the mother for six weeks and can feed themselves at two months. The young grow rapidly, often causing the mother to walk awkwardly as she transports them.

Females maintain a territory shared with their offspring, though males leave their mothers&#x27; territories after puberty. Thus social groups consist of closely related females and their young. Adult males maintain separate territories, which overlap with those of the female social groups; generally, one adult male mates with all the females in an area. Males that have not established such territories sometimes form small bachelor groups.

Bush-babies are sometimes kept as pets, although this is not advised because, like many other nonhuman primates, they are a likely sources of diseases that can cross species barriers. Equally, they are very likely to attract attention from customs officials on importation into many countries. Reports from veterinary and zoological sources indicate captive lifetimes of 12.0 to 16.5 years, suggesting a natural lifetime over a decade.

Galagos communicate by calling to each other and by marking their paths with urine. By following the scent of urine, they can land on exactly the same branch every time. Each species produces a unique set of loud calls that have different functions. One function is to identify individuals as members of a particular species across distances. Scientists can recognize all known galago species by their &#x27;loud calls&#x27;. At the end of the night, group members use a special rallying call and gather to sleep in a nest of leaves, a group of branches, or a hole in a tree.

=== Jumping ===

Galagos have remarkable jumping abilities. The highest reliably reported jump for a galago is . According to a study published by the Royal Society, given the body mass of each animal and the fact that the leg muscles amount to about 25% of this, galago&#x27;s jumping muscles should perform six to nine times better than those of a frog. This is thought to be due to elastic energy storage in tendons of the lower leg, allowing far greater jumps than would otherwise be possible for an animal of their size. In mid-flight, they tuck their arms and legs close to the body; they bring them out at the last second to grab a branch. In a series of leaps, a galago can cover ten yards in mere seconds. The tail, which is longer than the length of the head and body combined, assists the legs in powering the jumps. They may also hop like a kangaroo or simply run or walk on four legs. Such strong, complicated, and coordinated movements are due to the rostral half of the posterior parietal cortex that is linked to the motor, premotor, and visuomotor areas of the frontal cortex.

== Behaviour ==

Generally, the social structure of the galago has components of both social life and solitary life. This can be seen in their play. They swing off branches or climb high and throw things. Social play includes play fights, play grooming, and following-play. During following-play, two galagos jump sporadically and chase each other through the trees. The older galagos in a group prefer to rest alone, while younger ones are in constant contact with one another. This is observed in the &quot;Galago garnetti&quot; species. Mothers often leave infants alone for long periods and do not try to stop them from leaving. On the other hand, the offspring tries to stay close to, and initiate social interactions with the mother.

Grooming is a very important part of galago daily life. They often groom themselves before, during, and after rest. Social grooming is done more often by males in the group. Females often reject attempts by males to groom them.

== Relationship with humans ==

The name “bush baby” also refers to a myth that is used to scare children to stay indoors at night. Their baby-like cry is most likely the basis of the myth, about a powerful animal that can kidnap humans. It is also said that wild bush babies/galagos in Nigeria can never be found dead on plain ground. Rather, they make a nest of sticks, leaves or branches to die in. Endangerment of the species in sub-Saharan Africa has made this claim difficult to verify.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="0" end="7" title="Galago" label="Galagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="24" end="35" title="Galago" label="bush babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="86" end="95" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="108" end="117" title="Nocturnality" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="118" end="125" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="150" end="160" title="sub-Sahara" label="sub-Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="161" end="167" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="185" end="191" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="192" end="201" title="Galago" label="Galagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="225" end="236" title="Galago" label="Galagonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="261" end="273" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q368623" start="281" end="290" title="Lorisidae" label="Lorisidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="579" end="592" title="strepsirrhine" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689959" start="630" end="657" title="African Wildlife Foundation" label="African Wildlife Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193762" start="758" end="766" title="Euoticus" label="Euoticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="778" end="783" title="basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="784" end="796" title="sister taxon" label="sister taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094482" start="894" end="904" title="Galagoides" label="Galagoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="1128" end="1139" title="East African Rift" label="rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q31837388" start="1316" end="1326" title="Paragalago" label="Paragalago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190066" start="1351" end="1359" title="Otolemur" label="Otolemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952448" start="1376" end="1389" title="Sciurocheirus" label="Sciurocheirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193762" start="1471" end="1479" title="Euoticus" label="Euoticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365863" start="1514" end="1545" title="Southern needle-clawed bushbaby" label="Southern needle-clawed bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206148" start="1576" end="1607" title="Northern needle-clawed bushbaby" label="Northern needle-clawed bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q285214" start="1646" end="1652" title="Galago (genus)" label="Galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206221" start="1740" end="1755" title="Somali bushbaby" label="Somali bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143192" start="1784" end="1798" title="Mohol bushbaby" label="Mohol bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q77332" start="1825" end="1841" title="Senegal bushbaby" label="Senegal bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q917099" start="1911" end="1925" title="Dusky bushbaby" label="Dusky bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094482" start="1965" end="1975" title="Galagoides" label="Galagoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q28156612" start="2007" end="2038" title="Prince Demidoff&amp;#x27;s bushbaby" label="Prince Demidoff&amp;#x27;s bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q29870046" start="2068" end="2088" title="Angolan dwarf galago" label="Angolan dwarf galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q28157194" start="2120" end="2142" title="Thomas&amp;#x27;s bushbaby" label="Thomas&amp;#x27;s bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q21369132" start="2182" end="2190" title="Laetolia" label="Laetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21369132" start="2206" end="2227" title="Laetolia sadimanensis" label="Laetolia sadimanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190066" start="2247" end="2255" title="Otolemur" label="Otolemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q756194" start="2309" end="2329" title="Brown greater galago" label="Brown greater galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196226" start="2363" end="2386" title="Northern greater galago" label="Northern greater galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206135" start="2415" end="2437" title="Silvery greater galago" label="Silvery greater galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q31837388" start="2476" end="2486" title="Paragalago" label="Paragalago"/>
<link wikidata="Q103998647" start="2563" end="2581" title="Kenya coast galago" label="Kenya coast galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q104248230" start="2607" end="2628" title="Grant&amp;#x27;s bushbaby" label="Grant&amp;#x27;s bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q104005586" start="2655" end="2672" title="Zanzibar bushbaby" label="Zanzibar bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q104004870" start="2743" end="2759" title="Uluguru bushbaby" label="Uluguru bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q104004501" start="2786" end="2800" title="Rondo bushbaby" label="Rondo bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952448" start="2841" end="2854" title="Sciurocheirus" label="Sciurocheirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28155507" start="2881" end="2908" title="Bioko Allen&amp;#x27;s bushbaby" label="Bioko Allen&amp;#x27;s bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074435" start="2934" end="2954" title="Cross River bushbaby" label="Cross River bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q125614031" start="2986" end="3000" title="Gabon bushbaby" label="Gabon bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20721809" start="3030" end="3053" title="Makandé squirrel galago" label="Makandé squirrel galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="3321" end="3328" title="Hearing (sense)" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q851554" start="3758" end="3771" title="grooming claw" label="grooming claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="3887" end="3895" title="incisors" label="incisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q143666" start="3903" end="3912" title="toothcomb" label="toothcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="3923" end="3937" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="3974" end="3983" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="4604" end="4613" title="territory (animal)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="5172" end="5212" title="zoonoses" label="diseases that can cross species barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151752" start="6085" end="6092" title="jumping" label="jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="7996" end="8011" title="Social grooming" label="Social grooming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37281" wikidata="Q1411087" url="?curid=37281" title="Peg solitaire">
<text>Peg Solitaire, Solo Noble, Solo Goli, Marble Solitaire or simply Solitaire is a board game for one player involving movement of pegs on a board with holes. Some sets use marbles in a board with indentations. The game is known as solitaire in Britain and as peg solitaire in the US where &#x27;solitaire&#x27; is now the common name for patience. 

The first evidence of the game can be traced back to the court of Louis XIV, and the specific date of 1697, with an engraving made ten years later by Claude Auguste Berey of Anne de Rohan-Chabot, Princess of Soubise, with the puzzle by her side. The August 1697 edition of the French literary magazine &quot;Mercure galant&quot; contains a description of the board, rules and sample problems. This is the first known reference to the game in print.

The standard game fills the entire board with pegs except for the central hole. The objective is, making valid moves, to empty the entire board except for a solitary peg in the central hole.

==Board==

There are two traditional boards (&#x27;.&#x27; as an initial peg, &#x27;o&#x27; as an initial hole):
==Play==
A valid move is to jump a peg orthogonally over an adjacent peg into a hole two positions away and then to remove the jumped peg.

In the diagrams which follow, codice_1 indicates a peg in a hole, codice_2 emboldened indicates the peg to be moved, and codice_3 indicates an empty hole. A blue codice_4 is the hole the current peg moved from; a red codice_4 is the final position of that peg, a red codice_4 is the hole of the peg that was jumped and removed.

Thus valid moves in each of the four orthogonal directions are:

 * · o → &quot;Jump to right&quot;

 o · * → &quot;Jump to left&quot;
 · → &quot;Jump down&quot;
 o 

 o 
 · → &quot;Jump up&quot;

On an English board, the first three moves might be:
 · * · · · · o · · · 
 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · o o · · ·
 · · · o · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
 · · · · · · · · · · · ·

==Strategy==
There are many different solutions to the standard problem, and one notation used to describe them assigns letters to the holes (although numbers may also be used):

 English European
 a b c a b c
 d e f y d e f z
 g h i j k l m g h i j k l m
 n o p x P O N n o p x P O N
 M L K J I H G M L K J I H G
 F E D Z F E D Y
 C B A C B A
This mirror image notation is used, amongst other reasons, since on the European board, one set of alternative games is to start with a hole at some position and to end with a single peg in its mirrored position. On the English board the equivalent alternative games are to start with a hole and end with a peg at the same position.

There is no solution to the European board with the initial hole centrally located, if only orthogonal moves are permitted. This is easily seen as follows, by an argument from Hans Zantema. Divide the positions of the board into A, B and C positions as follows:

 A B C
 A B C A B
 A B C A B C A
 B C A B C A B
 C A B C A B C
 B C A B C
 A B C

Initially with only the central position free, the number of covered A positions is 12, the number of covered B positions is 12, and also the number of covered C positions is 12. After every move the number of covered A positions increases or decreases by one, and the same for the number of covered B positions and the number of covered C positions. Hence after an even number of moves all these three numbers are even, and after an odd number of moves all these three numbers are odd. Hence a final position with only one peg cannot be reached, since that would require that one of these numbers is one (the position of the peg, one is odd), while the other two numbers are zero, hence even.

There are, however, several other configurations where a single initial hole can be reduced to a single peg.

A tactic that can be used is to divide the board into packages of three and to purge (remove) them entirely using one extra peg, the catalyst, that &quot;jumps out&quot; and then &quot;jumps back again&quot;. In the example below, the * is the catalyst.:

 * · o o · 
 · → · → → o
 · · o

This technique can be used with a line of 3, a block of 2·3 and a 6-peg L shape with a base of length 3 and upright of length 4.

Other alternate games include starting with two empty holes and finishing with two pegs in those holes. Also starting with one hole &quot;here&quot; and ending with one peg &quot;there&quot;. On an English board, the hole can be anywhere and the final peg can only end up where multiples of three permit. Thus a hole at a can only leave a single peg at a, p, O or C.

=== Studies on peg solitaire ===
A thorough analysis of the game is known. This analysis introduced a notion called pagoda function which is a strong tool to show the infeasibility of a given generalized peg solitaire problem.

A solution for finding a pagoda function, which demonstrates the infeasibility of a given problem, is formulated as a linear programming problem and solvable in polynomial time.

A paper in 1990 dealt with the generalized Hi-Q problems which are equivalent to the peg solitaire problems and showed their NP-completeness.

A 1996 paper formulated a peg solitaire problem as a combinatorial optimization problem and discussed the properties of the feasible region called &#x27;a solitaire cone&#x27;.

In 1999 peg solitaire was completely solved on a computer using an exhaustive search through all possible variants. It was achieved making use of the symmetries, efficient storage of board constellations and hashing.

In 2001 an efficient method for solving peg solitaire problems was developed.

An unpublished study from 1989 on a generalized version of the game on the English board showed that each possible problem in the generalized game has 29 possible distinct solutions, excluding symmetries, as the English board contains 9 distinct 3×3 sub-squares. One consequence of this analysis is to put a lower bound on the size of possible &quot;inverted position&quot; problems, in which the cells initially occupied are left empty and vice versa. Any solution to such a problem must contain a minimum of 11 moves, irrespective of the exact details of the problem.

It can be proved using abstract algebra that there are only 5 fixed board positions where the game can successfully end with one peg.

=== Solutions to the English game ===
The shortest solution to the standard English game involves 18 moves, counting multiple jumps as single moves:

This solution was found in 1912 by Ernest Bergholt and proven to be the shortest possible by John Beasley in 1964.

This solution can also be seen on a page that also introduces the Wolstenholme notation, which is designed to make memorizing the solution easier.

Other solutions include the following list. In these, the notation used is
*List of starting holes
*Colon
*List of end target pegs
*Equals sign
*Source peg and destination hole (the pegs jumped over are left as an exercise to the reader)
*, or / (&quot;a slash is used to separate &#x27;chunks&#x27; such as a six-purge out&quot;)


===Brute force attack on standard English peg solitaire===

The only place it is possible to end up with a solitary peg is the centre, or the middle of one of the edges; on the last jump, there will always be an option of choosing whether to end in the centre or the edge.

Following is a table over the number (Possible Board Positions) of possible board positions after n jumps, and the possibility of the same peg moved to make a further jump (No Further Jumps). Interesting to note is that the shortest way to fail the game is in six moves, and the solution (besides its rotations and reflections) is unique. An example of this is as follows: 4 → 16; 23 → 9; 14 → 16; 17 → 15; 19 → 17; 31 → 23. (In this notation, the pegs are numbered from left to right, starting with 0, and moving down each row and to the far left once each row is marked.)

NOTE: If one board position can be rotated and/or flipped into another board position, the board positions are counted as identical.




Since there can only be 31 jumps, modern computers can easily examine all game positions in a reasonable time.

The above sequence &quot;PBP&quot; has been entered as in OEIS. Note that the total number of reachable board positions (sum of the sequence) is 23,475,688, while the total number of possible board positions is 8,589,934,590 (33bit-1) (2^33), so only about 2.2% of all possible board positions can be reached starting with the center vacant.

It is also possible to generate all board positions. The results below have been obtained using
the mCRL2 toolset (see the peg_solitaire example in the distribution).



In the results below, it has generated all the board positions it really reached starting with the center vacant and finishing in the central hole.



===Solutions to the European game===
There are 3 initial non-congruent positions that have solutions. These are:

1)
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 0 o · ·
 1 · · · · ·
 2 · · · · · · ·
 3 · · · · · · ·
 4 · · · · · · ·
 5 · · · · ·
 6 · · ·
Possible solution: [2:2-0:2, 2:0-2:2, 1:4-1:2, 3:4-1:4, 3:2-3:4, 2:3-2:1, 5:3-3:3, 3:0-3:2, 5:1-3:1, 4:5-4:3, 5:5-5:3, 0:4-2:4, 2:1-4:1, 2:4-4:4, 5:2-5:4, 3:6-3:4, 1:1-1:3, 2:6-2:4, 0:3-2:3, 3:2-5:2, 3:4-3:2, 6:2-4:2, 3:2-5:2, 4:0-4:2, 4:3-4:1, 6:4-6:2, 6:2-4:2, 4:1-4:3, 4:3-4:5, 4:6-4:4, 5:4-3:4, 3:4-1:4, 1:5-1:3, 2:3-0:3, 0:2-0:4]

2)
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 0 · · ·
 1 · · o · ·
 2 · · · · · · ·
 3 · · · · · · ·
 4 · · · · · · ·
 5 · · · · ·
 6 · · ·
Possible solution: [1:1-1:3, 3:2-1:2, 3:4-3:2, 1:4-3:4, 5:3-3:3, 4:1-4:3, 2:1-4:1, 2:6-2:4, 4:4-4:2, 3:4-1:4, 3:2-3:4, 5:1-3:1, 4:6-2:6, 3:0-3:2, 4:5-2:5, 0:2-2:2, 2:6-2:4, 6:4-4:4, 3:4-5:4, 2:3-2:1, 2:0-2:2, 1:4-3:4, 5:5-5:3, 6:3-4:3, 4:3-4:1, 6:2-4:2, 3:2-5:2, 4:0-4:2, 5:2-3:2, 3:2-1:2, 1:2-1:4, 0:4-2:4, 3:4-1:4, 1:5-1:3, 0:3-2:3]

and 
3)
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 0 · · ·
 1 · · · · ·
 2 · · · o · · ·
 3 · · · · · · ·
 4 · · · · · · ·
 5 · · · · ·
 6 · · ·
Possible solution: [2:1-2:3, 0:2-2:2, 4:1-2:1, 4:3-4:1, 2:3-4:3, 1:4-1:2, 2:1-2:3, 0:4-0:2, 4:4-4:2, 3:4-1:4, 6:3-4:3, 1:1-1:3, 4:6-4:4, 5:1-3:1, 2:6-2:4, 1:4-1:2, 0:2-2:2, 3:6-3:4, 4:3-4:1, 6:2-4:2, 2:3-2:1, 4:1-4:3, 5:5-5:3, 2:0-2:2, 2:2-4:2, 3:4-5:4, 4:3-4:1, 3:0-3:2, 6:4-4:4, 4:0-4:2, 3:2-5:2, 5:2-5:4, 5:4-3:4, 3:4-1:4, 1:5-1:3]

===Board variants===
Peg solitaire has been played on other size boards, although the two given above are the most popular. It has also been played on a triangular board, with jumps allowed in all 3 directions. As long as the variant has the proper &quot;parity&quot; and is large enough, it will probably be solvable.

A common triangular variant has five pegs on a side. A solution where the final peg arrives at the initial empty hole is not possible for a hole in one of the three central positions. An empty corner-hole setup can be solved in ten moves, and an empty midside-hole setup in nine (Bell 2008):

==Video game ==

On June 26, 1992, a video game based on peg solitaire was released for the Game Boy. Titled simply &quot;Solitaire&quot;, the game was developed by Hect. In North America, DTMC released the game as &quot;Lazlos&#x27; Leap&quot;.

Professor Layton and the Diabolical Box features six puzzles asking the player to solve the English peg solitaire board from different initial positions, the last one being the traditional configuration.

==In popular culture==
The PC game Shivers, a horror-themed point and click puzzle game, features many puzzles/games for the player to complete. The puzzle dubbed &quot;Chinese Checkers&quot; is actually peg solitaire.

Cracker Barrel features the game at every table at their locations. The board featured is triangular with 15 total holes.

In &quot;Cowboy Bebop: The Movie&quot;, the main antagonist, Vincent Volaju, spends most of his free time playing peg solitaire. The vector 
for his planned Bioterrorism attack, a type of nanobot, is stored in peg solitaire marbles.

==References==
==Further reading==
*.
*
* 206 (6): 156–166, June 1962; 214 (2): 112–113, Feb. 1966; 214 (5): 127, May 1966.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="0" end="13" title="Peg solitaire" label="Peg Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="15" end="25" title="Peg solitaire" label="Solo Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="27" end="36" title="Peg solitaire" label="Solo Goli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="38" end="54" title="Peg solitaire" label="Marble Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="65" end="74" title="Peg solitaire" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="80" end="90" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="336" end="344" title="patience (game)" label="patience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="414" end="423" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q448589" start="522" end="542" title="Anne de Rohan-Chabot" label="Anne de Rohan-Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q186225" start="656" end="670" title="Mercure galant" label="Mercure galant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1142" end="1154" title="Orthogonality#Gaming" label="orthogonally"/>
<link wikidata="Q18012465" start="2824" end="2836" title="Hans Zantema" label="Hans Zantema"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="5117" end="5132" title="NP-completeness" label="NP-completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="6204" end="6220" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="8219" end="8223" title="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714982" start="8604" end="8609" title="mCRL2" label="mCRL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q154210" start="8882" end="8895" title="Congruence (geometry)" label="non-congruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193816" start="11151" end="11190" title="Professor Layton and the Diabolical Box" label="Professor Layton and the Diabolical Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q499257" start="11391" end="11398" title="Shivers_(video_game)" label="Shivers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11416" end="11431" title="Adventure_game#Point-and-click_adventure_games" label="point and click"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492609" start="11576" end="11590" title="Cracker Barrel" label="Cracker Barrel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11708" end="11731" title="Cowboy Bebop: The Movie" label="Cowboy Bebop: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="11856" end="11868" title="Bioterrorism" label="Bioterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q587024" start="11887" end="11894" title="nanobot" label="nanobot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37282" wikidata="Q1191033" url="?curid=37282" title="Klondike (solitaire)">
<text>Klondike is a card game for one player and the best known and most popular version of the patience or solitaire family, as well as one of the most challenging in widespread play. It has spawned numerous variants including Batsford, Easthaven, King Albert, Thumb and Pouch, Somerset or Usk and Whitehead, as well as the American variants of the games, Agnes and Westcliff. The distinguishing feature of all variants is a triangular layout of the tableau, building in ascending sequence and packing in descending order.

== Name ==
In the U.S. and Canada, it is so well known that the term &quot;Solitaire&quot;, in the absence of qualifiers, typically refers to Klondike. Equally in the UK, it is often just known as &quot;Patience&quot;. Elsewhere the game is known as American Patience.

Historically, Klondike was also called Canfield in America, perhaps because it was a casino game at the Canfield Casino in Saratoga Springs, New York; this is the name by which it became known in England. Today, however, Canfield is more usually the American name for the patience game called &quot;Demon&quot; in England, which is a different game altogether. Likewise the rumour prevails that this other game was devised by Richard Canfield even though Canfield himself called his game &quot;Klondike&quot;.

== History ==
The origins of the name Klondike are unknown; a handful of authors have speculated the name derives from the late 19th-century Klondike Gold Rush, but no material evidence substantiates such a claim. The earliest rules for the game known as Klondike today appear in the 1907 edition of &quot;Hoyle&#x27;s Games&quot; under the name &quot;Seven-Card Klondike&quot;. &quot;Hoyles&quot; calls it a simpler version of &quot;Klondike&quot;, also described in the same book, but which turns out to be a gambling version of the game nowadays known as Canfield in the US and Demon elsewhere in the world.

In the 1913 edition of the so-called &quot;Official Rules of Card Games&quot;, Seven-Card Klondike has become Klondike, with the modification that the pack is run through one card at a time instead of three, and the original Klondike is now being called Canfield.

Klondike&#x27;s inclusion in Microsoft Windows in the 1990s contributed significantly to its current popularity. It is considered the most popular version of solitaire.

== Rules ==

Klondike is played with a standard 52-card deck, without Jokers.

After shuffling, a tableau of seven fanned piles of cards is laid from left to right. From left to right, each pile contains one more card than the last. The first and left-most pile contains a single upturned card, the second pile contains two cards, and so forth. The topmost card of each pile is turned face up.

The remaining cards form the stock and are placed facedown at the upper left of the layout.

The four foundations (light rectangles in the upper right of the figure) are built up by suit from Ace (low in this game) to King, and the tableau piles can be built down by alternate colors. Every face-up card in a partial pile, or a complete pile, can be moved, as a unit, to another tableau pile on the basis of its highest card. Any empty piles can be filled with a King, or a pile of cards with a King. The aim of the game is to build up four stacks of cards starting with Ace and ending with King, all of the same suit, on one of the four foundations, at which time the player would have won. 

There are different ways of dealing the remainder of the deck from the stock to the waste, including the following:
* Turning three cards at once to the waste, with no limit on passes through the deck.
* Turning three cards at once to the waste, with three passes through the deck.
* Turning one card at a time to the waste, with three passes through the deck.
* Turning one card at a time to the waste with only a single pass through the deck and playing it if possible.
* Turning one card at a time to the waste, with no limit on passes through the deck.

If the player can no longer make any meaningful moves, the game is considered lost. At this point, winning is impossible.

== Probability of winning ==


The probability of being able to win a game of Klondike with best-possible play is not known, and the inability of theoreticians to precisely calculate these odds has been referred to by mathematician Persi Diaconis as &quot;one of the embarrassments of applied probability&quot;.

An upper bound on the probability of winning can be found by considering a modified version of the game called &quot;Thoughtful Solitaire&quot; or &quot;Thoughtful Klondike&quot;, in which location of all 52 cards is known.
The probability of winning Thoughtful Klondike (with draw three rules) has been estimated at 81.942% ± 0.081%. However the probability of winning regular Klondike is smaller, because sometimes there is no way of knowing the correct move without being able to see the downturned cards.

For the most common variant (turn three cards, unlimited passes), a number of studies have been made. A Klondike-playing AI using Monte Carlo tree search was able to solve up to 35% of randomly generated games. Another algorithm has a winning rate of 52% in “turn one” mode, and 18% in “turn three”. These results place a lower bound on the winnability percentage. One experiment found a skilled human player could win 189 out of 442 games (43%).

&quot;Hoyle&#x27;s Rules of Games&quot; suggests the chances of winning as being 1 in 30 games, when there is only one pass through the deck.

== Variants ==

===Single deck===
Below are some single-pack variants of Klondike:
* Agnes (US variant): the stock is dealt in batches of seven on reserve piles and every one is available. Furthermore, the bases of the foundations depend on the twenty-ninth card, which is dealt on the foundations.
* Easthaven (less commonly Aces Up,) twenty-one cards are dealt into seven piles of three, two face-down and one face-up. A space in this game may only be filled by a king or sequence starting with a king (several rule sets simplify this and allow any card or sequence to be moved to a vacancy), and when a play goes to a standstill, seven new cards are dealt to the tableau, one top of each pile. Easthaven may be played with 2 or 3 decks. The two-deck version is either called Double Easthaven or Gypsy.
* Nine Across: nine columns of cards are dealt, as opposed to seven in classic Klondike. The player can choose which cards to form the foundations; if one or more eights are exposed, for example, the player may decide to build on eights, and the piles are built up 8-9-10-J-Q-K-Ace-2-3-4-5-6-7. If eights are built on, sevens fill up spaces and so forth. The stock is dealt through one by one as many times as required.
* Somerset or Usk: as Klondike but all the cards are dealt out: 10 in the first row, 9 in the second, and so on until there are 3 in the last.
* Thumb and Pouch: a card in the tableau can be built upon another that is any suit other than its own (e.g. spades cannot be placed over spades) and spaces can be filled by any card or sequence.
* Whitehead: &quot;all&quot; cards are dealt face up, building is by color (red on red, black on black), a sequence made up of cards that are of the same suit can be moved as a unit, and a space can be filled by any card or sequence.
* Westcliff (US variant): thirty cards are dealt into ten piles of three cards, two face down and one face up. A space in this game can be filled with any card or sequence.
* Kuipers: as Klondike but with eight columns instead of seven, turning one card at a time to the waste, with no limit on passes through the deck. This lowers the probability of winning to approximately 5%.

=== Gambling variant ===
In some casinos, Klondike is turned into a gambling game, by playing with the rule of dealing cards one at a time and going through the stock once. For example, a player would pay $50 to play, and the house would pay $5 for each card played to the foundations. This form of Klondike is sometimes called Las Vegas Solitaire.

=== Joker Solitaire ===
Joker Solitaire is a variant of Klondike created by Joli Quentin Kansil which adds two jokers that serve as limited wild cards.

=== Double Solitaire ===
Klondike has been turned into a two-player game under the name Double Solitaire. Players have their own packs and may not play to each other&#x27;s tableaus but share their foundations. Players take turns until they are unable to play a card from their talons. The first player to play all 52 cards is the winner. Informally, &quot;Double&quot; Solitaire can be played as a party game with more than 2 players.

== Computerized versions ==
Digital versions of Klondike have helped popularize the game and offer advantages over playing with a physical deck. Notable examples of computerized versions include:
* A software version of Klondike named simply &quot;Solitaire&quot; has been a regular inclusion in the Microsoft Windows operating system, beginning with Windows 3.0 in 1990. Initially Microsoft included the game as both a diversion and a teaching tool: for many users, &quot;Solitaire&quot; was their first introduction to using a computer mouse. Microsoft officials stated in 1994 that &quot;for years, Solitaire was the most-used application for Windows&quot;.
* In 1981, the Atari Program Exchange published Mark Reid&#x27;s implementation of Klondike for Atari 8-bit computers, simply titled &quot;Solitaire&quot;.
* Michael A. Casteel&#x27;s shareware version of Klondike for the Macintosh was first released in 1984, and has been continually updated since.
* Klondike was added to Clubhouse Games: 51 Worldwide Classics for Nintendo Switch, a compilation of tabletop games.

Scoring in the Microsoft Windows Solitaire version of Klondike is as follows:

Moving cards directly from the Waste stack to a Foundation scores 10 points. However, if the card is first moved to a Tableau, and then to a Foundation, an extra 5 points are scored making a total of 15. Thus, to score the most points, no cards should be moved directly from the Waste to Foundation.

Time also plays a role, if the &#x27;Timed game&#x27; option is selected. In this case, 2 points are deducted every 10 seconds. Bonus points are scored using the formula 700,000 ÷ (seconds to finish), if the game takes at least 30 seconds. If the game takes under 30 seconds, no bonus points are awarded.

== See also ==
* FreeCell
* List of solitaires
* Glossary of solitaire
* Solitaire

== References ==
==Notes==
== Literature ==
* Arnold, Peter (2011). &quot;Card Games for One&quot;. Chambers.
* Coops, Helen Leslie (1939). &quot;100 Games of Solitaire.&quot; Whitman. 128 pp.
* Morehead, Albert and Geoffrey Mott-Smith (2001). &quot;The Complete Book of Solitaire and Patience&quot;. Foulsham, Slough.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191033" start="0" end="8" title="Klondike (solitaire)" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="14" end="23" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="90" end="98" title="patience (cards)" label="patience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="102" end="111" title="Solitaire (game)" label="solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016208" start="222" end="230" title="Batsford (card game)" label="Batsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411220" start="243" end="254" title="King Albert (card game)" label="King Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692997" start="351" end="356" title="Agnes (card game)" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987274" start="361" end="370" title="Westcliff (card game)" label="Westcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032309" start="893" end="908" title="Canfield Casino" label="Canfield Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144357" start="912" end="938" title="Saratoga Springs, New York" label="Saratoga Springs, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032311" start="1088" end="1093" title="Canfield (solitaire)" label="Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323659" start="1215" end="1231" title="Richard Canfield" label="Richard Canfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="1441" end="1459" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032311" start="1858" end="1866" title="Canfield (patience)" label="Canfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032311" start="1881" end="1886" title="Demon (patience)" label="Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2206" end="2223" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419503" start="2386" end="2407" title="standard 52-card deck" label="standard 52-card deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q221783" start="2417" end="2423" title="Joker (playing card)" label="Jokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571872" start="2445" end="2452" title="Solitaire terminology" label="tableau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467867" start="2771" end="2776" title="Talon (cards)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571872" start="2844" end="2855" title="Solitaire terminology" label="foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571872" start="2995" end="3025" title="Solitaire terminology" label="built down by alternate colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571872" start="3520" end="3525" title="Solitaire terminology" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061471" start="4349" end="4363" title="Persi Diaconis" label="Persi Diaconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785332" start="5070" end="5093" title="Monte Carlo tree search" label="Monte Carlo tree search"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692997" start="5616" end="5621" title="Agnes (card game)" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987274" start="5832" end="5841" title="Easthaven (card game)" label="Easthaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987274" start="7331" end="7340" title="Westcliff (solitaire)" label="Westcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269953" start="8136" end="8155" title="Joli Quentin Kansil" label="Joli Quentin Kansil"/>
<link wikidata="Q909627" start="8898" end="8907" title="Solitaire (Windows)" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="8950" end="8967" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="9179" end="9193" title="computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812837" start="9326" end="9348" title="Atari Program Exchange" label="Atari Program Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="9407" end="9428" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="9495" end="9504" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9635" end="9673" title="Clubhouse Games: 51 Worldwide Classics" label="Clubhouse Games: 51 Worldwide Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="9678" end="9693" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070115" start="9697" end="9708" title="Video game compilation" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244175" start="9712" end="9726" title="tabletop games" label="tabletop games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050614" start="10432" end="10440" title="FreeCell" label="FreeCell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632073" start="10443" end="10461" title="List of solitaires" label="List of solitaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571872" start="10464" end="10485" title="Glossary of solitaire" label="Glossary of solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056928" start="10488" end="10497" title="Solitaire (game)" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710481" start="10694" end="10710" title="Morehead, Albert" label="Morehead, Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918611" start="10715" end="10734" title="Geoffrey Mott-Smith" label="Geoffrey Mott-Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37283" wikidata="Q283496" url="?curid=37283" title="Edna Ferber">
<text>Edna Ferber (August 15, 1885 – April 16, 1968) was an American novelist, short story writer and playwright. Her novels include the Pulitzer Prize-winning &quot;So Big&quot; (1924), &quot;Show Boat&quot; (1926; made into the celebrated 1927 musical), &quot;Cimarron&quot; (1930; adapted into the 1931 film which won the Academy Award for Best Picture), &quot;Giant&quot; (1952; made into the 1956 film of the same name) and &quot;Ice Palace&quot; (1958), which also received a film adaptation in 1960. She helped adapt her short story &quot;Old Man Minick&quot;, published in 1922, into a play (&quot;Minick&quot;) and it was thrice adapted to film, in 1925 as the silent film &quot;Welcome Home&quot;, in 1932 as &quot;The Expert&quot;, and in 1939 as &quot;No Place to Go&quot;.

==Life and career==
===Early years===
Ferber was born August 15, 1885, in Kalamazoo, Michigan, to a Hungarian-born Jewish storekeeper, Jacob Charles Ferber, and his Milwaukee, Wisconsin–born wife, Julia (Neumann) Ferber, who was of German Jewish descent. The Ferbers had moved to Kalamazoo from Chicago, Illinois, in order to open a dry goods store, and her older sister Fannie was born there three years earlier.
Ferber&#x27;s father was not adept at business, and the family moved often during Ferber&#x27;s childhood.
From Kalamazoo, they returned to Chicago for a year, and then
moved to Ottumwa, Iowa, where they resided from 1890 to 1897 (ages 5 to 12 for Ferber). 

In Ottumwa, Ferber and her family faced brutal anti-Semitism, including adult males verbally abusing, mocking and spitting on her on days when she brought lunch to her father, often mocking her in a Yiddish accent. 
According to Ferber, her years in Ottumwa &quot;must be held accountable for anything in me that is hostile toward the world&quot;.
During this time, Ferber&#x27;s father began to lose his eyesight, necessitating costly and ultimately unsuccessful treatments. At the age of 12, Ferber and her family moved to Appleton, Wisconsin, where she graduated from high school and later briefly attended Lawrence University.

===Career===
After graduation, Ferber planned to study elocution, with vague thoughts of someday becoming an actress, but her family could not afford to send her to college. 
On the spur of the moment, she took a job as a cub reporter at the &quot;Appleton Daily Crescent&quot; and subsequently moved to the &quot;Milwaukee Journal.&quot; In early 1909, Ferber suffered a bout of anemia and returned to Appleton to recuperate. She never resumed her career as a reporter, although she subsequently covered the 1920 Republican National Convention and 1920 Democratic National Convention for the United Press Association.

While Ferber was recovering, she began writing and selling short stories to various magazines, and in 1911 she published her first novel, &quot;Dawn O&#x27;Hara, The Girl Who Laughed&quot;. In 1912, a collection of her short stories was published in a volume titled &quot;Buttered Side Down&quot;. In her autobiography, Ferber wrote:
In 1925, she won the Pulitzer Prize for her book &quot;So Big&quot;. Ferber initially believed her draft of what would become &quot;So Big&quot; lacked a plot, glorified failure, and had a subtle theme that could easily be overlooked. When she sent the book to her usual publisher, Doubleday, she was surprised to learn that he greatly enjoyed the novel. This was reflected by the several hundreds of thousands of copies of the novel sold to the public. Following the award, the novel was made into a silent film starring Colleen Moore that same year. A remake followed in 1932, starring Barbara Stanwyck and George Brent, with Bette Davis in a supporting role. A 1953 version of &quot;So Big&quot; starring Jane Wyman is the most popular version to modern audiences.

Riding the popularity of &quot;So Big&quot;, Ferber&#x27;s next novel, &quot;Show Boat&quot; in 1926, was just as successful. Shortly after its release, composer Jerome Kern proposed turning it into a musical. Ferber was shocked, thinking it would be transformed into a typical light entertainment of the 1920s. It was not until Kern explained that he and Oscar Hammerstein II wanted to create a different type of musical that Ferber granted him the rights and it premiered on Broadway in 1927, and it has been revived eight times.

Her 1952 novel &quot;Giant&quot; became the basis of the 1956 movie, starring Elizabeth Taylor, James Dean and Rock Hudson.
Ferber was reportedly the first author to assign film rights to her books on short-term contracts so that the rights needed to be renegotiated regularly.

=== Death ===
Ferber died at her home in New York City, of stomach cancer, at the age of 82. She left her estate to her sister and nieces.

== Personal life ==
Ferber never married, had no children, and is not known to have engaged in a romance or sexual relationship.
In her early novel &quot;Dawn O&#x27;Hara&quot;, the title character&#x27;s aunt remarks, &quot;Being an old maid was a great deal like death by drowning – a really delightful sensation when you ceased struggling.&quot; Ferber did take a maternal interest in the career of her niece Janet Fox, an actress who performed in the original Broadway casts of Ferber&#x27;s plays &quot;Dinner at Eight&quot; (1932) and &quot;Stage Door&quot; (1936).

Ferber was known for being outspoken and having a quick wit. On one occasion, she led other Jewish guests in leaving a house party after learning the host was antisemitic. Once, after Noël Coward joked about how her suit made her resemble a man, she replied, &quot;So does yours.&quot;

=== Importance of Jewish identity ===
Starting in 1922, Ferber began to visit Europe once or twice annually for thirteen or fourteen years. During this time and unlike most Americans, she became troubled by the rise of the Nazi Party and its spreading of the antisemitic prejudice she had faced in her childhood. She commented on this saying, &quot;It was a fearful thing to see a continent – a civilization – crumbling before one&#x27;s eyes. It was a rapid and seemingly inevitable process to which no one paid any particular attention.&quot; Her fears greatly influenced her work, which often featured themes of racial and cultural discrimination. Her 1938 autobiography, &quot;A Peculiar Treasure&quot;, originally included a spiteful dedication to Adolf Hitler which stated: To Adolf Hitler, who has made me a better Jew and a more understanding human being, as he has of millions of other Jews, this book is dedicated in loathing and contempt.While this was changed by the time of the book&#x27;s publication, it still alluded to the Nazi threat. She frequently mentions Jewish success in her book, alluding to and wanting to show not just that Jewish success, but Jews being able to use that and prevail.

=== Algonquin Round Table ===
Ferber was a member of the Algonquin Round Table, a group of wits who met for lunch every day at the Algonquin Hotel in New York. Ferber and another member of the Round Table, Alexander Woollcott, were long-time enemies, their antipathy lasting until Woollcott&#x27;s death in 1943, although Howard Teichmann states in his biography of Woollcott that their feud was due to a misunderstanding. According to Teichmann, Ferber once described Woollcott as &quot;a New Jersey Nero who has mistaken his pinafore for a toga&quot;.

Ferber collaborated with Round Table member George S. Kaufman on several plays presented on Broadway: &quot;Minick&quot; (1924), &quot;The Royal Family&quot; (1927), &quot;Dinner At Eight&quot; (1932), &quot;The Land Is Bright&quot; (1941), &quot;Stage Door&quot; (1936), and &quot;Bravo!&quot; (1948).

===Political views===
In a poll carried out by the &quot;Saturday Review of Literature&quot;, asking American writers which presidential candidate they supported in the 1940 election, Ferber endorsed Franklin D. Roosevelt.

== Characteristics of works ==
Ferber&#x27;s novels generally featured strong female protagonists, along with a rich and diverse collection of supporting characters. She usually highlighted at least one strong secondary character who faced discrimination, ethnic or otherwise.

Ferber&#x27;s works often concerned small subsets of American culture, and sometimes took place in exotic locations she had visited but was not intimately familiar with, such as Texas or Alaska. She thus helped to highlight the diversity of American culture to those who did not have the opportunity to experience it. Some novels are set in places she had not visited.

==Legacy==

*Ferber was portrayed by the actress Lili Taylor in the film &quot;Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle&quot; (1994).
*In 2008, The Library of America selected Ferber&#x27;s article &quot;Miss Ferber Views &#x27;Vultures&#x27; at Trial&quot; for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American True Crime.
*On July 29, 2002, in her hometown of Appleton, Wisconsin, the U.S. Postal Service issued an 83¢ Distinguished Americans series postage stamp honoring her. Artist Mark Summers, well known for his scratchboard technique, created this portrait for the stamp referencing a black-and-white photograph of Ferber taken in 1927.
*A fictionalized version of Edna Ferber appears briefly as a character in Philipp Meyer&#x27;s novel &quot;The Son&quot; (2013).
*Another fictionalized Edna Ferber, with herself as the protagonist, appears in a series of mystery novels by Ed Ifkovic, published by Poisoned Pen Press, including &quot;Downtown Strut: An Edna Ferber Mystery&quot;, written in 2013.
*In 2013, Ferber was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.
*In her hometown of Appleton, Wisconsin, the Edna Ferber Elementary School was named after her. Construction of the school was initially voted down in a 1971 referendum.

==List of works==
Ferber wrote thirteen novels, two autobiographies, numerous short stories, and nine plays, many which were written in collaborations with other playwrights.

===Novels===
* &quot;Dawn O&#x27;Hara, The Girl Who Laughed&quot; (1911)
* &quot;Fanny Herself&quot; (1917)
* &quot;The Girls&quot; (1921)
* &quot;So Big&quot; (1924) (won Pulitzer Prize)
* &quot;Show Boat&quot; (1926, Grosset &amp; Dunlap)
* &quot;Cimarron&quot; (1930)
* &quot;American Beauty&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Come and Get It&quot; (1935)
* &quot;Saratoga Trunk&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Great Son&quot; (1945)
* &quot;Giant&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Ice Palace&quot; (1958)

===Novellas and short story collections===
* &quot;Buttered Side Down&quot; (1912)
* &quot;Roast Beef, Medium&quot; (1913) Emma McChesney stories
* &quot;Personality Plus&quot; (1914) Emma McChesney stories
* &quot;Emma Mc Chesney and Co.&quot; (1915) Emma McChesney stories
* &quot;Cheerful – By Request&quot; (1918)
* &quot;Half Portions&quot; (1919)
* Gigolo (1922)
* &quot;Mother Knows Best&quot; (1927)
* &quot;They Brought Their Women&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Nobody&#x27;s in Town: Two Short Novels&quot; (1938) Contains &quot;Nobody&#x27;s in Town&quot; and &quot;Trees Die at the Top&quot;
* &quot;One Basket: Thirty-One Short Stories&quot; (1947) Includes &quot;No Room at the Inn: A Story of Christmas in the World Today&quot;

===Autobiographies===
* &quot;A Peculiar Treasure&quot; (1939)
* &quot;A Kind of Magic&quot; (1963)

===Plays===
* &quot;Our Mrs. McChesney&quot; (1915) (play, with George V. Hobart)
* &quot;$1200 a Year: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1920) (play, with Newman Levy)
* &quot;Minick: A Play&quot; (1924) (play, with G. S. Kaufman), adapted from her short story &quot;Old Man Minick&quot;
* &quot;The Royal Family&quot; (1927) (play, with G. S. Kaufman)
* &quot;Dinner at Eight&quot; (1932) (play, with G. S. Kaufman)
* &quot;Stage Door&quot; (1936) (play, with G.S. Kaufman)
* &quot;The Land Is Bright&quot; (1941) (play, with G. S. Kaufman)
* &quot;Bravo!&quot; (1949) (play, with G. S. Kaufman)

===Screenplays===
* &quot;Saratoga Trunk&quot; (1945) (film, with Casey Robinson)

===Musical adaptations===

* &quot;Show Boat&quot; (1927) – music by Jerome Kern, lyrics and book by Oscar Hammerstein II, produced by Florenz Ziegfeld
* &quot;Saratoga&quot; (1959) – music by Harold Arlen, lyrics by Johnny Mercer, dramatized by Morton DaCosta
* &quot;Giant&quot; (2009) – music and lyrics by Michael John LaChiusa, book by Sybille Pearson

==References==

===Endnotes===
===Footnotes===
===Bibliography===
* 
;Archives
*
*
==External links==

* 
* Jeiwsh Women&#x27;s Archive page

===Online editions===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283496" start="0" end="11" title="Edna Ferber" label="Edna Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="131" end="145" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549047" start="160" end="166" title="So Big (novel)" label="So Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249322" start="187" end="196" title="Show Boat (novel)" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="235" end="247" title="Show Boat" label="1927 musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479598" start="256" end="264" title="Cimarron (novel)" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q251997" start="295" end="304" title="Cimarron (1931 film)" label="1931 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="319" end="349" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q669592" start="391" end="400" title="Giant (1956 film)" label="1956 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230887" start="476" end="491" title="Ice Palace (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116196960" start="540" end="554" title="Old Man Minick" label="Old Man Minick"/>
<link wikidata="Q116483170" start="600" end="606" title="Minick" label="Minick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394809" start="682" end="694" title="Welcome Home (1925 film)" label="Welcome Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964316" start="719" end="729" title="The Expert (1932 film)" label="The Expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949919" start="758" end="772" title="No Place to Go (1939 film)" label="No Place to Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q167155" start="855" end="874" title="Kalamazoo, Michigan" label="Kalamazoo, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="946" end="966" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1076" end="1093" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q853566" start="1373" end="1386" title="Ottumwa, Iowa" label="Ottumwa, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1501" end="1514" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="1653" end="1660" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="1979" end="1998" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809286" start="2064" end="2083" title="Lawrence University" label="Lawrence University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2308" end="2320" title="cub reporter" label="cub reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757849" start="2334" end="2357" title="The Post-Crescent" label="Appleton Daily Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="2400" end="2417" title="Milwaukee Journal" label="Milwaukee Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560879" start="2595" end="2630" title="1920 Republican National Convention" label="1920 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560828" start="2635" end="2670" title="1920 Democratic National Convention" label="1920 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="2679" end="2703" title="United Press Association" label="United Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3061" end="3075" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549047" start="3095" end="3101" title="So Big (novel)" label="So Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="3322" end="3331" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="3541" end="3552" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q446715" start="3562" end="3575" title="Colleen Moore" label="Colleen Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549042" start="3581" end="3590" title="So Big (1924 film)" label="same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q973612" start="3613" end="3617" title="So Big (1932 film)" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="3628" end="3644" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124735" start="3649" end="3661" title="George Brent" label="George Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="3668" end="3679" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549044" start="3704" end="3716" title="So Big (1953 film)" label="1953 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q95055" start="3748" end="3758" title="Jane Wyman" label="Jane Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249322" start="3886" end="3895" title="Show Boat (novel)" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="3971" end="3982" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="4010" end="4017" title="Show Boat" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="4165" end="4185" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="4223" end="4230" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4286" end="4294" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568341" start="4320" end="4327" title="Revival (theatre)" label="revived"/>
<link wikidata="Q669592" start="4399" end="4409" title="Giant (1956 film)" label="1956 movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="4420" end="4436" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="4438" end="4448" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q184378" start="4453" end="4464" title="Rock Hudson" label="Rock Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="4680" end="4694" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153345" start="5173" end="5182" title="Janet Fox" label="Janet Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278419" start="5269" end="5284" title="Dinner at Eight (play)" label="Dinner at Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q24047666" start="5308" end="5318" title="Stage Door (play)" label="Stage Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="5518" end="5529" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="5844" end="5854" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="5880" end="5891" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078193" start="6302" end="6321" title="A Peculiar Treasure" label="A Peculiar Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="6374" end="6386" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376047" start="6891" end="6912" title="Algonquin Round Table" label="Algonquin Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q689447" start="6965" end="6980" title="Algonquin Hotel" label="Algonquin Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q361859" start="7040" end="7059" title="Alexander Woollcott" label="Alexander Woollcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720077" start="7156" end="7172" title="Howard Teichmann" label="Howard Teichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="7335" end="7339" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247116" start="7361" end="7369" title="pinafore" label="pinafore"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="7376" end="7380" title="toga" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q163662" start="7433" end="7450" title="George S. Kaufman" label="George S. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761683" start="7524" end="7540" title="The Royal Family (play)" label="The Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278419" start="7561" end="7576" title="Dinner at Eight (play)" label="Dinner At Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468911" start="7597" end="7615" title="The Land Is Bright" label="The Land Is Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q24047666" start="7636" end="7646" title="Stage Door (play)" label="Stage Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="7750" end="7779" title="Saturday Review of Literature" label="Saturday Review of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q699416" start="7862" end="7875" title="1940 United States presidential election" label="1940 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7893" end="7914" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="8002" end="8013" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="8373" end="8378" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="8382" end="8388" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q233502" start="8614" end="8625" title="Lili Taylor" label="Lili Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q175278" start="8644" end="8678" title="Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" label="Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="8703" end="8725" title="The Library of America" label="The Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="8926" end="8945" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282976" start="8985" end="9015" title="Distinguished Americans series" label="Distinguished Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405203" start="9084" end="9096" title="scratchboard" label="scratchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087069" start="9284" end="9297" title="Philipp Meyer" label="Philipp Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208480" start="9474" end="9492" title="Poisoned Pen Press" label="Poisoned Pen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549047" start="10137" end="10143" title="So Big (novel)" label="So Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="10162" end="10176" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249322" start="10186" end="10195" title="Show Boat (novel)" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="10209" end="10229" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479598" start="10239" end="10247" title="Cimarron (novel)" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743157" start="10269" end="10284" title="American Beauty (Edna Ferber novel)" label="American Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151307" start="10306" end="10321" title="Come and Get It (novel)" label="Come and Get It"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423385" start="10343" end="10357" title="Saratoga Trunk (novel)" label="Saratoga Trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170648" start="10616" end="10632" title="Personality Plus" label="Personality Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078193" start="11227" end="11246" title="A Peculiar Treasure" label="A Peculiar Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111105" start="11318" end="11336" title="Our Mrs. McChesney" label="Our Mrs. McChesney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492844" start="11362" end="11378" title="George V. Hobart" label="George V. Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q116196960" start="11471" end="11477" title="Old Man Minick" label="Minick"/>
<link wikidata="Q116196960" start="11562" end="11576" title="Old Man Minick" label="Old Man Minick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761683" start="11591" end="11607" title="The Royal Family (play)" label="The Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278419" start="11656" end="11671" title="Dinner at Eight (play)" label="Dinner at Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q24047666" start="11720" end="11730" title="Stage Door (play)" label="Stage Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468911" start="11778" end="11796" title="The Land Is Bright" label="The Land Is Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121131" start="11919" end="11933" title="Saratoga Trunk" label="Saratoga Trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="11979" end="11998" title="Musical theater" label="Musical adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="12011" end="12020" title="Show Boat" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="12045" end="12056" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="12077" end="12097" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q95024" start="12111" end="12127" title="Florenz Ziegfeld" label="Florenz Ziegfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423345" start="12136" end="12144" title="Saratoga (musical)" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="12169" end="12181" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="12193" end="12206" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q731760" start="12222" end="12236" title="Morton DaCosta" label="Morton DaCosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558345" start="12245" end="12250" title="Giant (musical)" label="Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308276" start="12286" end="12307" title="Michael John LaChiusa" label="Michael John LaChiusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659540" start="12317" end="12332" title="Sybille Pearson" label="Sybille Pearson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37284" wikidata="Q233309" url="?curid=37284" title="Brain tumor">
<text>A brain tumor (sometimes referred more commonly as brain cancer) occurs when a group of cells within the brain turn cancerous and grow out of control, creating a mass. There are two main types of tumors: malignant (cancerous) tumors and benign (non-cancerous) tumors. These can be further classified as primary tumors, which start within the brain, and secondary tumors, which most commonly have spread from tumors located outside the brain, known as brain metastasis tumors. All types of brain tumors may produce symptoms that vary depending on the size of the tumor and the part of the brain that is involved. Where symptoms exist, they may include headaches, seizures, problems with vision, vomiting and mental changes. Other symptoms may include difficulty walking, speaking, with sensations, or unconsciousness.

The cause of most brain tumors is unknown, though up to 4% of brain cancers may be caused by CT scan radiation. Uncommon risk factors include exposure to vinyl chloride, Epstein–Barr virus, ionizing radiation, and inherited syndromes such as neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, and von Hippel-Lindau Disease. Studies on mobile phone exposure have not shown a clear risk. The most common types of primary tumors in adults are meningiomas (usually benign) and astrocytomas such as glioblastomas. In children, the most common type is a malignant medulloblastoma. Diagnosis is usually by medical examination along with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The result is then often confirmed by a biopsy. Based on the findings, the tumors are divided into different grades of severity.

Treatment may include some combination of surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy. If seizures occur, anticonvulsant medication may be needed. Dexamethasone and furosemide are medications that may be used to decrease swelling around the tumor. Some tumors grow gradually, requiring only monitoring and possibly needing no further intervention. Treatments that use a person&#x27;s immune system are being studied. Outcomes for malignant tumors vary considerably depending on the type of tumor and how far it has spread at diagnosis. Although benign tumors only grow in one area, they may still be life-threatening depending on their size and location. Malignant glioblastomas usually have very poor outcomes, while benign meningiomas usually have good outcomes. The average five-year survival rate for all (malignant) brain cancers in the United States is 33%.

Secondary, or metastatic, brain tumors are about four times as common as primary brain tumors, with about half of metastases coming from lung cancer. Primary brain tumors occur in around 250,000 people a year globally, and make up less than 2% of cancers. In children younger than 15, brain tumors are second only to acute lymphoblastic leukemia as the most common form of cancer. In New South Wales, Australia in 2005, the average lifetime economic cost of a case of brain cancer was AU$1.9 million, the greatest of any type of cancer.
==Signs and symptoms==
The signs and symptoms of brain tumors are broad. People may experience symptoms regardless of whether the tumor is benign (not cancerous) or cancerous. Primary and secondary brain tumors present with similar symptoms, depending on the location, size, and rate of growth of the tumor. For example, larger tumors in the frontal lobe can cause changes in the ability to think. However, a smaller tumor in an area such as Wernicke&#x27;s area (small area responsible for language comprehension) can result in a greater loss of function.

===Headaches ===
Headaches as a result of raised intracranial pressure can be an early symptom of brain cancer. However, isolated headache without other symptoms is rare, and other symptoms including visual abnormalities may occur before headaches become common. Certain warning signs for headache exist which make the headache more likely to be associated with brain cancer. These are defined as &quot;abnormal neurological examination, headache worsened by Valsalva maneuver, headache causing awakening from sleep, new headache in the older population, progressively worsening headache, atypical headache features, or patients who do not fulfill the strict definition of migraine&quot;. Other associated signs are headaches that are worse in the morning or that subside after vomiting.

===Location-specific symptoms===

The brain is divided into lobes and each lobe or area has its own function. A tumour in any of these lobes may affect the area&#x27;s performance. The symptoms experienced are often linked to the location of the tumour, but each person may experience something different.
* Frontal lobe: Tumours may contribute to poor reasoning, inappropriate social behavior, personality changes, poor planning, lower inhibition, and decreased production of speech (Broca&#x27;s area).
* Temporal lobe: Tumours in this lobe may contribute to poor memory, loss of hearing, and difficulty in language comprehension (Wernicke&#x27;s area is located in this lobe).
* Parietal lobe: Tumours here may result in poor interpretation of languages, difficulty with speaking, writing, drawing, naming, and recognizing, and poor spatial and visual perception.
* Occipital lobe: Damage to this lobe may result in poor vision or loss of vision.
* Cerebellum: Tumours in this area may cause poor balance, muscle movement, and posture.
* Brain stem: Tumours on the brainstem can cause seizures, endocrine problems, respiratory changes, visual changes, headaches and partial paralysis.
* Leptomeninges: Tumours that spread to the leptomeninges, the lining of the brain, may cause cranial nerve palsies such as facial paralysis, abnormalities of eye movement, abnormalities of facial sensation or swallowing difficulty, depending on which cranial nerves are involved.

===Behaviour changes===
A person&#x27;s personality may be altered due to the tumor-damaging lobes of the brain. Since the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes control inhibition, emotions, mood, judgement, reasoning, and behavior, a tumor in those regions can cause inappropriate social behavior, temper tantrums, laughing at things which merit no laughter, and even psychological symptoms such as depression and anxiety. More research is needed into the effectiveness and safety of medication for depression in people with brain tumors.

Personality changes can have damaging effects such as unemployment, unstable relationships, and a lack of control.

==Cause==
A known cause of brain cancers is ionizing radiation. Approximately 4% of brain cancers in the general population are caused by CT-scan radiation. For brain cancers that follow a CT scan at lags of 2 years or more, it has been estimated that 40% are attributable to CT-scan radiation. The risk of brain cancer is dose dependent, with the relative risk increasing by 0.8 for each 100 gray of ionizing radiation received. At this dose, approximately 6391 people would have to be exposed to cause 1 case of brain cancer. Ionizing radiation to the head as part of treatment for other cancers is also a risk factor for developing brain cancer.

Mutations and deletions of tumor suppressor genes, such as P53, are thought to be the cause of some forms of brain tumor. Inherited conditions, such as Von Hippel–Lindau disease, tuberous sclerosis, multiple endocrine neoplasia, and neurofibromatosis type 2 carry a high risk for the development of brain tumors. People with celiac disease have a slightly increased risk of developing brain tumors. Smoking may increase the risk, but evidence of this remains unclear.

Although studies have not shown any link between cell-phone or mobile-phone radiation and the occurrence of brain tumors, the World Health Organization has classified mobile-phone radiation on the IARC scale into Group 2B – possibly carcinogenic.
The claim that cell-phone usage may cause brain cancer is likely based on epidemiological studies which observed a slight increase in glioma risk among heavy users of wireless phones. When those studies were conducted, GSM (2G) phones were in use. Modern, third-generation (3G) phones emit, on average, about 1% of the energy emitted by those GSM (2G) phones, and therefore the finding of an association between cell-phone usage and increased risk of brain cancer is not based upon current phone usage.

==Pathophysiology==
===Meninges===

Human brains are surrounded by a system of connective tissue membranes called meninges that separate the brain from the skull. This three-layered covering is composed of (from the outside in) the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater. The arachnoid and pia are physically connected and thus often considered as a single layer, the &quot;leptomeninges&quot;. Between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater is the subarachnoid space which contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This fluid circulates in the narrow spaces between cells and through the cavities in the brain called ventricles, to support and protect the brain tissue. Blood vessels enter the central nervous system through the perivascular space above the pia mater. The cells in the blood vessel walls are joined tightly, forming the blood–brain barrier which protects the brain from toxins that might enter through the blood.

Tumors of the meninges are meningiomas and are often benign. Though not technically a tumor of brain tissue, they are often considered brain tumors since they protrude into the space where the brain is, causing symptoms. Since they are usually slow-growing tumors, meningiomas can be quite large by the time symptoms appear.

===Brain matter===
The three largest divisions of the brain are the cerebral cortex, cerebellum and the brainstem. These areas are composed of two broad classes of cells: neurons and glia. These two cell types are equally numerous in the brain as a whole, although glial cells outnumber neurons roughly 4 to 1 in the cerebral cortex. Glia come in several types, which perform a number of critical functions, including structural support, metabolic support, insulation, and guidance of development. Primary tumors of the glial cells are called gliomas and often are malignant by the time they are diagnosed.

The thalamus and hypothalamus are major divisions of the diencephalon, with the pituitary gland and pineal gland attached at the bottom; tumors of the pituitary and pineal gland are often benign.

The brainstem lies between the large cerebral cortex and the spinal cord. It is divided into the midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata.

==Diagnosis==
There are no specific signs or symptoms for brain cancer, but the presence of a combination of symptoms and the lack of alternative causes may indicate a brain tumor. A medical history aids in the diagnosis. Clinical and laboratory investigations will serve to exclude infections as the cause of the symptoms.

Brain tumors, when compared to tumors in other areas of the body, pose a challenge for diagnosis. Commonly, radioactive tracers are uptaken in large volumes in tumors due to the high activity of tumor cells, allowing for radioactive imaging of the tumor. However, most of the brain is separated from the blood by the blood–brain barrier (BBB), a membrane that exerts a strict control over what substances are allowed to pass into the brain. Therefore, many tracers that may reach tumors in other areas of the body easily would be unable to reach brain tumors until there was a disruption of the BBB by the tumor. Disruption of the BBB is well imaged via MRI or CT scan, and is therefore regarded as the main diagnostic indicator for malignant gliomas, meningiomas, and brain metastases.

===Imaging===

Medical imaging plays a central role in the diagnosis of brain tumors. Early imaging methods – invasive and sometimes dangerous – such as pneumoencephalography and cerebral angiography have been replaced by non-invasive, high-resolution techniques, especially magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans. MRI with contrast enhancement is the preferred imaging test in the diagnosis of brain tumors. Glioblastomas usually enhance with contrast on T1 MRI weighted MRI imaging, and on T2 with FLAIR imaging showing hyperintense cerebral edema. Low grade gliomas are usually hypointense on T1 MRI, and hyperintense with T2 with FLAIR MRI. Meningiomas are usually homogenously enhanced with dural thickening on MRI.

Treatment with radiation can lead to treatment induced changes in the brain, including radiation necrosis (death of brain tissue due to radiation treatments) visible on brain imaging and which can be difficult to differentiate from tumor recurrence.

==== Different Types of MRI Scans ====
Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) looks at the blood vessels in the brain. In the diagnosis of brain tumor, MRAs are typically carried out before surgery to help surgeons get a better understanding of the tumor vasculature. For example, a study was done where surgeons were able to separate benign brain tumors from malignant ones by analyzing the shapes of the blood vessels that were extracted from MRA. Although not required, some MRA may inject contrast agent, gadolinium, into the patient to get an enhanced image

Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) measures the metabolic changes or chemical changes inside the tumor. The most common MRS is proton spectroscopy with its frequency measured in parts per million (ppm). Gliomas or malignant brain tumors have different spectra from normal brain tissue in that they have greater choline levels and lower N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) signals. Using MRS in brain tumor diagnosis can help doctors identify the type of tumor and its aggressiveness. For example, benign brain tumors or meningioma have increased alanine levels. It can also help to distinguish brain tumors from scar tissues or dead tissues caused by previous radiation treatment, which does not have increased choline levels that brain tumors have, and from tumor-mimicking lesions such as abscesses or infarcts.

Perfusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (pMRI) assess the blood volume and blood flow of different parts of the brain and brain tumors. pMRI requires the injection of contrast agent, usually gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA) into the veins in order to enhance the contrast. pMRI provides a cerebral blood volume map that shows the tumor vascularity and angiogenesis. Brain tumors would require a larger blood supply and thus, would show a high cerebral blood volume on the pMRI map. The vascular morphology and degree of angiogenesis from pMRI help to determine the grade and malignancy of brain tumors. For brain tumor diagnosis, pMRI is useful in determining the best site to perform biopsy and to help reduce sampling error. pMRI is also valuable for after treatment to determine if the abnormal area is a remaining tumor or a scar tissue. For patients that are undergoing anti-angiogenesis cancer therapy, pMRI can give the doctors a better sense of efficacy of the treatment by monitoring tumor cerebral blood volume.

Functional MRI (fMRI) measures blood flow changes in active parts of the brain while the patient is performing tasks and provides specific locations of the brain that are responsible for certain functions. Before performing a brain tumor surgery on patients, neurosurgeons would use fMRI to avoid damage to structures of the brain that correspond with important brain functions while resecting the tumor at the same time. Preoperative fMRI is important because it is often difficult to distinguish the anatomy near the tumor as it distorts its surrounding regions. Neurosurgeons would use fMRI to plan whether to perform a resection where tumor is surgically removed as much as possible, a biopsy where they take a surgical sampling amount to provide a diagnosis, or to not undergo surgery at all. For example, a neurosurgeon may be opposed to resecting a tumor near the motor cortex as that would affect the patient&#x27;s movements. Without preoperative fMRI, the neurosurgeon would have to perform an awake-craniotomy where the patient would have to interact during open surgery to see if tumor removal would affect important brain functions.

Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) a form of MRI that measures random Brownian motion of water molecules along a magnetic field gradient. For brain tumor diagnosis, measurement of apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in brain tumors allow doctors to categorize tumor type. Most brain tumors have higher ADC than normal brain tissues and doctors can match the observed ADC of the patient&#x27;s brain tumor with a list of accepted ADC to identify tumor type. DWI is also useful for treatment and therapy purposes where changes in diffusion can be analyzed in response to drug, radiation, or gene therapy. Successful response results in apoptosis and increase in diffusion while failed treatment results in unchanged diffusion values.

==== Other Types of Imaging Techniques ====
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan uses x-rays to take pictures from different angles and computer processing to combine the pictures into a 3D image. A CT scan usually serves as an alternative to MRI in cases where the patient cannot have an MRI due to claustrophobia or pacemaker. Compared to MRI, a CT scan shows a more detailed image of the bone structures near the tumor and can be used to measure the tumor&#x27;s size. Like an MRI, a contrast dye may also be injected into the veins or ingested by mouth before a CT scan to better outline any tumors that may be present. CT scans use contrast materials that are iodine-based and barium sulfate compounds. The downside of using CT scans as opposed to MRI is that some brain tumors do not show up well on CT scans because some intra-axial masses are faint and resemble normal brain tissue. In some scenarios, brain tumors in CT scans may be mistaken for infarction, infection, and demyelination. To suspect that an intra-axial mass is a brain tumor instead of other possibilities, there must be unexplained calcifications in the brain, preservation of the cortex, and disproportionate mass effect.

CT Angiography (CTA) provides information about the blood vessels in the brain using X-rays. A contrast agent is always required to be injected into the patient in the CT scanner. CTA serves as an alternative to MRA.

Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan uses radiolabelled substances, such as FDG which taken up by cells that are actively dividing. Tumor cells are more actively dividing so they would absorb more of the radioactive substance. After injection, a scanner would be used to create an image of the radioactive areas in the brain. PET scans are used more often for high-grade tumors than for low-grade tumors. It is useful after treatment to help doctors determine if the abnormal area on an MRI image is a remaining tumor or a scar tissue. Scar tissues will not show up on PET scans while tumors would.

===Pathology===

Maximal safe surgical resection (to preserve as much neurological function as possible) and histologic examination of the tumor is also required to aid in the diagnosis. Cancer cells may have specific characteristics.

Atypia: an indication of abnormality of a cell (which may be indicative of malignancy). Significance of the abnormality is highly dependent on context.

Neoplasia: the (uncontrolled) division of cells that is characteristic of cancer.

Necrosis: the (premature) death of cells, caused by external factors such as infection, toxin or trauma. Necrotic cells send the wrong chemical signals which prevent phagocytes from disposing of the dead cells, leading to a buildup of dead tissue, cell debris and toxins at or near the site of the necrotic cells

Local hypoxia, or the deprivation of adequate oxygen supply to certain areas of the brain, including within the tumor, as the tumor grows and recruits local blood vessels.

===Classification===
Tumors can be benign or malignant, can occur in different parts of the brain, and may be classified as primary or secondary. A primary tumor is one that has started in the brain, as opposed to a metastatic tumor, which is one that has spread to the brain from another area of the body. The incidence of metastatic tumors is approximately four times greater than primary tumors. Tumors may or may not be symptomatic: some tumors are discovered because the patient has symptoms, others show up incidentally on an imaging scan, or at an autopsy.

Grading of the tumors of the central nervous system commonly occurs on a 4-point scale (I-IV) created by the World Health Organization in 1993. Grade I tumors are the least severe and commonly associated with long-term survival, with severity and prognosis worsening as the grade increases. Low-grade tumors are often benign, while higher grades are aggressively malignant and/or metastatic. Other grading scales do exist, many based upon the same criteria as the WHO scale and graded from I-IV.

==== Primary ====

The most common primary brain tumors are:
* Gliomas (50.4%)
* Meningiomas (20.8%)
* Pituitary adenomas (15%)
* Nerve sheath tumors (10%)

These common tumors can also be organized according to tissue of origin as shown below:
====Secondary====
Secondary tumors of the brain are metastatic and have spread to the brain from cancers originating in another organ. Metastatic spread is usually by the blood. The most common types of cancers that spread to the brain are lung cancer (accounting for over half of all cases), breast cancer, melanoma skin cancer, kidney cancer and colon cancer.

=====By behavior=====
Brain tumors can be cancerous (malignant) or non-cancerous (benign). However, the definitions of malignant or benign neoplasms differ from those commonly used in other types of cancerous or non-cancerous neoplasms in the body.
In cancers elsewhere in the body, three malignant properties differentiate benign tumors from malignant forms of cancer: benign tumors are self-limited and do not invade or metastasize. Characteristics of malignant tumors include:
* uncontrolled mitosis (growth by division beyond the normal limits)
* anaplasia: the cells in the neoplasm have an obviously different form (in size and shape). Anaplastic cells display marked pleomorphism. The cell nuclei are characteristically extremely hyperchromatic (darkly stained) and enlarged; the nucleus might have the same size as the cytoplasm of the cell (nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio may approach 1:1, instead of the normal 1:4 or 1:6 ratio). Giant cells – considerably larger than their neighbors – may form and possess either one enormous nucleus or several nuclei (syncytia). Anaplastic nuclei are variable and bizarre in size and shape.
* invasion or infiltration:
** Invasion or invasiveness is the spatial expansion of the tumor through uncontrolled mitosis, in the sense that the neoplasm invades the space occupied by adjacent tissue, thereby pushing the other tissue aside and eventually compressing the tissue. Often these tumors are associated with clearly outlined tumors in imaging.
** Infiltration is the behavior of the tumor either to grow (microscopic) tentacles that push into the surrounding tissue (often making the outline of the tumor undefined or diffuse) or to have tumor cells &quot;seeded&quot; into the tissue beyond the circumference of the tumorous mass.
* metastasis (spread to other locations in the body via lymph or blood).

==== By genetics ====
In 2016, the WHO restructured their classifications of some categories of gliomas to include distinct genetic mutations that have been useful in differentiating tumor types, prognoses, and treatment responses. Genetic mutations are typically detected via immunohistochemistry, a technique that visualizes the presence or absence of a targeted protein via staining.
* Mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 genes are commonly found in low-grade gliomas
* Loss of both IDH genes combined with loss of chromosome arms 1p and 19q indicates the tumor is an oligodendroglioma
* Loss of TP53 and ATRX characterizes astrocytomas
* Genes EGFR, TERT, and PTEN, are commonly altered in gliomas and are useful in differentiating tumor grade and biology

====Specific types====

Anaplastic astrocytoma, Anaplastic oligodendroglioma, Astrocytoma, Central neurocytoma, Choroid plexus carcinoma, Choroid plexus papilloma, Choroid plexus tumor, Colloid cyst, Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumour, Ependymal tumor, Fibrillary astrocytoma, Giant-cell glioblastoma, Glioblastoma, Gliomatosis cerebri, Gliosarcoma, Hemangiopericytoma, Medulloblastoma, Medulloepithelioma, Meningeal carcinomatosis, Neuroblastoma, Neurocytoma, Oligoastrocytoma, Oligodendroglioma, Optic nerve sheath meningioma, Pediatric ependymoma, Pilocytic astrocytoma, Pinealoblastoma, Pineocytoma, Pleomorphic anaplastic neuroblastoma, Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, Primary central nervous system lymphoma, Sphenoid wing meningioma, Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, Subependymoma, Trilateral retinoblastoma.

==Treatment==
A medical team generally assesses the treatment options and presents them to the person affected and their family. Various types of treatment are available depending on tumor type and location, and may be combined to produce the best chances of survival:
* Surgery: complete or partial resection of the tumor with the objective of removing as many tumor cells as possible.
* Radiotherapy: the most commonly used treatment for brain tumors; the tumor is irradiated with beta, x rays or gamma rays.
* Chemotherapy: a treatment option for cancer, however, it is not always used to treat brain tumors as the blood–brain barrier can prevent some drugs from reaching the cancerous cells.
* A variety of experimental therapies are available through clinical trials.

Survival rates in primary brain tumors depend on the type of tumor, age, functional status of the patient, the extent of surgical removal and other factors specific to each case.

Standard care for anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and anaplastic oligoastrocytomas is surgery followed by radiotherapy. One study found a survival benefit for the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy after surgery, compared with radiotherapy alone.

===Surgery===
Surgical resection of the greatest extent of contrast enhancing tumor possible (gross total resection) is associated with increased overall and progression free survival in those with glioblastoma. Gross total resection is often required in other brain tumors. Minimally invasive techniques are becoming the dominant trend in neurosurgical oncology. The main objective of surgery is to remove as many tumor cells as possible, with complete removal being the best outcome and cytoreduction (&quot;debulking&quot;) of the tumor may otherwise be done. Due to the infiltrative nature of glioblastomas, total resection is usually unachievable and progression after surgery usually occurs, with progression occurring about 7 months after surgery.

Many meningiomas, with the exception of some tumors located at the skull base, can be successfully removed surgically.
Most pituitary adenomas can be removed surgically, often using a minimally invasive approach through the nasal cavity and skull base (trans-nasal, trans-sphenoidal approach). Large pituitary adenomas require a craniotomy (opening of the skull) for their removal. Radiotherapy, including stereotactic approaches, is reserved for inoperable cases.

Postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy are integral parts of the therapeutic standard for malignant tumors.

Multiple metastatic tumors are generally treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy rather than surgery and the prognosis in such cases is determined by the primary tumor, and is generally poor.

===Radiation therapy===
The goal of radiation therapy is to kill tumor cells while leaving normal brain tissue unharmed. In standard external beam radiation therapy, multiple treatments of standard-dose &quot;fractions&quot; of radiation are applied to the brain. This process is repeated for a total of 10 to 30 treatments, depending on the type of tumor. This additional treatment provides some patients with improved outcomes and longer survival rates.

Radiosurgery is a treatment method that uses computerized calculations to focus radiation at the site of the tumor while minimizing the radiation dose to the surrounding brain. Radiosurgery may be an adjunct to other treatments, or it may represent the primary treatment technique for some tumors. Forms used include stereotactic radiosurgery, such as Gamma knife, Cyberknife or Novalis Tx radiosurgery.

Radiotherapy is the most common treatment for secondary brain tumors. The amount of radiotherapy depends on the size of the area of the brain affected by cancer. Conventional external beam &quot;whole-brain radiotherapy treatment&quot; (WBRT) or &quot;whole-brain irradiation&quot; may be suggested if there is a risk that other secondary tumors will develop in the future. Stereotactic radiotherapy is usually recommended in cases involving fewer than three small secondary brain tumors. Radiotherapy may be used following, or in some cases in place of, resection of the tumor. Forms of radiotherapy used for brain cancer include external beam radiation therapy, the most common, and brachytherapy and proton therapy, the last especially used for children.

People who receive stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) for the treatment of metastatic brain tumors have more than twice the risk of developing learning and memory problems than those treated with SRS alone. Results of a 2021 systematic review found that when using SRS as the initial treatment, survival or death related to brain metastasis was not greater than alone versus SRS with WBRT.

Postoperative conventional daily radiotherapy improves survival for adults with good functional well-being and high grade glioma compared to no postoperative radiotherapy. Hypofractionated radiation therapy has similar efficacy for survival as compared to conventional radiotherapy, particularly for individuals aged 60 and older with glioblastoma.

===Chemotherapy===
Patients undergoing chemotherapy are administered drugs designed to kill tumor cells. Although chemotherapy may improve overall survival in patients with the most malignant primary brain tumors, it does so in only about 20 percent of patients. Chemotherapy is often used in young children instead of radiation, as radiation may have negative effects on the developing brain. The decision to prescribe this treatment is based on a patient&#x27;s overall health, type of tumor, and extent of cancer. The toxicity and many side effects of the drugs, and the uncertain outcome of chemotherapy in brain tumors puts this treatment further down the line of treatment options with surgery and radiation therapy preferred.

UCLA Neuro-Oncology publishes real-time survival data for patients with a diagnosis of glioblastoma. They are the only institution in the United States that displays how brain tumor patients are performing on current therapies. They also show a listing of chemotherapy agents used to treat high-grade glioma tumors.

Genetic mutations have significant effects on the effectiveness of chemotherapy. Gliomas with IDH1 or IDH2 mutations respond better to chemotherapy than those without the mutation. Loss of chromosome arms 1p and 19q also indicate better response to chemoradiation.

===Other===
A shunt may be used to relieve symptoms caused by intracranial pressure, by reducing the build-up of fluid (hydrocephalus) caused by the blockage of the free flow of cerebrospinal fluid.

For those with brain tumors, anti-seizure prophylactic (preventative) medications are not usually recommended. However, anti-epileptics are used in those with seizures.

Cerebral edema secondary to brain tumors is managed by corticosteroids. Dexamethasone is the preferred corticosteroid due to its long half life and reduced effect on water retention (mineralcorticoid activity). Bevacizumab (an anti-VEGFA antibody) may improve cerebral edema in those that are unresponsive to steroids.

==Prognosis==
The prognosis of brain cancer depends on the type of cancer diagnosed. Medulloblastoma has a good prognosis with chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical resection while glioblastoma has a median survival of only 15 months even with aggressive chemoradiotherapy and surgery. Brainstem gliomas have the poorest prognosis of any form of brain cancer, with most patients dying within one year, even with therapy that typically consists of radiation to the tumor along with corticosteroids. However, one type, focal brainstem gliomas in children, seems open to exceptional prognosis and long-term survival has frequently been reported.

Prognosis is also affected by presentation of genetic mutations. Certain mutations provide better prognosis than others. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in gliomas, as well as deletion of chromosome arms 1p and 19q, generally indicate better prognosis. TP53, ATRX, EGFR, PTEN, and TERT mutations are also useful in determining prognosis.

===Glioblastoma===
Glioblastoma is the most aggressive (grade 4) and most common form of a malignant primary brain tumor. Even when aggressive multimodality therapy consisting of radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and surgical excision is used, median survival is only 15–18 months. Standard therapy for glioblastoma consists of maximal surgical resection of the tumor, followed by radiotherapy between two and four weeks after the surgical procedure to remove the cancer, then by chemotherapy, such as temozolomide. Most patients with glioblastoma take a corticosteroid, typically dexamethasone, during their illness to relieve symptoms. Experimental treatments include targeted therapy, gamma knife radiosurgery, boron neutron capture therapy, gene therapy, and chemowafer implants.

===Oligodendrogliomas===

Oligodendrogliomas are incurable but slowly progressive malignant brain tumors. They can be treated with surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiotherapy or a combination. For some suspected low-grade (grade II) tumors, only a course of watchful waiting and symptomatic therapy is opted for. These tumors show co-deletions of the p and q arms of chromosome 1 and chromosome 19 respectively (1p19q co-deletion) and have been found to be especially chemosensitive with one report claiming them to be one of the most chemosensitive tumors. A median survival of up to 16.7 years has been reported for grade II oligodendrogliomas.

=== Acoustic neuroma ===
Acoustic neuromas are non-cancerous tumors. They can be treated with surgery, radiation therapy, or observation. Early intervention with surgery or radiation is recommended to prevent progressive hearing loss.

==Epidemiology==
The incidence of brain tumors is higher in developed countries. This could be explained by undiagnosed tumor-related deaths in resource limited or lower income countries or by early deaths caused by other poverty-related causes that preempt a patient&#x27;s life before tumors develop.

The incidence of CNS tumors in the United States, Israel, and the Nordic countries is relatively high, while Japan and Asian countries have a lower incidence.
===United States===
In the United States in 2015, approximately 166,039 people were living with brain or other central nervous system tumors. Over 2018, it was projected that there would be 23,880 new cases of brain tumors and 16,830 deaths in 2018 as a result, accounting for 1.4 percent of all cancers and 2.8 percent of all cancer deaths. Median age of diagnosis was 58 years old, while median age of death was 65. Diagnosis was slightly more common in males, at approximately 7.5 cases per 100 000 people, while females saw 2 fewer at 5.4. Deaths as a result of brain cancer were 5.3 per 100 000 for males, and 3.6 per 100 000 for females, making brain cancer the 10th leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Overall lifetime risk of developing brain cancer is approximated at 0.6 percent for men and women.

===UK===
Brain, other CNS or intracranial tumors are the ninth most common cancer in the UK (around 10,600 people were diagnosed in 2013), and it is the eighth most common cause of cancer death (around 5,200 people died in 2012). White British patients with brain tumour are 30% more likely to die within a year of diagnosis than patients from other ethnicities. The reason for this is unknown.

===Children===
In the United States more than 28,000 people under 20 are estimated to have a brain tumor. About 3,720 new cases of brain tumors are expected to be diagnosed in those under 15 in 2019. Higher rates were reported in 1985–1994 than in 1975–1983. There is some debate as to the reasons; one theory is that the trend is the result of improved diagnosis and reporting, since the jump occurred at the same time that MRIs became available widely, and there was no coincident jump in mortality. Central nervous system tumors make up 20–25 percent of cancers in children.

The average survival rate for all primary brain cancers in children is 74%. Brain cancers are the most common cancer in children under 19, are result in more death in this group than leukemia. Younger people do less well.

The most common brain tumor types in children (0–14) are: pilocytic astrocytoma, malignant glioma, medulloblastoma, neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumors, and ependymoma.

In children under 2, about 70% of brain tumors are medulloblastomas, ependymomas, and low-grade gliomas. Less commonly, and seen usually in infants, are teratomas and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors. Germ cell tumors, including teratomas, make up just 3% of pediatric primary brain tumors, but the worldwide incidence varies significantly.

In the UK, 429 children aged 14 and under are diagnosed with a brain tumour on average each year, and 563 children and young people under the age of 19 are diagnosed.

==Research==
===Immunotherapy===
Cancer immunotherapy is being actively studied. For malignant gliomas no therapy has been shown to improve life expectancy as of 2015.

===Vesicular stomatitis virus===

In 2000, researchers used the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) to infect and kill cancer cells without affecting healthy cells.

===Retroviral replicating vectors===

Led by Prof. Nori Kasahara, researchers from USC, who are now at UCLA, reported in 2001 the first successful example of applying the use of retroviral replicating vectors towards transducing cell lines derived from solid tumors. Building on this initial work, the researchers applied the technology to &quot;in vivo&quot; models of cancer and in 2005 reported a long-term survival benefit in an experimental brain tumor animal model. Subsequently, in preparation for human clinical trials, this technology was further developed by Tocagen (a pharmaceutical company primarily focused on brain cancer treatments) as a combination treatment (Toca 511 &amp; Toca FC). This has been under investigation since 2010 in a Phase I/II clinical trial for the potential treatment of recurrent high-grade glioma including glioblastoma and anaplastic astrocytoma. No results have yet been published.

===Non-invasive detection===
Efforts to detect and monitor development and treatment response of brain tumors by liquid biopsy from blood, cerebrospinal fluid or urine, are in the early stages of development.

== See also ==
* Brain
* Tumor
* Nervous system neoplasm
* List of brain tumor cases

== References ==
== External links ==
* Brain tumour information from Cancer Research UK
* Neuro-Oncology: Cancer Management Guidelines
* MedPix Teaching File MR Scans of Primary Brain Lymphoma, etc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="2" end="13" title="Brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="51" end="63" title="Brain tumor" label="brain cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="105" end="110" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="196" end="201" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417240" start="237" end="243" title="benign tumor" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110267" start="303" end="316" title="primary tumor" label="primary tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="353" end="362" title="metastasis" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620196" start="451" end="467" title="brain metastasis" label="brain metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="651" end="660" title="headaches" label="headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="662" end="669" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="686" end="692" title="visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="694" end="702" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="707" end="713" title="cognition" label="mental"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="800" end="815" title="unconsciousness" label="unconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="939" end="950" title="Risk factor (epidemiology)" label="risk factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q338869" start="972" end="986" title="vinyl chloride" label="vinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="988" end="1006" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein–Barr virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="1008" end="1026" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q847605" start="1060" end="1077" title="neurofibromatosis" label="neurofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="1079" end="1097" title="tuberous sclerosis" label="tuberous sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q741315" start="1103" end="1128" title="von Hippel-Lindau Disease" label="von Hippel-Lindau Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q612254" start="1141" end="1162" title="Mobile phone radiation and health" label="mobile phone exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="1246" end="1256" title="meningioma" label="meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q177755" start="1279" end="1290" title="astrocytoma" label="astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="1300" end="1312" title="glioblastoma" label="glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="1364" end="1379" title="medulloblastoma" label="medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="1405" end="1424" title="medical examination" label="medical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="1436" end="1455" title="computed tomography" label="computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="1464" end="1490" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="1538" end="1544" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591928" start="1597" end="1625" title="Grading of the tumors of the central nervous system" label="different grades of severity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="1670" end="1677" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="1679" end="1696" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="1701" end="1713" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="1734" end="1748" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="1775" end="1788" title="Dexamethasone" label="Dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q388801" start="1793" end="1803" title="furosemide" label="furosemide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012719" start="1976" end="2025" title="Cancer immunotherapy" label="Treatments that use a person&amp;#x27;s immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716347" start="2405" end="2428" title="five-year survival rate" label="five-year survival rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="2507" end="2517" title="metastatic" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="2630" end="2641" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="2810" end="2838" title="acute lymphoblastic leukemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="3195" end="3204" title="Malignancy" label="cancerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="3472" end="3492" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416096" start="3637" end="3658" title="intracranial pressure" label="intracranial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427231" start="4047" end="4064" title="Valsalva maneuver" label="Valsalva maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="4685" end="4697" title="Frontal lobe" label="Frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="4862" end="4879" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="4884" end="4897" title="Temporal lobe" label="Temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="5010" end="5030" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="5059" end="5072" title="Parietal lobe" label="Parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="5246" end="5260" title="Occipital lobe" label="Occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="5329" end="5339" title="Cerebellum" label="Cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="5418" end="5428" title="Brainstem" label="Brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="5567" end="5580" title="Leptomeninges" label="Leptomeninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182126" start="5659" end="5680" title="cranial nerve palsies" label="cranial nerve palsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562539" start="5689" end="5705" title="facial paralysis" label="facial paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="5775" end="5796" title="dysphagia" label="swallowing difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="6548" end="6566" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="6642" end="6649" title="CT-scan" label="CT-scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190095" start="6897" end="6901" title="Gray (unit)" label="gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="7181" end="7202" title="tumor suppressor gene" label="tumor suppressor gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="7213" end="7216" title="P53" label="P53"/>
<link wikidata="Q741315" start="7306" end="7331" title="Von Hippel–Lindau disease" label="Von Hippel–Lindau disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="7333" end="7351" title="tuberous sclerosis" label="tuberous sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553018" start="7353" end="7381" title="multiple endocrine neoplasia" label="multiple endocrine neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q847605" start="7387" end="7411" title="Neurofibromatosis" label="neurofibromatosis type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="7479" end="7493" title="celiac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q612254" start="7672" end="7708" title="Mobile phone radiation and health" label="cell-phone or mobile-phone radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="7749" end="7774" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="7820" end="7824" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="IARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q943717" start="7836" end="7844" title="List of IARC Group 2B carcinogens" label="Group 2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="8004" end="8010" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="8453" end="8470" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="8488" end="8496" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="8515" end="8520" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="8530" end="8535" title="Human skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394389" start="8606" end="8616" title="dura mater" label="dura mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647112" start="8618" end="8633" title="arachnoid mater" label="arachnoid mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647118" start="8639" end="8648" title="pia mater" label="pia mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="8826" end="8844" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="8860" end="8879" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="8989" end="8999" title="Ventricular system" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="9042" end="9055" title="Blood vessels" label="Blood vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="9066" end="9088" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="9209" end="9228" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="9259" end="9265" title="toxins" label="toxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="9330" end="9340" title="meningioma" label="meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="9697" end="9712" title="Cerebrum" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="9714" end="9724" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="9733" end="9742" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="9800" end="9807" title="neurons" label="neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="9812" end="9816" title="glia" label="glia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="9894" end="9905" title="glial cells" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="9916" end="9923" title="neurons" label="neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="9946" end="9961" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="10172" end="10178" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="10241" end="10249" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="10254" end="10266" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="10294" end="10306" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="10317" end="10332" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="10337" end="10349" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="10388" end="10397" title="pituitary" label="pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="10402" end="10414" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="10438" end="10447" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="10754" end="10769" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="11004" end="11022" title="radioactive tracer" label="radioactive tracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="11213" end="11232" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="11699" end="11714" title="Medical imaging" label="Medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205999" start="11837" end="11858" title="pneumoencephalography" label="pneumoencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q468414" start="11872" end="11883" title="angiography" label="angiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="11959" end="11985" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="11996" end="12015" title="computed tomography" label="computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281360" start="12205" end="12207" title="T2*-weighted imaging" label="T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q419849" start="18447" end="18450" title="Fluorodeoxyglucose" label="FDG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960558" start="19207" end="19213" title="Atypia" label="Atypia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="19360" end="19369" title="Neoplasia" label="Neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="19443" end="19451" title="Necrosis" label="Necrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="19609" end="19618" title="phagocyte" label="phagocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="19763" end="19770" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="19965" end="19971" title="benign" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="19975" end="19984" title="malignant" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="20146" end="20156" title="metastasis" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="20354" end="20365" title="symptomatic" label="symptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591928" start="20495" end="20546" title="Grading of the tumors of the central nervous system" label="Grading of the tumors of the central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="21055" end="21062" title="Gliomas" label="Gliomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="21073" end="21084" title="Meningiomas" label="Meningiomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="21095" end="21113" title="Pituitary adenomas" label="Pituitary adenomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11590740" start="21122" end="21141" title="Nerve sheath tumors" label="Nerve sheath tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="21289" end="21299" title="metastasis" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="21334" end="21340" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="21477" end="21488" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="21530" end="21543" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="21545" end="21553" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242950" start="21567" end="21580" title="kidney cancer" label="kidney cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="21585" end="21597" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="21642" end="21651" title="cancerous" label="cancerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q486082" start="22151" end="22160" title="anaplasia" label="anaplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005740" start="22274" end="22286" title="pleomorphism (cytology)" label="pleomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="22292" end="22303" title="cell nuclei" label="cell nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="22427" end="22436" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152526" start="22535" end="22546" title="Giant cells" label="Giant cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q844460" start="22660" end="22668" title="syncytium" label="syncytia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="23378" end="23388" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="23546" end="23552" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="23574" end="23591" title="genetic mutations" label="genetic mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q899285" start="23727" end="23747" title="immunohistochemistry" label="immunohistochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="23827" end="23835" title="staining" label="staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027543" start="23852" end="23856" title="IDH1" label="IDH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q21116031" start="23861" end="23865" title="IDH2" label="IDH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="23959" end="23969" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318384" start="24012" end="24029" title="oligodendroglioma" label="oligodendroglioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="24040" end="24044" title="P53" label="TP53"/>
<link wikidata="Q17835753" start="24049" end="24053" title="ATRX" label="ATRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q177755" start="24068" end="24079" title="astrocytoma" label="astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="24089" end="24093" title="Epidermal growth factor receptor" label="EGFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315135" start="24095" end="24099" title="Telomerase reverse transcriptase" label="TERT"/>
<link wikidata="Q416356" start="24105" end="24109" title="PTEN (gene)" label="PTEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q486092" start="24226" end="24248" title="Anaplastic astrocytoma" label="Anaplastic astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q84955701" start="24250" end="24278" title="Anaplastic oligodendroglioma" label="Anaplastic oligodendroglioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q177755" start="24280" end="24291" title="Astrocytoma" label="Astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062123" start="24293" end="24312" title="Central neurocytoma" label="Central neurocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524940" start="24314" end="24338" title="Choroid plexus carcinoma" label="Choroid plexus carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q623668" start="24340" end="24364" title="Choroid plexus papilloma" label="Choroid plexus papilloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105211" start="24366" end="24386" title="Choroid plexus tumor" label="Choroid plexus tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779478" start="24388" end="24400" title="Colloid cyst" label="Colloid cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q824595" start="24402" end="24441" title="Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumour" label="Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346753" start="24443" end="24458" title="Ependymal tumor" label="Ependymal tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q953330" start="24460" end="24482" title="Fibrillary astrocytoma" label="Fibrillary astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772317" start="24484" end="24507" title="Giant-cell glioblastoma" label="Giant-cell glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="24509" end="24521" title="Glioblastoma" label="Glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531482" start="24523" end="24542" title="Gliomatosis cerebri" label="Gliomatosis cerebri"/>
<link wikidata="Q609503" start="24544" end="24555" title="Gliosarcoma" label="Gliosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144913" start="24557" end="24575" title="Hemangiopericytoma" label="Hemangiopericytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="24577" end="24592" title="Medulloblastoma" label="Medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807330" start="24594" end="24612" title="Medulloepithelioma" label="Medulloepithelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920586" start="24614" end="24638" title="Meningeal carcinomatosis" label="Meningeal carcinomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938205" start="24640" end="24653" title="Neuroblastoma" label="Neuroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062123" start="24655" end="24666" title="Neurocytoma" label="Neurocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938668" start="24668" end="24684" title="Oligoastrocytoma" label="Oligoastrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318384" start="24686" end="24703" title="Oligodendroglioma" label="Oligodendroglioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098799" start="24705" end="24734" title="Optic nerve sheath meningioma" label="Optic nerve sheath meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159224" start="24736" end="24756" title="Pediatric ependymoma" label="Pediatric ependymoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095252" start="24758" end="24779" title="Pilocytic astrocytoma" label="Pilocytic astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095567" start="24781" end="24796" title="Pinealoblastoma" label="Pinealoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106360" start="24798" end="24809" title="Pineocytoma" label="Pineocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204589" start="24811" end="24847" title="Pleomorphic anaplastic neuroblastoma" label="Pleomorphic anaplastic neuroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q627373" start="24849" end="24878" title="Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma" label="Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246818" start="24880" end="24919" title="Primary central nervous system lymphoma" label="Primary central nervous system lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576644" start="24921" end="24945" title="Sphenoid wing meningioma" label="Sphenoid wing meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q122222" start="24947" end="24982" title="Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma" label="Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631123" start="24984" end="24997" title="Subependymoma" label="Subependymoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394840" start="24999" end="25024" title="Trilateral retinoblastoma" label="Trilateral retinoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="25327" end="25336" title="Resection (surgery)" label="resection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977435" start="26722" end="26735" title="cytoreduction" label="cytoreduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="26994" end="27005" title="meningiomas" label="meningiomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="27113" end="27130" title="pituitary adenoma" label="pituitary adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q156104" start="27213" end="27225" title="nasal cavity" label="nasal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="27289" end="27306" title="pituitary adenoma" label="pituitary adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q514921" start="27318" end="27328" title="craniotomy" label="craniotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931968" start="27395" end="27407" title="stereotactic" label="stereotactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070621" start="27898" end="27929" title="external beam radiation therapy" label="external beam radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q973234" start="28222" end="28234" title="Radiosurgery" label="Radiosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931968" start="28539" end="28551" title="stereotactic" label="stereotactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q973234" start="28574" end="28585" title="Gamma knife" label="Gamma knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147165" start="28587" end="28597" title="Cyberknife (device)" label="Cyberknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q973234" start="28601" end="28611" title="Novalis radiosurgery" label="Novalis Tx"/>
<link wikidata="Q973234" start="28612" end="28624" title="radiosurgery" label="radiosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="28627" end="28639" title="Radiation therapy" label="Radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070621" start="29258" end="29289" title="external beam radiation therapy" label="external beam radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="29312" end="29325" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q507667" start="29330" end="29344" title="proton therapy" label="proton therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="30150" end="30162" title="glioblastoma" label="glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="30204" end="30216" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="30257" end="30262" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027543" start="31310" end="31314" title="IDH1" label="IDH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q21116031" start="31318" end="31322" title="IDH2" label="IDH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890115" start="31496" end="31501" title="Shunt (medical)" label="shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416096" start="31544" end="31565" title="intracranial pressure" label="intracranial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="31602" end="31615" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="31660" end="31679" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q413299" start="32063" end="32074" title="Bevacizumab" label="Bevacizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="32257" end="32272" title="Medulloblastoma" label="Medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32299" end="32349" title="Medulloblastoma#Treatment and prognosis" label="chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical resection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090613" start="32430" end="32447" title="chemoradiotherapy" label="chemoradiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="32656" end="32670" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027543" start="32940" end="32944" title="IDH1" label="IDH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q21116031" start="32949" end="32953" title="IDH2" label="IDH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="32967" end="32973" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="33064" end="33068" title="P53" label="TP53"/>
<link wikidata="Q17835753" start="33070" end="33074" title="ATRX" label="ATRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="33076" end="33080" title="Epidermal growth factor receptor" label="EGFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q416356" start="33082" end="33086" title="PTEN (gene)" label="PTEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315135" start="33092" end="33096" title="Telomerase reverse transcriptase" label="TERT"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="33169" end="33181" title="Glioblastoma" label="Glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591928" start="33206" end="33213" title="grading of the tumors of the central nervous system" label="grade 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446275" start="33489" end="33498" title="Segmental resection" label="resection"/>
<link wikidata="Q514921" start="33575" end="33593" title="craniotomy" label="surgical procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q425088" start="33624" end="33636" title="temozolomide" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q425088" start="33646" end="33658" title="temozolomide" label="temozolomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="33699" end="33713" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="33725" end="33738" title="dexamethasone" label="dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q492646" start="33814" end="33830" title="targeted therapy" label="targeted therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33832" end="33856" title="radiosurgery#Gamma Knife" label="gamma knife radiosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q893257" start="33858" end="33887" title="boron neutron capture therapy" label="boron neutron capture therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="33889" end="33901" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33907" end="33926" title="Carmustine#Implants" label="chemowafer implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318384" start="33955" end="33972" title="Oligodendroglioma" label="Oligodendroglioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446275" start="34060" end="34078" title="Segmental resection" label="surgical resection"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="34080" end="34092" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="34094" end="34106" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q430258" start="34299" end="34311" title="chromosome 1 (human)" label="chromosome 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q510786" start="34316" end="34329" title="chromosome 19 (human)" label="chromosome 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q423965" start="34605" end="34621" title="Vestibular schwannoma" label="Acoustic neuroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="36925" end="36929" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="36991" end="37000" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="37262" end="37270" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095252" start="37360" end="37381" title="pilocytic astrocytoma" label="pilocytic astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="37383" end="37399" title="Glioma" label="malignant glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="37401" end="37416" title="medulloblastoma" label="medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346753" start="37464" end="37474" title="ependymoma" label="ependymoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="37528" end="37543" title="medulloblastoma" label="medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346753" start="37546" end="37556" title="ependymoma" label="ependymoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="37573" end="37579" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q200741" start="37630" end="37638" title="teratoma" label="teratoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q631904" start="37644" end="37676" title="ATRT" label="atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737977" start="37679" end="37694" title="Germ cell tumor" label="Germ cell tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012719" start="38021" end="38041" title="Cancer immunotherapy" label="Cancer immunotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162762" start="38221" end="38247" title="vesicular stomatitis virus" label="vesicular stomatitis virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="38403" end="38406" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="38423" end="38427" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298489" start="38498" end="38528" title="Viral vector" label="retroviral replicating vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811936" start="38997" end="39019" title="Toca 511 &amp;amp; Toca FC" label="Toca 511 &amp;amp; Toca FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="39472" end="39477" title="Brain" label="Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="39480" end="39485" title="Tumor" label="Tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55789539" start="39488" end="39511" title="Nervous system neoplasm" label="Nervous system neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608132" start="39514" end="39539" title="List of brain tumor patients" label="List of brain tumor cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q326079" start="39611" end="39629" title="Cancer Research UK" label="Cancer Research UK"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37285" wikidata="Q661613" url="?curid=37285" title="Batch processing">
<text>Computerized batch processing is a method of running software programs called [[Job (computing)|jobs]] in batches automatically. While users are required to submit the jobs, no other interaction by the user is required to process the batch. Batches may automatically be run at scheduled times as well as being run contingent on the availability of computer resources.

==History==
The term &quot;batch processing&quot; originates in the traditional classification of methods of production as job production (one-off production), batch production (production of a &quot;batch&quot; of multiple items at once, one stage at a time), and flow production (mass production, all stages in process at once).

===Early history===
Early computers were capable of running only one program at a time. Each user had sole control of the machine for a scheduled period of time. They would arrive at the computer with program and data, often on punched paper cards and magnetic or paper tape, and would load their program, run and debug it, and carry off their output when done.

As computers became faster the setup and takedown time became a larger percentage of available computer time. Programs called &quot;monitors&quot;, the forerunners of operating systems, were developed which could process a series, or &quot;batch&quot;, of programs, often from magnetic tape prepared offline. The monitor would be loaded into the computer and run the first job of the batch. At the end of the job it would regain control and load and run the next until the batch was complete. Often the output of the batch would be written to magnetic tape and printed or punched offline. Examples of monitors were IBM&#x27;s &quot;Fortran Monitor System&quot;, SOS (Share Operating System), and finally IBSYS for IBM&#x27;s 709x systems in 1960.

===Third-generation systems===
 capable of multiprogramming began to appear in the 1960s. Instead of running one batch job at a time, these systems can have multiple batch programs running at the same time in order to keep the system as busy as possible. One or more programs might be awaiting input, one actively running on the CPU, and others generating output. Instead of offline input and output, programs called spoolers read jobs from cards, disk, or remote terminals and place them in a job queue to be run. In order to prevent deadlocks the job scheduler needs to know each job&#x27;s resource requirements—memory, magnetic tapes, mountable disks, etc., so various scripting languages were developed to supply this information in a structured way. Probably the most well-known is IBM&#x27;s &quot;Job Control Language&quot; (JCL). Job schedulers select jobs to run according to a variety of criteria, including priority, memory size, etc. Remote batch is a procedure for submitting batch jobs from remote terminals, often equipped with a punch card reader and a line printer. Sometimes asymmetric multiprocessing is used to spool batch input and output for one or more large computers using an attached smaller and less-expensive system, as in the IBM System/360 Attached Support Processor.

===Later history===

The first general purpose time sharing system, Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS), was compatible with batch processing. This facilitated transitioning from batch processing to interactive computing.

From the late 1960s onwards, interactive computing such as via text-based computer terminal interfaces (as in Unix shells or read-eval-print loops), and later graphical user interfaces became common. Non-interactive computation, both one-off jobs such as compilation, and processing of multiple items in batches, became retrospectively referred to as &quot;batch processing&quot;, and the term &quot;batch job&quot; (in early use often &quot;batch &quot;of&quot; jobs&quot;) became common. Early use is particularly found at the University of Michigan, around the Michigan Terminal System (MTS).
Although timesharing did exist, its use was not robust enough for corporate data processing; none of this was related to the earlier unit record equipment, which was human-operated.

===Ongoing===
Non-interactive computation remains pervasive in computing, both for general data processing and for system &quot;housekeeping&quot; tasks (using system software). A high-level program (executing multiple programs, with some additional &quot;glue&quot; logic) is today most often called a &quot;script&quot;, and written in scripting languages, particularly shell scripts for system tasks; in IBM PC DOS and MS-DOS this is instead known as a batch file. That includes UNIX-based computers, Microsoft Windows, macOS (whose foundation is the BSD Unix kernel), and even smartphones. A running script, particularly one executed from an interactive login session, is often known as a job, but that term is used very ambiguously.

&quot;There is no direct counterpart to z/OS batch processing in PC or UNIX systems. Batch jobs are typically executed at a scheduled time or on an as-needed basis. Perhaps the closest comparison is with processes run by an at or cron command in UNIX, although the differences are significant.&quot;

== Modern systems ==
Batch applications are still critical in most organizations in large part because many common business processes are amenable to batch processing. While online systems can also function when manual intervention is not desired, they are not typically optimized to perform high-volume, repetitive tasks. Therefore, even new systems usually contain one or more batch applications for updating information at the end of the day, generating reports, printing documents, and other non-interactive tasks that must complete reliably within certain business deadlines.

Some applications are amenable to flow processing, namely those that only need data from a single input at once (not totals, for instance): start the next step for each input as it completes the previous step. In this case flow processing lowers latency for individual inputs, allowing them to be completed without waiting for the entire batch to finish. However, many applications require data from all records, notably computations such as totals. In this case the entire batch must be completed before one has a usable result: partial results are not usable.

Modern batch applications make use of modern batch frameworks such as Jem The Bee, Spring Batch or implementations of JSR 352 written for Java, and other frameworks for other programming languages, to provide the fault tolerance and scalability required for high-volume processing. In order to ensure high-speed processing, batch applications are often integrated with grid computing solutions to partition a batch job over a large number of processors, although there are significant programming challenges in doing so. High volume batch processing places particularly heavy demands on system and application architectures as well. Architectures that feature strong input/output performance and vertical scalability, including modern mainframe computers, tend to provide better batch performance than alternatives.

Scripting languages became popular as they evolved along with batch processing.

==Batch window== 
A &quot;batch window&quot; is &quot;a period of less-intensive online activity&quot;, when the computer system is able to run batch jobs without interference from, or with, interactive online systems.

A bank&#x27;s &quot;end-of-day (EOD)&quot; jobs require the concept of &quot;cutover&quot;, where transaction and data are cut off for a particular day&#x27;s batch activity (&quot;deposits after 3 PM will be processed the next day&quot;).

As requirements for online systems uptime expanded to support globalization, the Internet, and other business needs, the batch window shrank and increasing emphasis was placed on techniques that would require online data to be available for a maximum amount of time.

==Batch size==
The &quot;batch size&quot; refers to the number of work units to be processed within one batch operation. Some examples are:
* The number of lines from a file to load into a database before committing the transaction.
* The number of messages to dequeue from a queue.
* The number of requests to send within one payload.

==Common batch processing usage==
* Efficient bulk database updates and automated transaction processing, as contrasted to interactive online transaction processing (OLTP) applications. The extract, transform, load (ETL) step in populating data warehouses is inherently a batch process in most implementations.
* Performing bulk operations on digital images such as resizing, conversion, watermarking, or otherwise editing a group of image files.
* Converting computer files from one format to another. For example, a batch job may convert proprietary and legacy files to common standard formats for end-user queries and display.
* Training Machine Learning models. For example, an e-commerce website might want to process customer transactions in a hourly batch to update the model that produces related product recommendations, in order to save computational resources. 

== Notable batch scheduling and execution environments ==
The IBM mainframe z/OS operating system or platform has arguably the most highly refined and evolved set of batch processing facilities owing to its origins, long history, and continuing evolution. Today such systems commonly support hundreds or even thousands of concurrent online and batch tasks within a single operating system image. Technologies that aid concurrent batch and online processing include Job Control Language (JCL), scripting languages such as REXX, Job Entry Subsystem (JES2 and JES3), Workload Manager (WLM), Automatic Restart Manager (ARM), Resource Recovery Services (RRS), IBM Db2 data sharing, Parallel Sysplex, unique performance optimizations such as HiperDispatch, I/O channel architecture, and several others.

The Unix programs codice_1, codice_2, and codice_3 (today codice_4 is a variant of codice_5) allow for complex scheduling of jobs. Windows has a job scheduler. Most high-performance computing clusters use batch processing to maximize cluster usage.

==See also==

* Background process
* Batch file
* Batch renaming – to rename lots of files automatically without human intervention, in order to save time and effort
* BatchPipes – for utility that increases batch performance
* Processing modes
* Production support – for batch job/schedule/stream support
* High-throughput computing

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661613" start="13" end="29" title="Batch processing" label="batch processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q661613" start="78" end="102" title="Batch processing" label="[[Job (computing)|jobs]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823875" start="467" end="488" title="methods of production" label="methods of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310004" start="492" end="506" title="job production" label="job production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759113" start="529" end="545" title="batch production" label="batch production"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="634" end="649" title="flow production" label="flow production"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="929" end="947" title="punch card" label="punched paper card"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1231" end="1247" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="1341" end="1354" title="magnetic-tape data storage" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q620465" start="1768" end="1773" title="IBM 7090/94 IBSYS" label="IBSYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="1789" end="1793" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="709x"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="1855" end="1871" title="multiprogramming" label="multiprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156819" start="2229" end="2236" title="spooler" label="spooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206744" start="2306" end="2315" title="batch queue" label="job queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q623276" start="2347" end="2355" title="deadlock (computer science)" label="deadlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641413" start="2361" end="2374" title="job scheduler" label="job scheduler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="2461" end="2466" title="disk storage" label="disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505372" start="2617" end="2637" title="Job Control Language" label="Job Control Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312157" start="2759" end="2771" title="Remote job entry" label="Remote batch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867361" start="2858" end="2875" title="punch card reader" label="punch card reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="2882" end="2894" title="line printer" label="line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q752700" start="2906" end="2932" title="asymmetric multiprocessing" label="asymmetric multiprocessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927948" start="3083" end="3109" title="Attached Support Processor" label="Attached Support Processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="3180" end="3210" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="Compatible Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q956238" start="3313" end="3334" title="interactive computing" label="interactive computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="3411" end="3428" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663" start="3447" end="3457" title="Unix shell" label="Unix shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="3462" end="3482" title="read-eval-print loop" label="read-eval-print loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="3496" end="3520" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="3866" end="3888" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="3901" end="3925" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="4066" end="4087" title="unit record equipment" label="unit record equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q676202" start="4276" end="4291" title="system software" label="system software"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="4454" end="4472" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="4488" end="4500" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q863568" start="4523" end="4533" title="IBM PC DOS" label="IBM PC DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="4538" end="4544" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q479833" start="4572" end="4582" title="batch file" label="batch file"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4598" end="4602" title="Unix" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4620" end="4637" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="4639" end="4644" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="4670" end="4673" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="4697" end="4707" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667633" start="4774" end="4787" title="login session" label="login session"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206712" start="4809" end="4812" title="job (Unix)" label="job"/>
<link wikidata="Q283937" start="5079" end="5081" title="at (command)" label="at"/>
<link wikidata="Q300864" start="5085" end="5089" title="cron" label="cron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="5984" end="5991" title="latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580383" start="6384" end="6396" title="Spring Batch" label="Spring Batch"/>
<link wikidata="Q840596" start="6419" end="6422" title="Java Specification Request" label="JSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="6439" end="6443" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="6514" end="6529" title="fault tolerance" label="fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="6534" end="6545" title="scalability" label="scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q249999" start="6670" end="6684" title="grid computing" label="grid computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="6698" end="6707" title="partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="6968" end="6980" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="7006" end="7017" title="scalability" label="scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="7036" end="7055" title="mainframe computers" label="mainframe computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="7118" end="7137" title="Scripting languages" label="Scripting languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="7722" end="7735" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="7741" end="7749" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776675" start="8133" end="8143" title="Commit_(data_management)" label="committing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844565" start="8347" end="8369" title="transaction processing" label="transaction processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501395" start="8400" end="8429" title="online transaction processing" label="online transaction processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276130" start="8455" end="8479" title="extract, transform, load" label="extract, transform, load"/>
<link wikidata="Q193351" start="8505" end="8520" title="data warehouses" label="data warehouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250322" start="8608" end="8621" title="digital image" label="digital image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="8906" end="8922" title="Machine learning" label="Machine Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="8947" end="8957" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q554950" start="9070" end="9093" title="product recommendations" label="product recommendations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092142" start="9112" end="9135" title="Computational resource" label="computational resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114593" start="9201" end="9214" title="IBM mainframe" label="IBM mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q283705" start="9215" end="9219" title="z/OS" label="z/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9220" end="9236" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9511" end="9527" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505372" start="9604" end="9624" title="Job Control Language" label="Job Control Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q685820" start="9660" end="9664" title="REXX" label="REXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q355203" start="9687" end="9691" title="JES2" label="JES2"/>
<link wikidata="Q355203" start="9696" end="9700" title="JES3" label="JES3"/>
<link wikidata="Q936578" start="9703" end="9719" title="Workload Manager" label="Workload Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q431195" start="9794" end="9801" title="IBM Db2" label="IBM Db2"/>
<link wikidata="Q358927" start="9816" end="9832" title="Parallel Sysplex" label="Parallel Sysplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927969" start="9875" end="9888" title="HiperDispatch" label="HiperDispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q844006" start="9890" end="9914" title="Channel I/O" label="I/O channel architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641413" start="10082" end="10095" title="job scheduler" label="job scheduler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190465" start="10102" end="10128" title="high-performance computing" label="high-performance computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="10129" end="10137" title="Cluster (computing)" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q549497" start="10203" end="10221" title="Background process" label="Background process"/>
<link wikidata="Q479833" start="10224" end="10234" title="Batch file" label="Batch file"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868714" start="10237" end="10251" title="Batch renaming" label="Batch renaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868701" start="10355" end="10365" title="BatchPipes" label="BatchPipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247324" start="10415" end="10431" title="Processing modes" label="Processing modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247846" start="10434" end="10452" title="Production support" label="Production support"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754758" start="10495" end="10520" title="High-throughput computing" label="High-throughput computing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37287" wikidata="Q205683" url="?curid=37287" title="Scooby-Doo">
<text>Scooby-Doo is an American media franchise owned by Warner Bros. Entertainment and created in 1969 by writers Joe Ruby and Ken Spears through their animated series, &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot;, for Hanna-Barbera (which was absorbed into Warner Bros. Animation in 2001). The series features four teenagers: Fred Jones, Daphne Blake, Velma Dinkley, and Shaggy Rogers, and their talking Great Dane named Scooby-Doo, who solve mysteries involving supposedly supernatural creatures through a series of antics and missteps, while traveling using a brightly colored van called the &quot;Mystery Machine&quot;. The franchise has several live-action films and shows.

&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was originally broadcast on CBS from 1969 to 1976, when it moved to ABC. ABC aired various versions of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; until canceling it in 1986, and presented a spin-off featuring the characters as children called &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot; from 1988 until 1991. Two &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; reboots aired as part of Kids&#x27; WB on The WB and its successor The CW from 2002 until 2008. Further reboots were produced for Cartoon Network beginning in 2010 and continuing through 2018. Repeats of the various &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series are frequently broadcast on Cartoon Network&#x27;s sister channel Boomerang in the United States and other countries. The most recent &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series, &quot;Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?&quot;, premiered on June 27, 2019, as an original series on Boomerang&#x27;s streaming service and later HBO Max.

In 2013, &quot;TV Guide&quot; ranked &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; the fifth-greatest TV cartoon of all time.

== Development ==
In 1968, parent-run organizations, particularly Action for Children&#x27;s Television (ACT), began protesting what they perceived as excessive violence in Saturday-morning cartoons. Most of these shows were Hanna-Barbera action cartoons such as &quot;Space Ghost&quot;, &quot;The Herculoids&quot;, and &quot;Birdman and the Galaxy Trio&quot;, and virtually all of them were canceled by 1969 because of pressure from the parent groups. Members of these watch groups served as advisers to Hanna-Barbera and other animation studios to ensure that new programs would be safe for children.

Fred Silverman, an executive for daytime programming at CBS, was then looking for a show that would both revitalize his Saturday-morning line and please the watch groups. The result was &quot;The Archie Show&quot; from Filmation, based on Bob Montana&#x27;s teenage humor comic book &quot;Archie&quot;. Also successful were the musical numbers The Archies performed during each program (one of which, &quot;Sugar, Sugar&quot;, was the most successful &quot;Billboard&quot; number-one hit of 1969). Eager to build upon this success, Silverman contacted producers William Hanna and Joseph Barbera about creating another show based on a teenage rock group, this time featuring teens who solved mysteries between gigs. Silverman envisioned the show as a cross between the popular &quot;I Love a Mystery&quot; radio serials of the 1940s and the Archie characters or the popular early 1960s television series &quot;The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis&quot;.

After attempting to develop his version of the show, called &quot;House of Mystery&quot;, Barbera, who developed and sold Hanna-Barbera shows while Hanna produced them, passed the task along to story writers Joe Ruby and Ken Spears, as well as artist/character designer Iwao Takamoto. Their treatment, based in part on &quot;The Archie Show&quot;, was titled &quot;Mysteries Five&quot; and featured five teenagers: Geoff, Mike, Kelly, Linda, and Linda&#x27;s brother W.W., along with their bongo-playing dog, Too Much, who collectively formed the band Mysteries Five. When The Mysteries Five were not performing at gigs, they were out solving spooky mysteries involving ghosts, zombies, and other supernatural creatures. Ruby and Spears were unable to decide whether Too Much would be a large cowardly dog or a small feisty one. When the former was chosen, Ruby and Spears wrote Too Much as a Great Dane but revised the dog character to a large sheepdog (similar to the Archies&#x27; sheepdog, Hot Dog) just before their presentation to Silverman, as Ruby feared the character would be too similar to the comic strip character Marmaduke. Silverman rejected their initial pitch, and after consulting with Barbera on next steps, got Barbera&#x27;s permission to go ahead with Too Much being a Great Dane instead of a sheepdog.

During the design phase, lead character designer Takamoto consulted a studio colleague who was a breeder of Great Danes. After learning the characteristics of a prize-winning Great Dane from her, Takamoto proceeded to break most of the rules and designed Too Much with overly bowed legs, a double chin, and a sloped back, among other abnormalities.

Ruby and Spears&#x27; second pass at the show used &quot;Dobie Gillis&quot; as the template for the teenagers rather than &quot;Archie&quot;. The treatment retained the dog Too Much, while reducing the number of teenagers to four, removing the Mike character and retaining Geoff, Kelly, Linda, and W.W. As their personalities were modified, so were the characters&#x27; names: Geoff became &quot;Ronnie&quot;—later renamed &quot;Fred&quot; (at Silverman&#x27;s behest), Kelly became &quot;Daphne&quot;, Linda &quot;Velma&quot;, and W.W. &quot;Shaggy&quot;. The teens were now based on four teenage characters from &quot;The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis&quot;: Dobie Gillis, Thalia Menninger, Zelda Gilroy and Maynard G. Krebs, respectively.

The revised show was re-pitched to Silverman, who liked the material but, disliking the title &quot;Mysteries Five&quot;, decided to call the show &quot;Who&#x27;s S-S-Scared?&quot; Silverman presented &quot;Who&#x27;s S-S-Scared?&quot; to the CBS executives as the centerpiece for the upcoming 1969–70 season&#x27;s Saturday-morning cartoon block. CBS president Frank Stanton felt that the presentation artwork was too scary for young viewers and, thinking the show would be the same, decided to pass on it.

Now without a centerpiece for the upcoming season&#x27;s programming, Silverman had Ruby, Spears, and the Hanna-Barbera staff revise the treatments and presentation materials to tone down the show and better reflect its comedy elements. The rock band element was dropped, and more attention was focused on Shaggy and Too Much. According to Ruby and Spears, Silverman was inspired by Frank Sinatra&#x27;s scat &quot;doo-be-doo-be-doo&quot; at the end of his recording of &quot;Strangers in the Night&quot; on a red-eye flight to one of the development meetings, and decided to rename the dog &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; and retitled the show &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; The revised show was re-presented to CBS executives, who approved it for production.

== CBS years (1969–76) ==
=== &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; ===
The first episode of &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; &quot;What a Night for a Knight&quot; debuted on the CBS network Saturday, September 13, 1969, at 10:30 AM Eastern Time. The original voice cast featured Don Messick as Scooby-Doo, Casey Kasem as Shaggy, Frank Welker as Fred, actress Nicole Jaffe as Velma, and Indira Stefanianna as Daphne. Scooby&#x27;s speech patterns closely resembled an earlier cartoon dog, Astro from &quot;The Jetsons&quot; (1962–63), also voiced by Messick. Seventeen episodes of &quot;Scooby-Doo Where Are You!&quot; were produced in 1969–70. The series theme song was written by David Mook and Ben Raleigh, and performed by Larry Marks.

Each of these episodes features Scooby and the four teenage members of Mystery, Inc.—Fred, Shaggy, Daphne, and Velma—arriving at a location in the Mystery Machine, a van painted with psychedelic colors and flower power imagery. Encountering a purportedly supernatural monster terrorizing the local populace, such as a ghost, they decide to investigate. The kids split up to look for clues and suspects, while being chased at turns by the monster. Eventually, the kids come to realize the paranormal activity is actually an elaborate hoax, and—often with the help of a Rube Goldberg-like trap designed by Fred—they capture the creature suit-wearing villain and unmask him or her. Revealed usually as a flesh and blood crook who used the costume to cover up their crimes, the villain is arrested and taken to jail, often with the catchphrase &quot;if it weren&#x27;t for those pesky/meddling kids&quot;. A few times though, the &quot;villain&quot; turns out to be innocent, such as a haywire robot or the owner disguised to scare away thieves.

Scheduled opposite another teenage mystery-solving show, ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot;, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; became a ratings success, with Nielsen ratings reporting that as many as 65% of Saturday-morning audiences were tuned in to CBS when &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was being broadcast. The show was renewed for a second season in 1970, for which eight episodes were produced. Seven of the second-season episodes featured chase sequences set to bubblegum pop songs recorded by Austin Roberts, who also re-recorded the theme song for this season. With Stefanianna Christopherson having married and retired from voice acting, Heather North assumed the role of Daphne, and she continued to voice the character until 1997.

The TV influences of &quot;I Love a Mystery&quot; and &quot;Dobie Gillis&quot; were apparent in the first episode. Of the similarities between the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; teens and the &quot;Dobie Gillis&quot; teens, the similarities between Shaggy and Maynard are the most noticeable; both characters share the same beatnik-style goatee, similar hairstyles, and demeanors. The core premise of &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; was also similar to Enid Blyton&#x27;s &quot;Famous Five&quot; books. Both series featured four youths with a dog, and the Famous Five stories often revolved around a mystery which invariably turned out not to be supernaturally based, but simply a ruse to disguise the villain&#x27;s true intent.

The role of each character was strongly defined in the series: Fred is the leader and the determined detective, Velma is the intelligent analyst, Daphne is danger-prone, Shaggy is a coward more motivated by hunger than any desire to solve mysteries, and Scooby is similar to Shaggy, save for a Bob Hope-inspired tendency towards temporary bravery. Later versions of the show made slight changes to the characters&#x27; established roles, such as showing the Daphne in 1990s and 2000s &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; productions as knowing many forms of karate and having the ability to defend herself, and reducing her tendency towards being kidnapped.

&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; itself influenced many other Saturday-morning cartoons of the 1970s. During that decade, Hanna-Barbera and its rivals produced several animated programs also featuring teenage detectives solving mysteries with a pet or mascot of some sort, including &quot;Josie and the Pussycats&quot; (1970–71), &quot;The Funky Phantom&quot; (1971–72), &quot;The Amazing Chan and the Chan Clan&quot; (1972–73), &quot;Speed Buggy&quot; (1973–74), &quot;Goober and the Ghost Chasers&quot; (1973–74), &quot;Jabberjaw&quot; (1976–78), and &quot;Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels&quot; (1977–80).

=== &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Movies&quot; ===
In the fall of 1972, new one-hour episodes under the title &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Movies&quot; were created; each episode featuring a real or fictitious guest star helping the gang solve mysteries, including characters from other Hanna-Barbera series such as &quot;Harlem Globetrotters&quot;, &quot;Josie and the Pussycats&quot; and &quot;Speed Buggy&quot;, the comic book characters Batman and Robin (adapted into their own Hanna-Barbera series, &quot;Super Friends&quot;, a year later), and celebrities such as Sandy Duncan, The Addams Family, Cass Elliot, Phyllis Diller, Don Knotts and The Three Stooges. Hanna-Barbera musical director Hoyt Curtin composed a new theme song for this series, and Curtin&#x27;s theme remained in use for much of &quot;Scooby-Doo&#x27;s&quot; original broadcast run. After two seasons and 24 episodes of the &quot;New Movies&quot; format from 1972 to 1973, CBS began airing reruns of the original &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; series until its option on the series expired in 1976.

== ABC years (1976–91) ==

=== &quot;The Scooby-Doo Show&quot; and &quot;Scooby&#x27;s All-Star Laff-A-Lympics&quot; ===
Now president of ABC, Fred Silverman made a deal with Hanna-Barbera to bring new episodes of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; to the ABC Saturday-morning lineup, where the show went through almost yearly lineup changes. For their 1976–77 season, 16 new episodes of Scooby-Doo were joined with a new Hanna-Barbera show, &quot;Dynomutt, Dog Wonder&quot;, to create &quot;The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Hour&quot; (the show became &quot;The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Show&quot; when a bonus &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; rerun was added to the package in November 1976). Joe Ruby and Ken Spears, now working for Silverman as supervisors of the ABC Saturday-morning programs, returned the program to its original &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; format, with the addition of Scooby&#x27;s dim-witted country cousin Scooby-Dum, voiced by Daws Butler, as a recurring character. The voice cast was held over from &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Movies&quot; save for Nicole Jaffe, who retired from acting in 1973. Pat Stevens took over her role as the voice of Velma.

Then Joe Ruby and Ken Spears left again to start their own studio in 1977 as competition for Hanna-Barbera. They would remain away for the rest of the 1980s.

For the 1977–78 season, &quot;The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Show&quot; became the two-hour programming block &quot;Scooby&#x27;s All-Star Laff-A-Lympics&quot; (1977–78) with the addition of &quot;Laff-a-Lympics&quot; and &quot;Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels&quot;. In addition to eight new episodes of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; and reruns of the 1969 show, Scooby-Doo also appeared during the &quot;All-Star&quot; block&#x27;s &quot;Laff-a-Lympics&quot; series, which featured 45 Hanna-Barbera characters competing in &quot;Battle of the Network Stars&quot;-esque parodies of Olympic sporting events. Scooby was seen as the team captain of the &quot;Laff-a-Lympics&quot; &quot;Scooby-Doobies&quot; team, which also featured Shaggy and Scooby-Dum among its members.

&quot;Scooby&#x27;s All-Star Laff-a-Lympics&quot; was retitled &quot;Scooby&#x27;s All Stars&quot; for the 1978–79 season, reduced to 90 minutes when &quot;Dynomutt&quot; was spun off into its own half-hour and the 1969 reruns were dropped. &quot;Scooby&#x27;s All-Stars&quot; continued broadcasting reruns of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; from 1976 and 1977, while new episodes of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; aired during a separate half-hour under the &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; banner. After nine weeks, the separate &quot;Where Are You!&quot; broadcast was cancelled, and the remainder of the 16 new 1978 episodes debuted during the &quot;Scooby&#x27;s All-Stars&quot; block. The 40 total &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; episodes produced from 1976 to 1978 were later packaged together for syndication as &quot;The Scooby-Doo Show&quot;, under which title they continue to air.

=== &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; ===
The &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; characters first appeared outside of their regular Saturday-morning format in &quot;Scooby Goes Hollywood&quot;, an hour-long ABC television special aired in prime time on December 13, 1979. The special revolved around Shaggy and Scooby attempting to convince the network to move Scooby out of Saturday morning and into a prime-time series, and featured spoofs of then-current television series and films such as &quot;Happy Days&quot;, &quot;Superman: The Movie&quot;, &quot;Laverne &amp; Shirley&quot; and &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;.

In 1979, Scooby&#x27;s tiny nephew Scrappy-Doo was added to both the series and the billing, in an attempt to boost &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;″s slipping ratings. The 1979–80 episodes, aired under the new title &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; as an independent half-hour show, succeeded in regenerating interest in the show. Lennie Weinrib voiced Scrappy in the 1979–80 episodes, with Don Messick assuming the role thereafter. Marla Frumkin replaced Pat Stevens as the voice of Velma mid-season.

=== &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; shorts ===
As a result of &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; success, the entire show was overhauled in 1980 to focus more upon Scrappy-Doo. At this time, Scooby-Doo started to walk and run anthropomorphically on two feet more often, rather than on four like a normal dog as he did previously. Fred, Daphne, and Velma were dropped from the series, and the new &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; format now consisted of three seven-minute comedic adventures starring Scooby, Scrappy, and Shaggy instead of one half-hour mystery. Most of the supernatural villains in the seven-minute &quot;Scooby and Scrappy&quot; cartoons, who in previous &quot;Scooby&quot; series had been revealed to be human criminals in costume, were now real within the context of the series.

This version of &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; first aired from 1980 to 1982 as part of &quot;The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show&quot;, an hour-long program also featuring episodes of Hanna-Barbera&#x27;s new &quot;Richie Rich&quot; cartoon, adapted from the Harvey Comics character. From 1982 to 1983, &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; were part of &quot;The Scooby-Doo/Scrappy-Doo/Puppy Hour&quot;, a co-production with Ruby-Spears Productions which featured two &quot;Scooby and Scrappy&quot; shorts, a &quot;Scrappy and Yabba-Doo&quot; short featuring Scrappy-Doo and his Western deputy uncle Yabba-Doo, and &quot;The Puppy&#x27;s New Adventures&quot;, based on characters from a 1977 Ruby-Spears TV special. Despite the popularity, this was negatively hated by fans for how it dropped the mystery format and other main characters like Fred, Daphne, and Velma.

Beginning in 1980, a half-hour of reruns from previous incarnations of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; were broadcast on ABC Saturday mornings in addition to first-run episodes. Airing under the titles &quot;Scooby-Doo Classics&quot;, &quot;Scary Scooby Funnies&quot;, &quot;The Best of Scooby-Doo&quot;, and &quot;Scooby&#x27;s Mystery Funhouse&quot;, the rerun package remained on the air until the end of the 1986 season.

=== &quot;The New Scooby and Scrappy-Doo Show&quot; ===
&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was restored to a standalone half-hour in 1983 with &quot;The New Scooby and Scrappy-Doo Show&quot; in 1983, which comprised two 11-minute mysteries per episode in a format reminiscent of the original &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; mysteries. Heather North returned to the voice cast as Daphne, who in this incarnation solved mysteries with Shaggy, Scooby, and Scrappy while working undercover as a reporter for a teen magazine.

This version of the show lasted for two seasons, with the second season airing under the title &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries&quot;. The 1984–85 season episodes featured semi-regular appearances from Fred and Velma, with Frank Welker and Marla Frumkin resuming their respective roles for these episodes.

=== &quot;The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo&quot; ===
1985 saw the debut of &quot;The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo&quot;, which featured Daphne, Shaggy, Scooby, Scrappy, and new characters Flim-Flam (voiced by Susan Blu) and Vincent Van Ghoul (based upon and voiced by Vincent Price) traveling the globe to capture &quot;thirteen of the most terrifying ghosts upon the face of the earth.&quot; The final first-run episode of &quot;The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo&quot; aired in December 1985, and after its reruns were removed from the ABC lineup the following March, no new &quot;Scooby&quot; series aired on the network for the next two years.

=== &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot; ===
Hanna-Barbera reincarnated the original &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; cast as elementary school students (a common trope in 1980s children&#x27;s TV) for a new series titled &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;, which debuted on ABC in 1988. &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot; was an irreverent re-imagining of the series, heavily inspired by the classic cartoons of Tex Avery and Bob Clampett, and eschewed the realistic aesthetic of the original &quot;Scooby&quot; series for a more &quot;Looney Tunes&quot;-like style, including an episode where Scooby-Doo&#x27;s parents show up and reveal his real name to be &quot;Scoobert&quot;. At the same time, the series returned to its original formula in that the group unmasked human villains in costume, as opposed to the supernatural monsters of the early to mid-1980s. The series also established &quot;Coolsville&quot; as the name of the gang&#x27;s hometown; this setting was retained for several of the later &quot;Scooby&quot; productions. The retooled show was a success, remaining in production for four seasons and on ABC&#x27;s lineup until 1991.

&quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot; was developed and produced by Tom Ruegger, who had been the head story editor on &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; since 1983. Following the first season of &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;, Ruegger and much of his unit defected from Hanna-Barbera to Warner Bros. Animation to develop &quot;Steven Spielberg Presents Tiny Toon Adventures&quot; and later &quot;Animaniacs&quot;, &quot;Pinky and the Brain&quot;, and &quot;Freakazoid!&quot;.

== Kids&#x27; WB years (2002–08) ==

=== &quot;What&#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?&quot; ===
In 2002, following the successes of the Cartoon Network reruns, the direct to video franchise, and the first feature film, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; returned to Saturday morning for the first time in a decade with &quot;What&#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?&quot;, which aired on Kids&#x27; WB from 2002 until 2006. Produced by Warner Bros. Animation, the show follows the format of the original series but places it in the 21st century, featuring a heavy promotion of modern technology (computers, DVD, the Internet, cell phones) and culture.

Beginning with this series, Frank Welker took over as Scooby&#x27;s voice actor, while continuing to provide the voice of Fred as well. Casey Kasem returned as Shaggy, on the condition that the character be depicted as a vegetarian like Kasem himself. Grey DeLisle continued to voice Daphne, and former &quot;Facts of Life&quot; star Mindy Cohn voiced Velma. The series was produced by Chuck Sheetz, who had worked on &quot;The Simpsons&quot;.

=== &quot;Shaggy &amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!&quot; ===
In September 2006 a new show entitled, &quot;Shaggy &amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!&quot;, debuted on The CW&#x27;s Kids&#x27; WB Saturday-morning programming block. In the new premise, Shaggy inherits money and a mansion from an uncle, an inventor who has gone into hiding from villains trying to steal his secret invention. The villains, led by &quot;Dr. Phibes&quot; (based primarily upon Dr. Evil from the &quot;Austin Powers &quot;series, and named after Vincent Price&#x27;s character from &quot;The Abominable Dr. Phibes&quot;), then use different schemes to try to get the invention from Shaggy and Scooby, who handle the plots alone. Fred, Daphne, and Velma are normally absent, but do make appearances at times to help. The characters were redesigned and the art style revised for the new series. Scott Menville voiced Shaggy in the series, with Casey Kasem appearing as the voice of Shaggy&#x27;s Uncle Albert. &quot;Shaggy &amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!&quot; ran for two seasons on The CW.

== Cartoon Network and Boomerang years (2010–2021) ==

=== &quot;Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated&quot; ===

The next &quot;Scooby&quot; series, &quot;Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated&quot;, premiered on Cartoon Network on April 5, 2010. The first &quot;Scooby&quot; series produced for cable television, &quot;Mystery Incorporated&quot; is a reboot of the franchise, re-establishing the characters&#x27; relationships, personalities, and locations, and expanding their world to feature their parents, high school, and neighbors. The series also borrowed pieces from many parts of &quot;Scooby-Doo&#x27;s&quot; long history, as well as characters and elements of other Hanna-Barbera shows to form its back story and the bases of some of its episodes. Matthew Lillard was brought over from the live-action theatrical series as the new voice of Shaggy, while Welker, Cohn, and DeLisle continued in their respective roles. Patrick Warburton, Linda Cardellini, Lewis Black, Vivica A. Fox, Gary Cole, Udo Kier, Tim Matheson, Tia Carrere, and Kate Higgins were added as new semi-regular cast members. Casey Kasem appeared in a recurring role as Shaggy&#x27;s father, one of his last roles before retiring due to declining health.

The series, while still following the basic mystery-solving format of its predecessors, was broadcast as a 52-chapter animated televised novel and included elements similar to live-action mystery/adventure shows such as &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; and &quot;Lost.&quot; An overarching mystery surrounding the gang&#x27;s hometown of Crystal Cove, California became the series&#x27; main story arc, with pieces to the mystery unfolding episode by episode. Also featured were romantic entanglements and interpersonal conflict between the lead characters. The series ran for 52 episodes over two seasons, with a three-part finale airing across April 4 and 5, 2013—exactly three years from the debut.

=== &quot;Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!&quot; ===

On March 10, 2014, Cartoon Network announced several new series based on classic cartoons, including a new Scooby-Doo animated series titled &quot;Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!&quot;. The show features the gang &quot;living it up&quot; the summer after the gang&#x27;s senior year of high school. Along the way, they run into monsters and mayhem. The series premiered October 5, 2015 on Cartoon Network and concluded on March 18, 2018.

=== &quot;Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?&quot; ===

The Scooby-Doo series &quot;Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?&quot; premiered on the Boomerang streaming service and app on June 27, 2019. It ran for two seasons, with the second half of the second season airing on HBO Max. The series features the Mystery Inc. gang teaming up with a variety of guest stars to solve mysteries. Guest stars included Halsey, Sia, Bill Nye, Mark Hamill, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Ricky Gervais, Kenan Thompson, and Chris Paul. The series also includes fictional guest stars, including Steve Urkel (played by Jaleel White), Batman (played by Kevin Conroy), Wonder Woman (played by Rachel Kimsey), the Flash, and Sherlock Holmes.

== HBO Max years (2021–present) ==
=== &quot;Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?&quot; ===
The remaining eleven episodes of the second season were released through the streaming service on October 1, 2021. 

=== &quot;Velma&quot; ===
&quot;Velma&quot; is an adult-oriented animated series which premiered on HBO Max on January 12, 2023. It ran for two seasons, and marked the first full original Scooby Doo related show on HBO Max since the previous series &quot;Guess Who?&quot; was picked up by it at the end of its run (originating on Boomerang). The series is an alternate reality prequel and spinoff to the main franchise, taking place before the formation of Mystery Inc., and does not include Scooby-Doo himself. Unlike in the previous series and films, the main characters (and main voice cast) in &quot;Velma&quot; are multi-racial.

== Netflix years (TBA) ==
=== &quot;Scooby-Doo! The Live-Action Series&quot; ===
On April 29, 2024, Deadline reported that a live action Scooby-Doo! series is in development 
by Berlanti Productions on Netflix titled &quot;Scooby-Doo! The Live-Action Series&quot;, with Josh Appelbaum and Scott Rosenberg writing; and Greg Berlanti, Sarah Schechter, Leigh London Redman, André Nemec, Jeff Pinkner, Jonathan Gabay and Midnight Radio&#x27;s Adrienne Erickson executive producing.

== Film and rerun history ==

=== Television films, reruns, and direct-to-video films ===
From 1987 to 1988, Hanna-Barbera Productions produced &quot;Hanna-Barbera Superstars 10&quot;, a series of syndicated television films featuring their most popular characters, including Yogi Bear, Huckleberry Hound, The Flintstones, and The Jetsons. Scooby-Doo, Scrappy-Doo and Shaggy starred in three of these films: &quot;Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers&quot; (1987), &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Ghoul School&quot; (1988), and &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf&quot; (1988). These three films took their tone from the early-1980s &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; entries, and featured the characters encountering actual monsters and ghosts rather than masqueraded people. Scooby-Doo and Shaggy later appeared as the narrators of the television film &quot;Arabian Nights&quot;, originally broadcast by TBS in 1994, Don Messick&#x27;s final outing as the original voice of Scooby-Doo.

Reruns of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; have been in syndication since 1980, and have also been shown on cable television networks such as TBS Superstation (until 1989) and USA Network (as part of the USA Cartoon Express from 1990 to 1994). In 1993, &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;, having just recently ended its network run on ABC, began reruns on Cartoon Network. With Turner Broadcasting purchasing Hanna-Barbera in 1991, in 1994 the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; franchise became exclusive to the Turner networks: Cartoon Network, TBS Superstation, and TNT. Canadian network Teletoon began airing &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; in 1997, with the other &quot;Scooby&quot; series soon following. When TBS and TNT ended their broadcasts of H-B cartoons in 1998, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; became the exclusive property of both Cartoon Network and sister station Boomerang.

With &quot;Scooby-Doo&#x27;s&quot; restored popularity in reruns on Cartoon Network, Warner Bros. Animation and Hanna-Barbera (by then a subsidiary of Warner Bros. following the merger of Time Warner and Turner Entertainment in 1996) began producing one new &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; direct-to-video film a year, beginning in 1998. These films featured a slightly older version of the original five-character cast from the &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; days. The first four DTV entries were &quot;Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island&quot; (1998), &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Witch&#x27;s Ghost&quot; (1999), &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders&quot; (2000), and &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase&quot; (2001). Frank Welker was the only original voice cast member to return for these productions. Don Messick had died in 1997 and Casey Kasem, a strict vegetarian, relinquished the role of Shaggy after having to provide the voice for a 1995 Burger King commercial. Therefore, Scott Innes took over as both Scooby-Doo and Shaggy (Billy West voiced Shaggy in &quot;Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island&quot;). B.J. Ward took over as Velma, and Mary Kay Bergman voiced Daphne until her death in November 1999, and was replaced by Grey DeLisle.

These first four direct-to-video films differed from the original series format by placing the characters in plots with a darker tone and pitting them against actual supernatural forces. &quot;Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island&quot;, featured the original 1969 gang, reunited after years of being apart, fighting voodoo-worshiping cat creatures in the Louisiana bayou. &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Witch&#x27;s Ghost&quot; featured an author (voice of Tim Curry) returning to his Massachusetts hometown with the gang, to find out that an event is being haunted by the author&#x27;s dead ancestor Sarah, who was an actual witch. &quot;The Witch&#x27;s Ghost&quot; introduced a goth rock band known as The Hex Girls, who became recurring characters in the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; franchise.

&quot;Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase&quot; was the final production made by the Hanna-Barbera studio, which was absorbed into parent company Warner Bros. Animation following William Hanna&#x27;s death in 2001. Warner Animation continued production of the direct-to-video series while also producing new &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series for television.

The direct-to-video productions continued to be produced concurrently with at least one entry per year. Two of these entries, &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico&quot; (both 2003) were produced in a retro-style reminiscent of the original series, and featured Heather North and Nicole Jaffe as the voices of Daphne and Velma, respectively. Later entries produced between 2004 and 2009 were done in the style of &quot;What&#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo&quot;, using that show&#x27;s voice cast. Entries from 2010 on use the original 1969 designs and feature Matthew Lillard as the voice of Shaggy, the character Lillard portrayed in the live-action theatrical &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; films. Two &quot;Scooby-Doo!&quot; movies were released in 2016, named &quot;Lego Scooby-Doo! Haunted Hollywood&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! and WWE: Curse of the Speed Demon&quot;.

=== &quot;Scooby-Doo!&quot; direct-to-video specials ===
Beginning in 2012, Warner Bros. Animation began producing direct-to-video special episodes in the style of the concurrently produced films for inclusion on &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; compilation DVD sets otherwise including episodes from previous Scooby series. These include &quot;Scooby-Doo! Spooky Games&quot;, included on the July 2012 release &quot;Scooby-Doo! Laff-A-Lympics: Spooky Games&quot;, &quot;Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays&quot;, from the October 2012 release &quot;Scooby-Doo! 13 Spooky Tales: Holiday Chills and Thrills&quot;, and &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Spooky Scarecrow&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! Mecha Mutt Menace&quot;, from the September 2013 DVD releases &quot;Scooby-Doo! 13 Spooky Tales: Run for Your &#x27;Rife!&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! 13 Spooky Tales: Ruh-Roh Robot!&quot;. On May 13, 2014, another episode, &quot;Scooby-Doo! Ghastly Goals&quot; was released on the &quot;Scooby-Doo! 13 Spooky Tales: Field of Screams&quot; DVD. On May 5, 2015, &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Beach Beastie&quot;, the sixth direct-to-video special, was released on the &quot;Scooby-Doo! 13 Spooky Tales: Surf&#x27;s Up Scooby-Doo&quot; DVD.

The direct-to-video series&#x27; 34th installment, &quot;Trick or Treat Scooby-Doo!&quot; (2022), made headlines for portraying Velma as a lesbian (by showing her &quot;crushing big time&quot; on a female guest character), which was in accordance with long-held fan speculation but had never previously been depicted.

=== Live-action films ===
A feature-length live-action film version of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was released by Warner Bros. Pictures on June 14, 2002. Directed by Raja Gosnell, the film starred Freddie Prinze Jr. as Fred, Sarah Michelle Gellar as Daphne, Matthew Lillard as Shaggy, and Linda Cardellini as Velma. Scooby-Doo, voiced by Neil Fanning, was created on-screen by computer-generated special effects. &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was a financially successful release, with a domestic box office gross of over US$130 million.

A sequel, &quot;Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed&quot;, followed in March 2004 with the same cast and director. &quot;Scooby-Doo 2&quot; earned US$84 (€55.98) million at the U.S. box office. A third film was planned, but later scrapped following Warner Bros.&#x27; disappointment at the returns from &quot;Scooby-Doo 2&quot;.

In addition, a live-action television film, &quot;Scooby-Doo! The Mystery Begins&quot;, was released on DVD and simultaneously aired on Cartoon Network on September 13, 2009, the 40th anniversary of the series&#x27; debut. The film starred Nick Palatas as Shaggy, Robbie Amell as Fred, Kate Melton as Daphne, Hayley Kiyoko as Velma, and Frank Welker as the voice of Scooby-Doo. A second live-action TV movie, &quot;Scooby-Doo! Curse of the Lake Monster&quot;, retained the same cast and aired on October 16, 2010, and a direct-to-video spin-off &quot;Daphne &amp; Velma&quot; in 2018. &quot;The Mystery Begins&quot; and &quot;Curse of the Lake Monster&quot; serve as reboots to the 2002 and 2004 films while &quot;Daphne and Velma&quot; serves as a spin-off/prequel to them.

=== Theatrical animated film ===
In 2013, Warner Bros. Pictures was developing a fully animated Scooby-Doo feature film with Atlas Entertainment. Charles Roven and Richard Suckle, who produced the first two live-action films, were producing the animated film, and Matt Lieberman was writing the film. In 2014, Warner Bros. was restarting the film series with Randall Green writing a new movie. In 2015, Warner Bros. had Tony Cervone lined up to direct an animated film, with Allison Abbate as producer and Dan Povenmire as executive producer. Originally planned for a September 21, 2018 release, it was later pushed back to May 15, 2020, with Dax Shepard co-directing and co-writing. The Hollywood Reporter announced that Frank Welker will be reprising his voice role as Scooby, and that he will be joined by Will Forte and Gina Rodriguez voicing Shaggy and Velma, while Tracy Morgan will be voicing Captain Caveman, from the Hanna-Barbera series &quot;Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels&quot; and Deadline reported that Zac Efron and Amanda Seyfried will voice Fred and Daphne. In addition, Ken Jeong will be voicing Dynomutt, Dog Wonder from Hanna-Barbera series of the same name and Kiersey Clemons will voice Dee Dee Sykes, a character from Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels. Dick Dastardly, from Hanna-Barbera&#x27;s &quot;Wacky Races&quot;, will be the film&#x27;s main antagonist, voiced by Jason Isaacs. In March 2020, the film&#x27;s theatrical release was delayed indefinitely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On April 22, 2020, Warner Bros. announced that due to movie theater closures the theatrical release for &quot;Scoob!&quot; had been cancelled, with the film released instead on Premium video on demand in the United States and Canada on May 15, 2020, the original date of release. In July 2020, Warner Bros. confirmed the film would still play in theaters in select countries with relaxed COVID-19 restrictions. The film subsequently received a secondary theatrical release in the United States beginning on May 21, 2021, in selected markets.

== Cast ==
* Scooby-Doo: Don Messick was the original voice of Scooby-Doo from 1969 until 1995. Hadley Kay performed the voice for the &quot;Johnny Bravo&quot; episodes &quot;Bravo Dooby-Doo&quot; and &quot;&#x27;Twas the Night&quot;, as well as in commercials, in 1997. Scott Innes was the voice of Scooby-Doo from 1998 to 2002. Neil Fanning voiced Scooby-Doo in the live-action Warner Bros. theatrical films produced in 2002 and 2004. Frank Welker is the current voice of Scooby-Doo, having taken over the role from Innes in 2002, although Innes voiced the character in video game projects (including PC, DVD and board games), commercials and some toys until 2008. Dave Coulier (2005) and Seth Green (2007, 2012, 2018) voiced Scooby in the &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; parodies.
* Norville &quot;Shaggy&quot; Rogers: Casey Kasem was the original voice of Shaggy from 1969 until 1997. Billy West voiced Shaggy in &quot;Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo: Behind the Scenes&quot; in 1998. Scott Innes voiced the character from 1999 to 2002 and he continued to voice Shaggy in video game projects (including PC, DVD and board games), commercials and some toys until 2009. Casey Kasem returned to the voice role in 2002 and continued as Shaggy until 2009. In 2006, Kasem continued to voice Shaggy only in the direct-to-video film series until 2009, while Scott Menville performed the voice of Shaggy in the 2006–08 CW series &quot;Shaggy &amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!&quot;. Matthew Lillard appeared as Shaggy in the live action 2002 and 2004 theatrical films, and took over as the voice of the animated character in 2010. He also voiced Shaggy in four stop-motion parody sketches for the Adult Swim show &quot;Robot Chicken&quot;. Nick Palatas appeared as Shaggy in the 2009 and 2010 live-action TV movies.
* Fred Jones: Frank Welker has always performed the voice of the animated versions of Fred since 1969, with the exception of the 1988–91 ABC series &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;, where Carl Steven performed the voice of preteen Fred. Freddie Prinze Jr. appears as Fred in the live-action theatrical films and voiced the character in the &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; parodies. Robbie Amell played Fred in the live-action TV movies.
* Daphne Blake: Stefanianna Christopherson was the voice of Daphne in the first season of &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; in 1969–70. Heather North assumed the role for season two in 1970, and continued as Daphne through 1997, save for Kellie Martin&#x27;s turn as preteen Daphne in &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;. Mary Kay Bergman performed the voice of Daphne from 1998 to 2000, with Grey DeLisle assuming the role. She continues to perform the role to this day. North reprised her voice role for two 2003 direct-to-video films, &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico&quot;. Sarah Michelle Gellar appears as Daphne in the live-action theatrical films and as Daphne&#x27;s voice in the &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; parodies. Kate Melton played Daphne in the live-action TV movies.
* Velma Dinkley: Nicole Jaffe was the original voice of Velma from 1969 to 1973. Pat Stevens assumed the role from 1976 to 1979, with Marla Frumkin taking over midseason on &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; in the latter year. Frumkin returned to voice Velma on a recurring basis for &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries&quot; in 1984, and Christina Lange voiced preteen Velma in &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;. B. J. Ward voiced Velma from 1997 to 2002, with Mindy Cohn assuming the role in 2002. As with North, Jaffe reprised her voice role for &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico&quot; in 2003. Stephanie D&#x27;Abruzzo voiced Velma for the 2013 puppet film &quot;Scooby-Doo! Adventures: The Mystery Map&quot;. In 2015, Kate Micucci took on the role for the series &quot;Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!&quot; and Lego Scooby-Doo shorts and specials; in 2016 she took over the role from Cohn completely. Linda Cardellini appears as Velma in the live-action theatrical films and as the voice of Velma in the &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; parodies. Hayley Kiyoko played Velma in the live-action TV movies.
* Scrappy-Doo: Lennie Weinrib voiced Scrappy-Doo during the first version of &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; in 1979–80. Don Messick assumed the role in 1980 for the &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; segments of &quot;The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show&quot; and continued as Scrappy through 1988. Scrappy has only appeared sporadically since 1988, with Scott Innes performing the voice in the 2002 live-action film, which portrays Scrappy as the main villain, as well as in Cartoon Network bumpers, video games and toys since 1999. Dan Milano voiced Scrappy in a 2007 &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; sketch.

== Comic books ==
Gold Key Comics began publication of &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; comic books in December 1969. The comics initially contained adaptations of episodes of the television show drawn by Phil DeLara, Jack Manning and Warren Tufts. The comic books later moved to all-original stories until ending with issue #30 in 1974. Several of these issues were written by Mark Evanier and drawn by Dan Spiegle. Charlton published &quot;Scooby&quot; comics, many drawn by Bill Williams, for 11 issues in 1975. From 1977 to 1979, Marvel Comics published nine issues of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;, all written by Evanier and drawn by Spiegel. Harvey Comics published reprints of the Charlton comics, as well as a handful of special issues, between 1993 and 1994.

In 1995, Archie Comics began publishing a monthly &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; comic book, the first year of which featured Scrappy-Doo among its cast. Evanier and Spiegel worked on three issues of the series, which ended after 21 issues in 1997 when Warner Bros.&#x27; DC Comics acquired the rights to publish comics based on Hanna-Barbera characters. DC&#x27;s &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series continues publication to this day. In 2013, DC began a digital bi-monthly comic book titled &quot;Scooby-Doo Team-Up&quot;, crossing over Mystery Inc. with other DC and Hanna-Barbera characters. Since then, the series has become a monthly comic book available in print.

In 2004, a limited series of a 100 comic books called &quot;Scooby-Doo! World of Mystery&quot; was released. In each issue, Mystery Inc. go from country to country solving mysteries. Each issue came with a pack of exclusive cards, with 350 in total able to be collected.

In 2016, DC launched a new monthly comic book entitled &quot;Scooby Apocalypse&quot;, with the characters being reinvented in a story set in a post-apocalyptic world, where monsters roam the streets and Scooby and the gang must find a way to survive at all costs, while also trying to find a way to reverse the apocalypse.

== Merchandising ==
Early &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; merchandise included a 1973 Milton Bradley board game, decorated lunch boxes, iron-on transfers, coloring books, story books, records, underwear, and other such goods. When Scrappy-Doo was introduced to the series in 1979, he, Scooby, and Shaggy became the foci of much of the merchandising, including a 1983 Milton-Bradley &quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&quot; board game. The first &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; video game appeared in arcades in 1986, and has been followed by a number of games for both home consoles and personal computers. &quot;Scooby-Doo &quot;multivitamins also debuted at this time, and have been manufactured by Bayer since 2001.

&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; merchandising tapered off during the late 1980s and early 1990s, but increased after the series&#x27; revival on Cartoon Network in 1995. Today, all manner of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;-branded products are available for purchase, including &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; breakfast cereal, plush toys, action figures, car decorations, Barbie dolls from Mattel and much more. Real &quot;Scooby Snacks&quot; dog treats are produced by Del Monte Pet Products. Hasbro has created a number of &quot;Scooby&quot; board games, including a &quot;Scooby&quot;-themed edition of the popular mystery board game &quot;Clue&quot;. In 2007, the Pressman Toy Corporation released the board game &quot;Scooby-Doo! Haunted House&quot;. Beginning in 2001, a &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; children&#x27;s book series was authorized and published by Scholastic. These books, written by Suzanne Weyn, include original stories and adaptations of &quot;Scooby&quot; theatrical and direct-to-video features.

From 1990 to 2002, Shaggy and Scooby-Doo appeared as characters in the &quot;Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera&quot; simulator ride at Universal Studios Florida. The ride was replaced in the early 2000s with a &quot;Jimmy Neutron&quot; attraction, and &quot;The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera&quot; instead became an attraction at several properties operated by Paramount Parks. Shaggy and Scooby-Doo are currently costumed characters at Universal Studios Florida, and can be seen driving the Mystery Machine around the park.

In 2001, &quot;Scooby-Doo in Stagefright&quot;, a live stage play based upon the series, began touring across the world. A follow-up, &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Pirate Ghost&quot;, followed in 2009.

The Mystery Machine has been used as the basis for many die-cast models and toys, such as from Hot Wheels.

The brand made $800 million in retail sales in 1999. In 2004, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; merchandise had generated in retail sales Licensed merchandise also sold in 2015, in 2016, and in 2017.

=== Tabletop games ===
== Overview of television series ==

== Reception and legacy ==

During its five-decade broadcast history, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; has received two Emmy nominations: a 1989 Daytime Emmy nomination for &quot;A Pup Named Scooby-Doo&quot;, and a 2003 Daytime Emmy nomination for &quot;What&#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo&quot;″s Mindy Cohn in the &quot;Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program&quot; category. Science advocate Carl Sagan favorably compared the predominantly skeptic oriented formula to that of most television dealing with paranormal themes, and considered that an adult analogue to &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; would be a great public service.

&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; has maintained a significant fan base, which has grown steadily since the 1990s due to the show&#x27;s popularity among both young children and nostalgic adults who grew up with the series. Several television critics have stated that the show&#x27;s mix of the comedy-adventure and horror genres was the reason for its widespread success. As Fred Silverman and the Hanna-Barbera staff had planned when they first began producing the series, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;″s ghosts, monsters and spooky locales tend more towards humor than horror, making them easily accessible to younger children. &quot;Overall, [&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; is] just not a show that is going to overstimulate kids&#x27; emotions and tensions,&quot; offered American Center for Children and Media executive director David Kleeman in a 2002 interview. &quot;It creates just enough fun to make it fun without getting them worried or giving them nightmares.

Older teenagers and adults have admitted to enjoying &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; because of presumed subversive themes which involve theories of drug use and sexuality, in particular that Shaggy is assumed to be a user of cannabis and Velma is assumed to be a lesbian. Such themes were pervasive enough in popular culture to find their way into Warner Bros.&#x27; initial &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; feature film in 2002, though several of the scenes were edited before release to secure a family-friendly &quot;PG&quot; rating. Series creators Joe Ruby and Ken Spears reported that they &quot;took umbrage&quot; to the inclusion of such themes in the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; feature and other places, and denied intending their characters to be drug users in any way.

Like many Hanna-Barbera shows, the early &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series have been criticized at times for their production values and storytelling. In 2002, Jamie Malanowski of &quot;The New York Times&quot; commented that &quot;[&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;″s] mysteries are not very mysterious, and the humor is hardly humorous. As for the animation—well, the drawings on your refrigerator may give it competition.&quot;

By the 2000s, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; had received recognition for its popularity by placing in a number of top cartoon or top cartoon character polls. The August 3, 2002, issue of &quot;TV Guide&quot; featured its list of the 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time, in which Scooby-Doo placed twenty-second. Scooby also ranked thirteenth in Animal Planet&#x27;s list of the 50 Greatest TV Animals. For one year from 2004 to 2005, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; held the Guinness World Record for having the most episodes of any animated television series ever produced, a record previously held by and later returned to &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was published as holding this record in the 2006 edition of the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot;.

In January 2009, entertainment website IGN named &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; #24 on its list of the Top 100 Best Animated TV Shows. Writing in 2020, Christopher Orr of &quot;The Atlantic&quot; queried why the franchise had remained popular for several decades, concluding that it was primarily due to the many differing ways in which the relationship between the main characters could be interpreted or used as a metaphor.

=== Accolades ===
==Five College folklore==
A popular urban legend among Five College students holds that the characters on &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; represent the five colleges. The legend has Velma representing Smith College and Daphne as Mount Holyoke College (or vice-versa), Fred as Amherst College, Shaggy as Hampshire College, and Scooby as UMass Amherst. Hanna-Barbera Productions, CBS executive Fred Silverman, and Mark Evanier, one of the show&#x27;s writers, have stated that the legend is false. Moreover, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; creators Joe Ruby and Ken Spears have been explicit in the cartoon show being based on the radio program &quot;I Love a Mystery&quot; and the TV sitcom &quot;The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis&quot;, with the four teenagers being based directly on characters from &quot;Dobie Gillis&quot;. In addition, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; made its television debut in 1969, one year before Hampshire College opened.

==In popular culture==

As with most popular franchises, &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; has been parodied and has done parodies.
* The cult television and comic book series &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; features a group of characters that refer to themselves as the &quot;Scooby Gang&quot;, who similarly battle supernatural forces and solve supernatural monster mysteries. The show contains obvious influences of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;, where &quot;The Scoobies&quot; use books to look up monsters. Sarah Michelle Gellar, the actress who plays Buffy Summers on the series, later went on to appear as Daphne Blake in the live-action films &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed&quot;.
* Scooby-Doo and the Mystery Inc. gang (based on their classic 1972 incarnation as opposed to their more recent incarnations) appear in the second part of the &quot;&quot; episode &quot;Bat-Mite Presents: Batman&#x27;s Strangest Cases&quot; in which they team up with Batman and Robin to rescue Weird Al who was kidnapped by the Joker and the Penguin.
* The song &quot;Scooby-Doo and the Snowmen Mystery&quot; was released in 1972 in the United Kingdom by the label Music for Pleasure.
* The film &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot; includes an alternate ending called the &quot;Scooby-Doo Ending&quot; in which a character in the film is revealed to have been wearing a mask. It also includes a reference to the iconic line &quot;Let&#x27;s see who this really is&quot; before removing the mask. When the culprit is revealed to be Old Man Withers, owner of the local haunted amusement park, Withers mutters &quot;And I would have gotten away with it, too, if it wasn&#x27;t for those meddling kids!&quot;
* &quot;Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back&quot; has a brief scene where the title characters hitch a ride in the Mystery Machine with Scooby and the gang.
* The filk band Ookla the Mok open their 2003 album &quot;Oh Okay LA&quot; with the song &quot;W.W.S.D.?&quot; (&quot;What Would Scooby Do?&quot;), which proposes a deontological system of moral philosophy based on the actions of Scooby-Doo.
* In October 1999, Cartoon Network made a &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; spoof of &quot;The Blair Witch Project&quot; called &quot;The Scooby-Doo Project&quot;.
* A &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; parody appeared in the &quot;Mad&quot; episode &quot;Kitchen Nightmares Before Christmas / How I Met Your Mummy&quot;.
* &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; was parodied on &quot;Futurama&quot; episode &quot;Saturday Morning Fun Pit&quot;, where the characters from Planet Express take on the roles of the gang (Bender as Scooby, Hermes as Fred, Leela as Daphne, Amy as Velma and Fry as Shaggy).
* The &quot;Venture Bros.&quot; episode &quot;¡Viva los Muertos!&quot; features a thinly parodied version of the gang as aging, gone-to-seed miscreants with the characters matched to corresponding serial killers and radical figures, e.g. Fred being mixed with Ted Bundy into the composite character &quot;Ted&quot;.
* The series is parodied in the animated music video for the song &quot;Ghost&quot; by Mystery Skulls.
* The animated series &quot;Arthur&quot; has a parody of &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; called &quot;Spooky-Poo&quot;.
* In the &quot;South Park&quot; episode &quot;Korn&#x27;s Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery&quot;, the nu metal band Korn, parodying Scooby and the gang, tackle an invasion of mysterious &quot;Pirate Ghosts&quot;. They enlist the help of Stan Marsh, Kyle Broflovski, Eric Cartman and Kenny McCormick, and after they solve the mystery they perform &quot;Falling Away from Me&quot; from their album &quot;Issues&quot;.
* The gang was featured in &quot;Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law&quot; where the title character defends Shaggy and Scooby against possession charges in the 2002 episode &quot;Shaggy Busted&quot;.
* After defeating and capturing a pirate crew in the role playing video game &quot;Golden Sun: The Lost Age&quot;, one of the imprisoned pirates declares that, &quot;Everything would have been fine if it hadn&#x27;t been for you meddling kids!&quot;
* In the &quot;Teen Titans Go!&quot; episode &quot;The Cruel Giggling Ghoul&quot;, each Titan assumes the role of a Scooby Gang member (with Beast Boy as Scooby) to investigate a mystery at a spooky amusement park, with the help of LeBron James. The Scooby Gang later appears in the crossover episode &quot;Cartoon Feud&quot;, where Control Freak forces them to compete in &quot;Family Feud&quot;. The Scooby Gang later appears in the episodes &quot;Intro&quot; and &quot;Warner Bros. 100th Anniversary&quot;.
* The novel &quot;Meddling Kids&quot; (2017) by Edgar Cantero parodies not only &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;, but also teen-detective dramas (such as the Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew, and the Famous Five) in general.
* The CW&#x27;s television series &quot;Supernatural&quot; crossed over with the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; franchise in the episode &quot;Scoobynatural&quot;, which aired March 29, 2018. The animated collaboration featured the three main characters of &quot;Supernatural&quot; (Sam, Dean, and Castiel) along with Scooby and the gang as they team up to solve a supernatural mystery.
* Velma made a cameo appearance in &quot;The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part&quot;, voiced by Trisha Gum.
* The &quot;Harvey Street Kids&quot; episode &quot;Crush 4U, Where RU?&quot; fully references the &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; series, especially the title.
* Scooby-Doo and the gang appear in the 2021 film &quot;Space Jam: A New Legacy&quot;. Their design is the same from &quot;Scoob!&quot; They appear among the other Warner Bros. characters in the film.
* Scooby-Doo and Shaggy both appeared in &quot;The Official BBC Children in Need Medley&quot; in 2009.
* In the &quot;Black Mirror&quot; episode &quot;Loch Henry&quot;, a character sings a line from the opening theme of &quot;Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!&quot; when investigating a cellar where murders had taken place.
* The term &quot;Don&#x27;t have a Scooby&quot; is recognised rhyming slang for &quot;clue&quot;.
* The Scooby Gang appeared in the &quot;Jellystone!&quot; third season episode &quot;Frankenhooky&quot;. They tie up the Ghost Chasers with a rope before unmasking them to reveal Sooey Pig, Orful Octopus, and Magic Rabbit of the Really Rottens. The Scooby Gang are revealed to actually be Cindy Bear, Ranger Smith, Hardy Har Har, Tubb, and a cotton ball in a jar.

== See also ==
* Hanna-Barbera Educational Filmstrips
* List of works produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions
* Lost Mysteries
* &quot;Scooby-Doo&#x27;s Snack Tracks: The Ultimate Collection&quot;
* Scoubidou

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official Warner Bros. site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="26" end="41" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="51" end="77" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros. Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212115" start="109" end="117" title="Joe Ruby" label="Joe Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388531" start="122" end="132" title="Ken Spears" label="Ken Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="147" end="162" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q936279" start="170" end="196" title="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!" label="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="208" end="221" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="247" end="269" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="Warner Bros. Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225316" start="316" end="326" title="Fred Jones (Scooby-Doo)" label="Fred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923284" start="328" end="340" title="Daphne Blake" label="Daphne Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q929855" start="342" end="355" title="Velma Dinkley" label="Velma Dinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q848673" start="361" end="374" title="Shaggy Rogers" label="Shaggy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414" start="394" end="404" title="Great Dane" label="Great Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q901323" start="411" end="421" title="Scooby-Doo (character)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="720" end="723" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="760" end="763" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="862" end="870" title="Spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="921" end="943" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711972" start="1024" end="1037" title="Kids&amp;#x27; WB" label="Kids&amp;#x27; WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="1041" end="1047" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="1066" end="1072" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="1129" end="1144" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q157906" start="1311" end="1320" title="Boomerang (TV network)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q54076668" start="1416" end="1441" title="Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?" label="Scooby-Doo and Guess Who?"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1502" end="1536" title="Boomerang (TV network)#Availability on subscription television" label="Boomerang&amp;#x27;s streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="1547" end="1554" title="Max (streaming service)" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="1572" end="1580" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329436" start="1688" end="1712" title="consumer organization" label="parent-run organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677201" start="1727" end="1764" title="Action for Children&amp;#x27;s Television" label="Action for Children&amp;#x27;s Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="1886" end="1899" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576897" start="1930" end="1941" title="Space Ghost (TV series)" label="Space Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574359" start="1955" end="1969" title="The Herculoids" label="The Herculoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396238" start="1987" end="2014" title="Birdman and the Galaxy Trio" label="Birdman and the Galaxy Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563108" start="2265" end="2279" title="Fred Silverman" label="Fred Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243464" start="2298" end="2317" title="Daytime television in the United States" label="daytime programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2321" end="2324" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282277" start="2457" end="2472" title="The Archie Show" label="The Archie Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414376" start="2484" end="2493" title="Filmation" label="Filmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641323" start="2504" end="2515" title="Bob Montana" label="Bob Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715415" start="2554" end="2560" title="Archie (comic book)" label="Archie"/>
<link wikidata="Q512836" start="2609" end="2620" title="The Archies" label="The Archies"/>
<link wikidata="Q516203" start="2672" end="2684" title="Sugar, Sugar" label="Sugar, Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2722" end="2731" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2738" end="2752" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="number-one hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q263324" start="2827" end="2840" title="William Hanna" label="William Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q190373" start="2845" end="2859" title="Joseph Barbera" label="Joseph Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978290" start="3047" end="3063" title="I Love a Mystery" label="I Love a Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353903" start="3070" end="3075" title="old-time radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="3076" end="3083" title="radio drama" label="serials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033276" start="3174" end="3204" title="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis" label="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212115" start="3421" end="3429" title="Joe Ruby" label="Joe Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388531" start="3434" end="3444" title="Ken Spears" label="Ken Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q445100" start="3483" end="3496" title="Iwao Takamoto" label="Iwao Takamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="3703" end="3708" title="bongo drum" label="bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="3891" end="3897" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414" start="4106" end="4116" title="Great Dane" label="Great Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37704" start="4158" end="4166" title="Old English Sheepdog" label="sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188107" start="4207" end="4214" title="Hot Dog (comics)" label="Hot Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511706" start="4340" end="4349" title="Marmaduke" label="Marmaduke"/>
<link wikidata="Q38677" start="4636" end="4643" title="dog breeding" label="breeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q82714" start="4829" end="4840" title="double chin" label="double chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225316" start="5318" end="5322" title="Fred Jones (Scooby-Doo)" label="Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923284" start="5378" end="5384" title="Daphne Blake" label="Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q929855" start="5404" end="5409" title="Velma Dinkley" label="Velma"/>
<link wikidata="Q848673" start="5432" end="5438" title="Shaggy Rogers" label="Shaggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033276" start="5547" end="5559" title="Dobie Gillis" label="Dobie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068705" start="5579" end="5591" title="Zelda Gilroy" label="Zelda Gilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797406" start="5596" end="5612" title="Maynard G. Krebs" label="Maynard G. Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195372" start="5992" end="6005" title="Frank Stanton (executive)" label="Frank Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="6522" end="6535" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="6543" end="6547" title="scat singing" label="scat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510219" start="6615" end="6637" title="Strangers in the Night" label="Strangers in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363305" start="6649" end="6663" title="red-eye flight" label="red-eye flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q901323" start="6736" end="6746" title="Scooby-Doo (character)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q936279" start="6781" end="6807" title="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!" label="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!"/>
<link wikidata="Q936279" start="7000" end="7026" title="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!" label="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="7167" end="7177" title="voice acting" label="voice cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="7187" end="7198" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="7214" end="7225" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="7237" end="7249" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355344" start="7267" end="7279" title="Nicole Jaffe" label="Nicole Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025063" start="7294" end="7312" title="Indira Stefanianna" label="Indira Stefanianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12732651" start="7396" end="7401" title="Astro (The Jetsons)" label="Astro"/>
<link wikidata="Q457409" start="7413" end="7424" title="The Jetsons" label="The Jetsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225316" start="7733" end="7737" title="Fred Jones (Scooby-Doo)" label="Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q848673" start="7739" end="7745" title="Shaggy Rogers" label="Shaggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923284" start="7747" end="7753" title="Daphne Blake" label="Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q929855" start="7759" end="7764" title="Velma Dinkley" label="Velma"/>
<link wikidata="Q696160" start="7831" end="7848" title="psychedelic color" label="psychedelic color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254661" start="7854" end="7866" title="flower power" label="flower power"/>
<link wikidata="Q505850" start="8216" end="8229" title="Rube Goldberg" label="Rube Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123744" start="8274" end="8287" title="creature suit" label="creature suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738896" start="8765" end="8779" title="The Hardy Boys (1969 TV series)" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="8841" end="8856" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q997481" start="9145" end="9158" title="bubblegum pop" label="bubblegum pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823260" start="9177" end="9191" title="Austin Roberts (singer)" label="Austin Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355790" start="9324" end="9337" title="Heather North" label="Heather North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978290" start="9447" end="9463" title="I Love a Mystery" label="I Love a Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033276" start="9480" end="9492" title="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis" label="Dobie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622408" start="9736" end="9743" title="beatnik" label="beatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014570" start="9750" end="9756" title="goatee" label="goatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="9872" end="9883" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134354" start="9897" end="9908" title="The Famous Five" label="Famous Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497468" start="10108" end="10116" title="disguise" label="disguise"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="10444" end="10452" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="10694" end="10700" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="10864" end="10871" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284299" start="11074" end="11097" title="Josie and the Pussycats (TV series)" label="Josie and the Pussycats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619409" start="11121" end="11138" title="The Funky Phantom" label="The Funky Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283805" start="11162" end="11196" title="The Amazing Chan and the Chan Clan" label="The Amazing Chan and the Chan Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268507" start="11220" end="11231" title="Speed Buggy" label="Speed Buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342554" start="11255" end="11283" title="Goober and the Ghost Chasers" label="Goober and the Ghost Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569415" start="11307" end="11316" title="Jabberjaw" label="Jabberjaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q864240" start="11344" end="11379" title="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels" label="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188675" start="11509" end="11534" title="The New Scooby-Doo Movies" label="The New Scooby-Doo Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776952" start="11711" end="11731" title="Harlem Globetrotters (TV series)" label="Harlem Globetrotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284299" start="11745" end="11768" title="Josie and the Pussycats (TV series)" label="Josie and the Pussycats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268507" start="11785" end="11796" title="Speed Buggy" label="Speed Buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="11830" end="11836" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59996" start="11841" end="11846" title="Robin (comics)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707472" start="11899" end="11912" title="Super Friends" label="Super Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q266825" start="11959" end="11971" title="Sandy Duncan" label="Sandy Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817916" start="11973" end="11990" title="The Addams Family" label="The Addams Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q49734" start="11992" end="12003" title="Cass Elliot" label="Cass Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q230512" start="12005" end="12019" title="Phyllis Diller" label="Phyllis Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q555236" start="12021" end="12031" title="Don Knotts" label="Don Knotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="12036" end="12053" title="The Three Stooges" label="The Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q753839" start="12086" end="12097" title="Hoyt Curtin" label="Hoyt Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12610" end="12613" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395696" start="12908" end="12928" title="Dynomutt, Dog Wonder" label="Dynomutt, Dog Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212764" start="12952" end="12980" title="The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Hour" label="The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900394" start="13396" end="13406" title="Scooby-Dum" label="Scooby-Dum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412586" start="13418" end="13429" title="Daws Butler" label="Daws Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225342" start="13585" end="13596" title="Pat Stevens" label="Pat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q922442" start="13908" end="13945" title="Scooby&amp;#x27;s All-Star Laff-A-Lympics" label="Scooby&amp;#x27;s All-Star Laff-A-Lympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601647" start="13989" end="14003" title="Laff-a-Lympics" label="Laff-a-Lympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q864240" start="14020" end="14055" title="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels" label="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966608" start="14319" end="14346" title="Battle of the Network Stars" label="Battle of the Network Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="14371" end="14378" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="15346" end="15357" title="broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q461288" start="15367" end="15386" title="The Scooby-Doo Show" label="The Scooby-Doo Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q383694" start="15593" end="15614" title="Scooby Goes Hollywood" label="Scooby Goes Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="15639" end="15657" title="television special" label="television special"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="15667" end="15677" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="15928" end="15938" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q213053" start="15952" end="15971" title="Superman (1978 film)" label="Superman: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247693" start="15985" end="16006" title="Laverne &amp;amp; Shirley" label="Laverne &amp;amp; Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="16023" end="16044" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083020" start="16088" end="16099" title="Scrappy-Doo" label="Scrappy-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="16203" end="16210" title="Nielsen ratings" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q579082" start="16266" end="16292" title="Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (1979 TV series)" label="Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="16381" end="16395" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q8774078" start="16956" end="17005" title="Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (1980 TV series)" label="new &amp;quot;Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo&amp;quot; format"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053464" start="17312" end="17319" title="costume" label="costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760664" start="17472" end="17503" title="The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show" label="The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619426" start="17590" end="17601" title="Richie Rich (1980 TV series)" label="Richie Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973435" start="17634" end="17647" title="Harvey Comics" label="Harvey Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762597" start="17736" end="17773" title="The Scooby-Doo/Scrappy-Doo/Puppy Hour" label="The Scooby-Doo/Scrappy-Doo/Puppy Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614803" start="17802" end="17825" title="Ruby-Spears Productions" label="Ruby-Spears Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="17956" end="17963" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q467722" start="17998" end="18029" title="The Puppy&amp;#x27;s New Adventures" label="The Puppy&amp;#x27;s New Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031104" start="18478" end="18498" title="Scary Scooby Funnies" label="Scary Scooby Funnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250848" start="18552" end="18582" title="Scooby&amp;#x27;s Mystery Funhouse" label="Scooby&amp;#x27;s Mystery Funhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q371746" start="18800" end="18835" title="The New Scooby and Scrappy-Doo Show" label="The New Scooby and Scrappy-Doo Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076646" start="19565" end="19592" title="The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo" label="The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142726" start="19688" end="19697" title="Susan Blu" label="Susan Blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="19747" end="19760" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="20251" end="20268" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="20353" end="20375" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319723" start="20538" end="20547" title="Tex Avery" label="Tex Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q670417" start="20552" end="20564" title="Bob Clampett" label="Bob Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="20662" end="20674" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530867" start="21342" end="21353" title="Tom Ruegger" label="Tom Ruegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620399" start="21377" end="21389" title="story editor" label="story editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="21554" end="21576" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="Warner Bros. Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q387943" start="21594" end="21640" title="Tiny Toon Adventures" label="Steven Spielberg Presents Tiny Toon Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q547744" start="21663" end="21673" title="Animaniacs" label="Animaniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500726" start="21687" end="21706" title="Pinky and the Brain" label="Pinky and the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q917608" start="21724" end="21735" title="Freakazoid!" label="Freakazoid!"/>
<link wikidata="Q741791" start="22047" end="22075" title="What&amp;#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?" label="What&amp;#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711972" start="22098" end="22111" title="Kids&amp;#x27; WB" label="Kids&amp;#x27; WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="22672" end="22685" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q276209" start="22697" end="22707" title="Mindy Cohn" label="Mindy Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q921754" start="22749" end="22761" title="Chuck Sheetz" label="Chuck Sheetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="22787" end="22799" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q848677" start="22909" end="22944" title="Shaggy &amp;amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!" label="Shaggy &amp;amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="22963" end="22969" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802963" start="23075" end="23082" title="mansion" label="mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q430599" start="23253" end="23261" title="Dr. Evil" label="Dr. Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500001" start="23277" end="23290" title="Austin Powers (film series)" label="Austin Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145807" start="23363" end="23388" title="The Abominable Dr. Phibes" label="The Abominable Dr. Phibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090527" start="23668" end="23682" title="Scott Menville" label="Scott Menville"/>
<link wikidata="Q680462" start="24014" end="24046" title="Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated" label="Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="24067" end="24082" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="24206" end="24212" title="reboot (fiction)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q343564" start="24783" end="24800" title="Patrick Warburton" label="Patrick Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234204" start="24802" end="24818" title="Linda Cardellini" label="Linda Cardellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q180252" start="24820" end="24831" title="Lewis Black" label="Lewis Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q220396" start="24833" end="24846" title="Vivica A. Fox" label="Vivica A. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q315864" start="24848" end="24857" title="Gary Cole" label="Gary Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q77035" start="24859" end="24867" title="Udo Kier" label="Udo Kier"/>
<link wikidata="Q712457" start="24869" end="24881" title="Tim Matheson" label="Tim Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q286570" start="24883" end="24894" title="Tia Carrere" label="Tia Carrere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330871" start="24900" end="24912" title="Kate Higgins" label="Kate Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="25215" end="25230" title="telenovela" label="televised novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="25314" end="25338" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23567" start="25355" end="25359" title="Lost (2004 TV series)" label="Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="25484" end="25493" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508236" start="25984" end="26004" title="Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!" label="Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="26215" end="26230" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26389" end="26424" title="Boomerang (TV network)#Mobile app/subscription service" label="Boomerang streaming service and app"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="26519" end="26526" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534249" start="26652" end="26658" title="Halsey (singer)" label="Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="26660" end="26663" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619019" start="26665" end="26673" title="Bill Nye" label="Bill Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="26675" end="26686" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q310903" start="26688" end="26707" title="Neil deGrasse Tyson" label="Neil deGrasse Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23517" start="26709" end="26722" title="Ricky Gervais" label="Ricky Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q552900" start="26724" end="26738" title="Kenan Thompson" label="Kenan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46040" start="26744" end="26754" title="Chris Paul" label="Chris Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777701" start="26814" end="26825" title="Steve Urkel" label="Steve Urkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q358306" start="26837" end="26849" title="Jaleel White" label="Jaleel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="26852" end="26858" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461264" start="26870" end="26882" title="Kevin Conroy" label="Kevin Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="26885" end="26897" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156281" start="26909" end="26922" title="Rachel Kimsey" label="Rachel Kimsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180784" start="26929" end="26934" title="Flash (DC Comics character)" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="26940" end="26955" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="27256" end="27263" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q21116818" start="27969" end="27989" title="Berlanti Productions" label="Berlanti Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="27993" end="28000" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288593" start="28061" end="28075" title="Josh Appelbaum" label="Josh Appelbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476302" start="28080" end="28095" title="Scott Rosenberg" label="Scott Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q978649" start="28109" end="28122" title="Greg Berlanti" label="Greg Berlanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q63111589" start="28124" end="28139" title="Sarah Schechter (producer)" label="Sarah Schechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760014" start="28162" end="28173" title="André Nemec" label="André Nemec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267145" start="28175" end="28187" title="Jeff Pinkner" label="Jeff Pinkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251001" start="28420" end="28447" title="Hanna-Barbera Superstars 10" label="Hanna-Barbera Superstars 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="28467" end="28477" title="broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="28478" end="28493" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q949916" start="28546" end="28555" title="Yogi Bear" label="Yogi Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692981" start="28557" end="28574" title="Huckleberry Hound" label="Huckleberry Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="28576" end="28591" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q457409" start="28597" end="28608" title="The Jetsons" label="The Jetsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188409" start="28684" end="28717" title="Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers" label="Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770445" start="28738" end="28769" title="Scooby-Doo and the Ghoul School" label="Scooby-Doo and the Ghoul School"/>
<link wikidata="Q592768" start="28794" end="28831" title="Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf" label="Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745805" start="29132" end="29146" title="Scooby-Doo in Arabian Nights" label="Arabian Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="29178" end="29181" title="TBS (TV network)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="29191" end="29202" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="29307" end="29318" title="broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="29359" end="29375" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="29393" end="29409" title="TBS (TV network)" label="TBS Superstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="29427" end="29438" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865801" start="29455" end="29474" title="USA Cartoon Express" label="USA Cartoon Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="29629" end="29648" title="Turner Broadcasting" label="Turner Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="29808" end="29811" title="Turner Network Television" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983009" start="29813" end="29821" title="Television in Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183935" start="29830" end="29838" title="TELETOON (Canada)" label="Teletoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157906" start="30118" end="30127" title="Boomerang (TV network)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="30215" end="30237" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="Warner Bros. Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="30281" end="30293" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="30318" end="30329" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275539" start="30633" end="30660" title="Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island" label="Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702996" start="30681" end="30719" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Witch&amp;#x27;s Ghost" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Witch&amp;#x27;s Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878809" start="30740" end="30773" title="Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders" label="Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869550" start="30798" end="30828" title="Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase" label="Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="31073" end="31084" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356246" start="31108" end="31119" title="Scott Innes" label="Scott Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531624" start="31161" end="31171" title="Billy West" label="Billy West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900254" start="31231" end="31240" title="B. J. Ward (actress)" label="B.J. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q242945" start="31265" end="31281" title="Mary Kay Bergman" label="Mary Kay Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13938" start="31350" end="31362" title="Grey DeLisle" label="Grey DeLisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016589" start="31672" end="31678" title="Louisiana Voodoo" label="voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="31711" end="31720" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="31808" end="31817" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="31836" end="31849" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="32032" end="32041" title="goth rock" label="goth rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="32286" end="32308" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="Warner Bros. Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q602018" start="32627" end="32668" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095720" start="32685" end="32722" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q29086" start="33111" end="33126" title="Matthew Lillard" label="Matthew Lillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23755563" start="33313" end="33347" title="Lego Scooby-Doo! Haunted Hollywood" label="Lego Scooby-Doo! Haunted Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33364" end="33409" title="Scooby-Doo! and WWE: Curse of the Speed Demon" label="Scooby-Doo! and WWE: Curse of the Speed Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954064" start="33753" end="33777" title="Scooby-Doo! Spooky Games" label="Scooby-Doo! Spooky Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627818" start="33879" end="33907" title="Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays" label="Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954064" start="34024" end="34060" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Spooky Scarecrow" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Spooky Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204688" start="34077" end="34106" title="Scooby-Doo! Mecha Mutt Menace" label="Scooby-Doo! Mecha Mutt Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968948" start="34318" end="34343" title="Scooby-Doo! Ghastly Goals" label="Scooby-Doo! Ghastly Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627547" start="34455" end="34488" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Beach Beastie" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Beach Beastie"/>
<link wikidata="Q113665795" start="34681" end="34707" title="Trick or Treat Scooby-Doo!" label="Trick or Treat Scooby-Doo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q936302" start="34971" end="35010" title="Scooby-Doo (film)" label="feature-length live-action film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="35053" end="35074" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q545351" start="35105" end="35117" title="Raja Gosnell" label="Raja Gosnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q309756" start="35136" end="35154" title="Freddie Prinze Jr." label="Freddie Prinze Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="35164" end="35185" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29086" start="35197" end="35212" title="Matthew Lillard" label="Matthew Lillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234204" start="35228" end="35244" title="Linda Cardellini" label="Linda Cardellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808701" start="35277" end="35289" title="Neil Fanning" label="Neil Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="35316" end="35334" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="35335" end="35349" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q936302" start="35358" end="35368" title="Scooby-Doo (film)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35487" end="35519" title="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed" label="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q603584" start="35848" end="35878" title="Scooby-Doo! The Mystery Begins" label="Scooby-Doo! The Mystery Begins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077881" start="36038" end="36050" title="Nick Palatas" label="Nick Palatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q926420" start="36062" end="36074" title="Robbie Amell" label="Robbie Amell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133386" start="36084" end="36095" title="Kate Melton" label="Kate Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q239195" start="36107" end="36120" title="Hayley Kiyoko" label="Hayley Kiyoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q588080" start="36213" end="36250" title="Scooby-Doo! Curse of the Lake Monster" label="Scooby-Doo! Curse of the Lake Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q44268586" start="36349" end="36367" title="Daphne &amp;amp; Velma" label="Daphne &amp;amp; Velma"/>
<link wikidata="Q19747898" start="36699" end="36718" title="Atlas Entertainment" label="Atlas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577186" start="36994" end="37006" title="Tony Cervone" label="Tony Cervone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732725" start="37049" end="37063" title="Allison Abbate" label="Allison Abbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q935609" start="37080" end="37093" title="Dan Povenmire" label="Dan Povenmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q462354" start="37217" end="37228" title="Dax Shepard" label="Dax Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319744" start="37383" end="37393" title="Will Forte" label="Will Forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729296" start="37398" end="37412" title="Gina Rodriguez" label="Gina Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542" start="37445" end="37457" title="Tracy Morgan" label="Tracy Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q864240" start="37527" end="37562" title="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels" label="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q45229" start="37596" end="37605" title="Zac Efron" label="Zac Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q189226" start="37610" end="37625" title="Amanda Seyfried" label="Amanda Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q440910" start="37667" end="37676" title="Ken Jeong" label="Ken Jeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395696" start="37693" end="37713" title="Dynomutt, Dog Wonder" label="Dynomutt, Dog Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132067" start="37761" end="37776" title="Kiersey Clemons" label="Kiersey Clemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252904" start="37857" end="37871" title="Dick Dastardly" label="Dick Dastardly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002254" start="37905" end="37916" title="Wacky Races (1968 TV series)" label="Wacky Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q214223" start="37975" end="37987" title="Jason Isaacs" label="Jason Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="38075" end="38092" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87625385" start="38148" end="38170" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on cinema" label="movie theater closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="38271" end="38294" title="video on demand" label="Premium video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q901323" start="38650" end="38660" title="Scooby-Doo (character)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="38662" end="38673" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637976" start="38733" end="38743" title="Hadley Kay" label="Hadley Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216991" start="38778" end="38790" title="Johnny Bravo" label="Johnny Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356246" start="38908" end="38919" title="Scott Innes" label="Scott Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808701" start="38967" end="38979" title="Neil Fanning" label="Neil Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="39074" end="39086" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173157" start="39304" end="39316" title="Dave Coulier" label="Dave Coulier"/>
<link wikidata="Q186757" start="39328" end="39338" title="Seth Green" label="Seth Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="39385" end="39398" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q848673" start="39417" end="39451" title="Shaggy Rogers" label="Norville &amp;quot;Shaggy&amp;quot; Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="39453" end="39464" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q531624" start="39520" end="39530" title="Billy West" label="Billy West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275539" start="39554" end="39581" title="Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island" label="Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39598" end="39627" title="Scooby-Doo: Behind the Scenes" label="Scooby-Doo: Behind the Scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356246" start="39643" end="39654" title="Scott Innes" label="Scott Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090527" start="40007" end="40021" title="Scott Menville" label="Scott Menville"/>
<link wikidata="Q848677" start="40083" end="40118" title="Shaggy &amp;amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!" label="Shaggy &amp;amp; Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!"/>
<link wikidata="Q29086" start="40126" end="40141" title="Matthew Lillard" label="Matthew Lillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="40340" end="40350" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="40362" end="40375" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077881" start="40383" end="40395" title="Nick Palatas" label="Nick Palatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225316" start="40461" end="40471" title="Fred Jones (Scooby-Doo)" label="Fred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="40473" end="40485" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="40613" end="40635" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019236" start="40649" end="40660" title="Carl Steven" label="Carl Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q309756" start="40698" end="40716" title="Freddie Prinze Jr." label="Freddie Prinze Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q926420" start="40837" end="40849" title="Robbie Amell" label="Robbie Amell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923284" start="40894" end="40906" title="Daphne Blake" label="Daphne Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025063" start="40908" end="40934" title="Indira Stefanianna" label="Stefanianna Christopherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q936279" start="40988" end="41014" title="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!" label="Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355790" start="41033" end="41046" title="Heather North" label="Heather North"/>
<link wikidata="Q235754" start="41135" end="41148" title="Kellie Martin" label="Kellie Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="41188" end="41210" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q242945" start="41218" end="41234" title="Mary Kay Bergman" label="Mary Kay Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13938" start="41289" end="41301" title="Grey DeLisle" label="Grey DeLisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q602018" start="41440" end="41481" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095720" start="41498" end="41535" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="41543" end="41564" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133386" start="41689" end="41700" title="Kate Melton" label="Kate Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q929855" start="41747" end="41760" title="Velma Dinkley" label="Velma Dinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355344" start="41762" end="41774" title="Nicole Jaffe" label="Nicole Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225342" start="41826" end="41837" title="Pat Stevens" label="Pat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q579082" start="41924" end="41950" title="Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (1979 TV series)" label="Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q371746" start="42040" end="42068" title="The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries" label="The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="42134" end="42156" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900254" start="42164" end="42174" title="B. J. Ward (actress)" label="B. J. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q276209" start="42212" end="42222" title="Mindy Cohn" label="Mindy Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q602018" start="42305" end="42346" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095720" start="42363" end="42400" title="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico" label="Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608255" start="42416" end="42440" title="Stephanie D&amp;#x27;Abruzzo" label="Stephanie D&amp;#x27;Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42485" end="42524" title="Scooby-Doo! Adventures: The Mystery Map" label="Scooby-Doo! Adventures: The Mystery Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q522856" start="42541" end="42553" title="Kate Micucci" label="Kate Micucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508236" start="42592" end="42612" title="Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!" label="Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q234204" start="42713" end="42729" title="Linda Cardellini" label="Linda Cardellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q239195" start="42852" end="42865" title="Hayley Kiyoko" label="Hayley Kiyoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083020" start="42911" end="42922" title="Scrappy-Doo" label="Scrappy-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="42924" end="42938" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="43037" end="43048" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760664" start="43139" end="43170" title="The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show" label="The Richie Rich/Scooby-Doo Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356246" start="43272" end="43283" title="Scott Innes" label="Scott Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214023" start="43451" end="43461" title="Dan Milano" label="Dan Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534616" start="43540" end="43555" title="Gold Key Comics" label="Gold Key Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="43616" end="43626" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378764" start="43733" end="43744" title="Phil DeLara" label="Phil DeLara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543615" start="43763" end="43775" title="Warren Tufts" label="Warren Tufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q354575" start="43906" end="43918" title="Mark Evanier" label="Mark Evanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214423" start="43932" end="43943" title="Dan Spiegle" label="Dan Spiegle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279731" start="43945" end="43953" title="Charlton Comics" label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="44062" end="44075" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973435" start="44170" end="44183" title="Harvey Comics" label="Harvey Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q633812" start="44300" end="44313" title="Archie Comics" label="Archie Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="44555" end="44564" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="44802" end="44815" title="Crossover (fiction)" label="crossing over"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054022" start="45282" end="45299" title="Scooby Apocalypse" label="Scooby Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="45364" end="45386" title="post-apocalyptic world" label="post-apocalyptic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="45622" end="45636" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="45637" end="45647" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q694311" start="45659" end="45668" title="lunch box" label="lunch box"/>
<link wikidata="Q497976" start="45691" end="45704" title="coloring book" label="coloring book"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="45720" end="45727" title="gramophone record" label="records"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="46025" end="46032" title="arcade game" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q172395" start="46155" end="46167" title="multivitamin" label="multivitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="46226" end="46231" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="46528" end="46544" title="breakfast cereal" label="breakfast cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q682582" start="46546" end="46556" title="stuffed animal" label="plush toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="46558" end="46571" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="46591" end="46597" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="46609" end="46615" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38420" start="46662" end="46672" title="dog food" label="dog treats"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="46713" end="46719" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17245" start="46862" end="46866" title="Cluedo" label="Clue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241672" start="46887" end="46911" title="Pressman Toy Corporation" label="Pressman Toy Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155729" start="47079" end="47089" title="Scholastic Corporation" label="Scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238823" start="47115" end="47127" title="Suzanne Weyn" label="Suzanne Weyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735484" start="47311" end="47343" title="The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera (ride)" label="Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880820" start="47368" end="47393" title="Universal Studios Florida" label="Universal Studios Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200946" start="47449" end="47462" title="Jimmy Neutron" label="Jimmy Neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302175" start="47597" end="47612" title="Paramount Parks" label="Paramount Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421635" start="47650" end="47668" title="costumed character" label="costumed character"/>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="48055" end="48065" title="Hot Wheels" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="48428" end="48432" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="48453" end="48465" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q279189" start="48487" end="48509" title="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo" label="A Pup Named Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="48700" end="48710" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="50096" end="50104" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="50375" end="50389" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="&amp;quot;PG&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="51241" end="51249" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43429" start="51400" end="51413" title="Animal Planet" label="Animal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="51521" end="51542" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="51677" end="51689" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="51862" end="51865" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728039" start="51967" end="51982" title="Christopher Orr (film critic)" label="Christopher Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="51992" end="52004" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="52296" end="52308" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="52315" end="52327" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five College"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="52602" end="52627" title="Hanna-Barbera Productions" label="Hanna-Barbera Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="52629" end="52632" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563108" start="52643" end="52657" title="Fred Silverman" label="Fred Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q354575" start="52663" end="52675" title="Mark Evanier" label="Mark Evanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212115" start="52789" end="52797" title="Joe Ruby" label="Joe Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388531" start="52802" end="52812" title="Ken Spears" label="Ken Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978290" start="52891" end="52907" title="I Love a Mystery" label="I Love a Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033276" start="52938" end="52968" title="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis" label="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="53307" end="53322" title="Cult following" label="cult television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524381" start="53351" end="53375" title="Buffyverse" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="53679" end="53700" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799459" start="53724" end="53737" title="Buffy Summers" label="Buffy Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923284" start="53780" end="53792" title="Daphne Blake" label="Daphne Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q936302" start="53824" end="53834" title="Scooby-Doo (film)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53851" end="53883" title="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed" label="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="54159" end="54165" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59996" start="54170" end="54175" title="Robin (character)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="54186" end="54194" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="Weird Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="54220" end="54225" title="Joker (character)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q384193" start="54234" end="54241" title="Penguin (character)" label="Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941798" start="54357" end="54375" title="Music for Pleasure (record label)" label="Music for Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="54394" end="54412" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q832190" start="54900" end="54930" title="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" label="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414130" start="55050" end="55054" title="Filk music" label="filk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095305" start="55060" end="55073" title="Ookla the Mok (band)" label="Ookla the Mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q221373" start="55209" end="55222" title="Deontological ethics" label="deontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="55233" end="55249" title="Ethics" label="moral philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="55305" end="55320" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q644554" start="55366" end="55389" title="The Blair Witch Project" label="The Blair Witch Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q57524508" start="55409" end="55431" title="The Scooby-Doo Project" label="The Scooby-Doo Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q916946" start="55495" end="55498" title="Mad (TV series)" label="Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="55632" end="55640" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020371" start="55661" end="55685" title="Saturday Morning Fun Pit" label="Saturday Morning Fun Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q750023" start="55765" end="55771" title="Bender (Futurama)" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068284" start="55783" end="55789" title="Hermes Conrad" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q121841" start="55799" end="55804" title="Leela (Futurama)" label="Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068284" start="55816" end="55819" title="Amy Wong" label="Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121806" start="55833" end="55836" title="Philip J. Fry" label="Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636213" start="55861" end="55874" title="The Venture Bros." label="Venture Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q192218" start="56109" end="56118" title="Ted Bundy" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23712114" start="56237" end="56242" title="Ghost (Mystery Skulls song)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204564" start="56252" end="56266" title="Mystery Skulls" label="Mystery Skulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="56274" end="56289" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056342" start="56296" end="56302" title="Arthur (TV series)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562314" start="56361" end="56371" title="List of Arthur characters" label="Spooky-Poo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="56394" end="56404" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q467280" start="56425" end="56464" title="Korn&amp;#x27;s Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery" label="Korn&amp;#x27;s Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="56490" end="56494" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47255" start="56611" end="56621" title="Stan Marsh" label="Stan Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47345" start="56623" end="56638" title="Kyle Broflovski" label="Kyle Broflovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="56640" end="56652" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47386" start="56657" end="56672" title="Kenny McCormick" label="Kenny McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470448" start="56726" end="56746" title="Falling Away from Me" label="Falling Away from Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q572173" start="56776" end="56782" title="Issues (Korn album)" label="Issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668194" start="56823" end="56854" title="Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law" label="Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677044" start="56871" end="56886" title="Harvey Birdman" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57070" end="57094" title="Golden Sun: The Lost Age" label="Golden Sun: The Lost Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809524" start="57252" end="57267" title="Teen Titans Go!" label="Teen Titans Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q575227" start="57378" end="57387" title="Beast Boy" label="Beast Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="57469" end="57481" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599164" start="57570" end="57583" title="Control Freak (Teen Titans)" label="Control Freak"/>
<link wikidata="Q506074" start="57616" end="57627" title="Family Feud" label="Family Feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8771884" start="57795" end="57808" title="Edgar Cantero" label="Edgar Cantero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="57891" end="57905" title="the Hardy Boys" label="the Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="57907" end="57917" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134354" start="57923" end="57938" title="The Famous Five (novel series)" label="the Famous Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q130585" start="57992" end="58004" title="Supernatural (American TV series)" label="Supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q51257047" start="58087" end="58100" title="Scoobynatural" label="Scoobynatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q900737" start="58227" end="58230" title="Sam Winchester" label="Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q903006" start="58232" end="58236" title="Dean Winchester" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453550" start="58242" end="58249" title="Castiel (Supernatural)" label="Castiel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58372" end="58405" title="The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part" label="The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731483" start="58447" end="58465" title="Harvey Street Kids" label="Harvey Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58642" end="58665" title="Space Jam: A New Legacy" label="Space Jam: A New Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754742" start="58834" end="58874" title="The Official BBC Children in Need Medley" label="The Official BBC Children in Need Medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q558112" start="58905" end="58917" title="Black Mirror" label="Black Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q118981375" start="58938" end="58948" title="Loch Henry" label="Loch Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q429083" start="59167" end="59180" title="rhyming slang" label="rhyming slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328164" start="59243" end="59254" title="Jellystone!" label="Jellystone!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342554" start="59324" end="59337" title="Goober and the Ghost Chasers" label="Ghost Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120485" start="59492" end="59502" title="Cindy Bear" label="Cindy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752315" start="59504" end="59516" title="Ranger Smith" label="Ranger Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29862312" start="59585" end="59621" title="Hanna-Barbera Educational Filmstrips" label="Hanna-Barbera Educational Filmstrips"/>
<link wikidata="Q10563322" start="59624" end="59675" title="List of works produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions" label="List of works produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059558" start="59678" end="59692" title="Lost Mysteries" label="Lost Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59701" end="59756" title="Scooby-Doo&amp;#x27;s Snack Tracks: The Ultimate Collection" label="Scooby-Doo&amp;#x27;s Snack Tracks: The Ultimate Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751729" start="59765" end="59774" title="Scoubidou" label="Scoubidou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37290" wikidata="Q312057" url="?curid=37290" title="Saint Casimir">
<text>Casimir Jagiellon (; ; ; 3 October 1458 – 4 March 1484) was a prince of the Kingdom of Poland and of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The second son of King Casimir IV Jagiellon, he was tutored by Johannes Longinus, a Polish chronicler, diplomat, and priest. After his elder brother Vladislaus was elected as King of Bohemia in 1471, Casimir became the heir apparent. At the age of 13, Casimir participated in the failed military campaign to install him as King of Hungary. He became known for his piety, devotion to God, and generosity towards the sick and poor. He became ill (most likely with tuberculosis) and died at the age of 25. He was buried in Vilnius Cathedral. His canonization was initiated by his brother King Sigismund I the Old in 1514 and the tradition holds that he was canonized in 1521.

Veneration of Casimir saw a resurgence in the 17th century when his feast day was confirmed by the pope in 1602 and the dedicated Chapel of Saint Casimir was completed in 1636. Casimir became a patron saint of Lithuania and Lithuanian youth. In Vilnius, his feast day is marked annually with Kaziuko mugė (a trade fair) held on the Sunday nearest to 4 March, the anniversary of his death. There are more than 50 churches named after Casimir in Lithuania and Poland, including Church of St. Casimir, Vilnius and St. Kazimierz Church, Warsaw, and more than 50 churches in Lithuanian and Polish diaspora communities in America. Women&#x27;s congregation Sisters of Saint Casimir was established in 1908 and remains active in the United States.

==Biography==
===Early life and education===
A member of the Jagiellon dynasty, Casimir was born in Wawel Castle in Kraków. Casimir was the third child and the second son of the King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania Casimir IV and Queen Elisabeth Habsburg of Austria. Elisabeth was a loving mother and took active interest in her children&#x27;s upbringing. The Queen and the children often accompanied the King in his annual trips to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.

Casimir was a polyglot and knew Lithuanian, Polish, German and Latin languages. From the age of nine, Casimir and his brother Vladislaus were educated by the Polish priest Fr. Jan Długosz. The boys were taught Latin and German, law, history, rhetoric, and classical literature. Długosz was a strict and conservative teacher who emphasized ethics, morality, and religious devotion. According to Stanisław Orzechowski (1513–1566), the princes were subject to corporal punishment which was approved by their father. Długosz noted Casimir&#x27;s skills in oratory when he delivered speeches to greet his father returning to Poland in 1469 and Jakub Sienienski, the Bishop of Kujawy, in 1470.

===Hungarian campaign===
Prince Casimir&#x27;s uncle Ladislaus the Posthumous, King of Hungary and Bohemia, died in 1457 at the age of 17, without leaving an heir. Casimir&#x27;s father, King Casimir IV, subsequently advanced his claims to Hungary and Bohemia, but could not enforce them due to the Thirteen Years&#x27; War (1454–66). Instead, Hungarian nobles elected Matthias Corvinus and Bohemian nobles selected George of Poděbrady as their kings. George of Poděbrady died in March 1471. In May 1471, Vladislaus, eldest son of Casimir IV, was elected to the throne of Bohemia. However, a group of Catholic Bohemian nobles supported Matthias Corvinus instead of Vladislaus II. In turn, a group of Hungarian nobles conspired against Matthias Corvinus and invited the Polish king to overthrow him. King Casimir IV decided to install his son, Casimir, in Hungary.

Poland amassed an army of 12,000 men, commanded by Piotr Dunin and Dziersław of Rytwiany. Both King Casimir and Prince Casimir participated in the campaign. In October 1471, the Polish army crossed the Hungarian border and slowly marched towards Buda. Matthias Corvinus managed to win over the majority of the Hungarian nobles, including the main conspirator Archbishop János Vitéz, and the Polish army did not receive the expected reinforcements. Only Deák, Perény and Rozgonyi families sent troops. Upon hearing that Corvinus&#x27; army of 16,000 men camped outside of Pest, the Polish army decided to retreat from Hatvan to Nitra. There the soldiers battled food shortages, spreading infectious diseases, and the upcoming winter. The Polish King also lacked funds to pay the mercenaries. As a result, the Polish army decreased by about a third. In December 1471, Prince Casimir, out of fear for his safety, was sent to Jihlava closer to the Polish border and that further eroded their soldiers&#x27; morale. Corvinus took Nitra and a one-year truce was completed in March 1472 in Buda. Prince Casimir returned to Kraków to resume his studies with Długosz.

Długosz remarked that Prince Casimir felt &quot;great sorrow and shame&quot; regarding the failure in Hungary. Polish propaganda, however, portrayed him as a savior, sent by divine providence, to protect the people from a godless tyrant (i.e. Matthias Corvinus) and marauding pagans (i.e. Muslim Ottoman Turks). Prince Casimir was also exposed to the cult of his uncle King Władysław III of Poland who died in the 1444 Battle of Varna against the Ottomans. This led some researchers, including Jacob Caro, to conclude that the Hungarian campaign pushed Prince Casimir into religious life.

===Later life and death===
As his elder brother, Vladislaus II, ruled Bohemia, Prince Casimir became the heir apparent to the throne of Poland and Lithuania. Italian humanist writer Filippo Buonaccorsi (also known as Filip Callimachus) was hired to become Casimir&#x27;s tutor in political matters, but his Renaissance views had less influence on Casimir than Długosz. In 1474, the Italian merchant and traveler Ambrogio Contarini met with Prince Casimir and was impressed by his wisdom. Prince Casimir completed his formal education at age 16 and spent most of his time with his father. In 1476, Prince Casimir accompanied his father to Royal Prussia where he tried to resolve the conflict with the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia (see War of the Priests). In 1478 Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania demanded that King Casimir IV leave either Prince Casimir or Prince John I Albert in Lithuania as a regent. King Casimir IV feared separatist moods and refused, but after settling the conflict in Prussia, moved to Vilnius.

Between 1479 and 1484 his father spent most of his time in Vilnius attending to the affairs of Lithuania. In 1481, Mikhailo Olelkovich and his relatives planned to murder King Casimir and Prince Casimir during a hunt at a wedding of Feodor Ivanovich Belsky. The plan was discovered and Prince Casimir, perhaps fearing for his safety, was sent to Poland to act as vice-regent. Around the same time his father tried to arrange his marriage to Kunigunde of Austria, daughter of Emperor Frederick III. It is often said that Prince Casimir refused the match, preferring to remain celibate and sensing his approaching death. According to Maciej Miechowita, Prince Casimir developed tuberculosis. In May 1483, Prince Casimir joined his father in Vilnius. There, after the death of Andrzej Oporowski, Bishop and Vice-Chancellor of the Crown, Prince Casimir took over some of his duties in the chancellery. However, his health deteriorated while rumors about his piety and good deeds spread further. In February 1484, the Polish sejm in Lublin was aborted as King Casimir IV rushed back to Lithuania to be with his ill son. Prince Casimir died on 4 March 1484, in Grodno. His remains were interred in Vilnius Cathedral, where the dedicated Saint Casimir&#x27;s Chapel was built in 1636.

==Veneration==
===Pious life and attributed miracles===
Surviving contemporary accounts described Prince Casimir as a young man of exceptional intellect and education, humility and politeness, who strove for justice and fairness. Early sources do not attest to his piety or devotion to God, but his inclination to religious life increased towards the end of his life. Later sources provide some stories of Casimir&#x27;s religious life. Marcin Kromer (1512–1589) said Casimir refused his physician&#x27;s advice to have sexual relations with women in hopes to cure his illness. Other accounts say Casimir contracted his lung disease after a particularly hard fast or that he could be found pre-dawn, kneeling by the church gates, waiting for a priest to open them. Zacharias Ferreri (1479–1524) wrote that Casimir composed a prayer in hexameter on Christ&#x27;s incarnation but this text has not survived. Later, a copy of &quot;Omni die dic Mariae&quot; (&quot;Daily, Daily Sing to Mary&quot;) was found in Casimir&#x27;s coffin. The hymn became so strongly associated with Casimir that sometimes it is known as &quot;Hymn of St. Casimir&quot; and he is credited as its author. The lengthy hymn has an intricate meter and rhyme scheme (alternate acatalectic and catalectic trochaic dimeter with internal rhyme in the first and third verses (aa/b, cc/b)) and was most likely written by Bernard of Cluny.

One of the first miracles attributed to Casimir was his appearance before the Lithuanian army during the Siege of Polotsk in 1518. Casimir showed where Lithuanian troops could safely cross the Daugava River and relieve the city, besieged by the army of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Ferreri&#x27;s hagiography of 1521 mentions many miracles of Casimir are known but describes only one – a Lithuanian victory against the Russians. The description lacks specifics, such as date or location, but most likely refers to the Lithuanian victory in 1519 against Russian troops that raided the environs of Vilnius, and not the more popular story of the Siege of Polotsk.

===Canonization and official veneration===

Casimir&#x27;s official cult started spreading soon after his death. In 1501, Pope Alexander VI, citing Casimir&#x27;s miracles as well as the splendor of the chapel where he was buried, granted a special indulgence to those who would pray in the chapel from one vespers to another during certain Catholic festivals, and would contribute to the upkeep of the chapel. In 1513, Andrzej Krzycki wrote a poem mentioning numerous wax votive offerings on Casimir&#x27;s grave. In 1514, during the Fifth Council of the Lateran, Casimir&#x27;s brother Sigismund I the Old petitioned the pope to canonize Casimir. After repeated requests, in November 1517, Pope Leo X appointed a three-bishop commission and later sent his legate Zacharias Ferreri to investigate. He arrived at Vilnius in September 1520 and completed his work in about two months. His findings, the first short hagiography of Casimir, was published in 1521 in Kraków as &quot;Vita Beati Casimiri Confessoris&quot;. The canonization was all but certain but Pope Leo X died in December 1521. Research of Zenonas Ivinskis and Paulius Rabikauskas showed that there is no documentary proof that he issued a papal bull canonizing Casimir but many important documents were lost during the Sack of Rome (1527). The Protestant Reformation attacked the cult of saints and there were no new canonizations between 1523 and 1588. However, Casimir was included in the first &quot;Roman Martyrology,&quot; published in 1583.

The cause of Casimir&#x27;s cult was taken up by the new Bishop of Vilnius Benedykt Woyna (appointed in 1600). He sent canon Gregorius Swiecicki to Rome with a letter from King Sigismund III Vasa requesting to add the feast of Casimir to the Roman Breviary and Roman Missal. The Sacred Congregation of Rites refused the request but on 7 November 1602 Pope Clement VIII issued a papal brief &quot;Quae ad sanctorum&quot; which authorized his feast &quot;sub duplici ritu&quot; on 4 March but only in Poland and Lithuania. The brief also mentioned that Casimir was added to the ranks of saints by Pope Leo X. In the absence of any earlier known papal document explicitly mentioning Casimir as saint, the brief is often cited as Casimir&#x27;s canonization. Swiecicki returned to Vilnius with the papal brief and red velvet labarum with the image of Saint Casimir. The city organized a large three-day festival on 10–12 May 1604 to properly accept the papal flag. On the third day, the cornerstone was laid for the new Church of St. Casimir. The coffin of Casimir was taken out of the crypt and elevated to the altar. Swiecicki testified that when the coffin was opened in August 1604 a wonderful smell filed the cathedral for three days.
In 1607 and 1613, Bishop Woyna declared Casimir patron saint of Lithuania (&quot;Patronus principalis Lithuaniae&quot;). The issue of a universal Casimir&#x27;s feast was not forgotten and in 1620 Bishop Eustachy Wołłowicz petitioned Pope Paul V to add Casimir to the Roman Breviary and Roman Missal. This time the Sacred Congregation of Rites granted the request in March 1621 and added his feast &quot;sub ritu semiduplici&quot;. In March 1636, Pope Urban VIII allowed the celebration of the feast of Casimir with an octave (&quot;duplex cum octava&quot;) in the Diocese of Vilnius and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. That is equivalent of proclaiming Casimir as the patron saint of Lithuania. On 28 September 1652, Pope Innocent X allowed a fest of transfer of relics of Casimir on a Sunday following the Assumption of Mary. On 11 June 1948, when many Lithuanians were displaced war refugees, Pope Pius XII named Casimir the special patron of Lithuanian youth.

===Iconography===
Saint Casimir&#x27;s painting in Vilnius Cathedral is considered to be miraculous. The painting, probably completed around 1520, depicts the saint with two right hands. According to a legend, the painter attempted to redraw the hand in a different place and paint over the old hand, but the old hand miraculously reappeared. More conventional explanations claim that three-handed Casimir was the original intent of the painter to emphasize the exceptional generosity of Casimir (&quot;But when you give to someone in need, don&#x27;t let your left hand know what your right hand is doing.&quot; Matthew 6:3) or that the old hand bled through a coat of new paint (similar to a palimpsest). Around 1636 the painting was covered in gilded silver clothing (&quot;riza&quot;).

Casimir&#x27;s iconography usually follows the three-handed painting. He is usually depicted as a young man in long red robe lined with stoat fur. Sometimes he wears a red cap of the Grand Duke of Lithuania, but other times, to emphasize his devotion to spiritual life, the cap is placed near Casimir. Almost always he holds a lily, a symbol of virginity, innocence, and purity. He might also hold a cross, a rosary, or a book with words from &quot;Omni die dic Mariae&quot; (Daily, Daily Sing to Mary). The towns of Kvėdarna and Nemunaitis in Lithuania have Saint Casimir depicted on their coat of arms.

===Physical remains and relics===

Casimir was buried in the crypt under the Royal Chapel of Vilnius Cathedral (present-day Wołłowicz Chapel to the left from the main entrance), constructed by his father in the Gothic style in 1474. In 1604, the coffin was elevated from the crypt to the altar and in 1636 moved to the dedicated Chapel of Saint Casimir. The present-day sarcophagus was made in 1747 under the last will of Bishop of Warmia Christopher Johan Szembek (1680–1740). It is made of linden wood and covered with silver plates; its corners are decorated with gilded eagles. The sarcophagus was removed from the cathedral on three occasions. In 1655, before the Battle of Vilnius during the Deluge, the relics were removed most likely by Jerzy Białłozor and hid by Cyprian Paweł Brzostowski and later by the Sapiehas in the Ruzhany Palace. They were returned to the devastated chapel in 1663. The relics were removed for a short time in 1702 during the Battle of Vilnius of the Great Northern War. In October 1952, the relics were quietly moved to the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul by the order of Soviet authorities. The cathedral was turned into an art gallery. The relics returned to their place in 1989 when the cathedral was reconsecrated.

After the rediscovery of the Catacombs of Rome in 1578, the cult of relics spread throughout Europe (see also catacomb saints) and the trend did not skip Casimir. The coffin of Casimir was opened in early 1602 and in August 1604. At the time, canon Gregorius Swiecicki testified that despite humidity the body was intact. But in 1667 there were only bones left; they were inventoried and placed into six cloth bags. Surviving written records indicate that the coffin was opened in 1664, 1667, 1677, 1690, 1736, 1838, 1878 (twice), and 1922. There are several recorded instances when Casimir&#x27;s relics were gifted to prominent figures and societies: to musicians&#x27; confraternity at San Giorgio Maggiore, Naples in early 1650s, to King John III Sobieski and Cosimo III de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany in October 1677, to the Sodality of Our Lady of the Jesuit academy in Mechelen and the Order of Malta in October 1690, to Queen Maria Josepha of Austria in February 1736, to Cistercian abbot Sztárek Lajos of in 1860. Many more relics of Casimir can be found in local churches. In particular, in 1838, two teeth and ten unspecified bones were removed from the coffin; the bones were cut into small pieces and distributed among various churches. In 1922, the bones were wrapped in a new cloth and the old cloth was distributed as a relic. It was the last time that a relic of Casimir (one tooth for the Church of St. Casimir) was taken.

===Dedications===
In his 1970 monograph priest Florijonas Neviera (Florian Niewiero, 1896–1976) counted churches named after Casimir. He found 12 churches in Lithuania (as of 1940), 48 churches and 5 chapels in Poland, 23 Lithuanian and 36 Polish churches in United States (as of 1964), five churches in Canada (Montreal, Winnipeg, Toronto, Portneuf, and Ripon), two churches in United Kingdom (London and Manchester), and two churches in Belarus (Vselyub and Lepiel). The women&#x27;s congregation Sisters of Saint Casimir was established in 1908 by Maria Kaupas and is active in the United States. In 1945, the College of Saint Casimir was established in Rome to educate Lithuanian priests who fled west after World War II.
While the devotion to Casimir is most prevalent in Lithuania and Poland and their diaspora communities, his cult can be found in other countries as well. In the 17th century, at least two societies of Saint Casimir were active in Mechelen and Antwerp (now Belgium). In the 17th century, Casimir&#x27;s cult also spread in Italy, particularly Florence, Palermo, Naples; his cult in Rome was more associated with Polish dignitaries and émigrés. Musical performances were organized in Rome in 1675 (words by Sebastiano Lazzarini, music by Francesco Beretta, performed at Santo Spirito in Sassia) and in 1678 (words by Ottavio Santacroce, music probably by Giovanni Bicilli, performed at Santa Maria in Vallicella on the occasion of the visit by Michał Kazimierz Radziwiłł and his wife Katarzyna Sobieska), and in Florence in 1706 (words possibly by Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni, music by Alessandro Scarlatti). In Palermo, Pietro Novelli was commissioned painting &quot;Coronation of Saint Casimir&quot; (l’Incoronazione di s. Casimiro) for the altar of (now held at the Galleria Regionale della Sicilia).

The settlements of Saint-Casimir in Canada (founded 1836) and San Casimiro in Venezuela (founded 1785) are named after him. Sculptures of Casimir, among other canonized royals, can be found in San Ferdinando, Livorno, Italy and Metropolitan Cathedral, Mexico City. Stained glass windows with Casimir can be found at the Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph in San Jose, California, and at the Church of St. Peter in Chevaigné, France. Since 1846, there is a nursing home in Paris named &quot;Maison Saint-Casimir&quot;. It was created by the Polish community of France and is run since its opening by Polish nuns Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
*Interactive panorama of Saint Casimir&#x27;s Chapel at Vilnius Cathedral</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312057" start="0" end="17" title="Saint Casimir" label="Casimir Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="76" end="93" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="105" end="129" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="154" end="174" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q326493" start="194" end="211" title="Johannes Longinus" label="Johannes Longinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="222" end="232" title="chronicler" label="chronicler"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="280" end="290" title="Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary" label="Vladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="306" end="321" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="350" end="363" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="454" end="469" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="593" end="605" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281237" start="651" end="668" title="Vilnius Cathedral" label="Vilnius Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="721" end="740" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q11735283" start="935" end="958" title="Chapel of Saint Casimir" label="Chapel of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="999" end="1011" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1015" end="1024" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="1050" end="1057" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988340" start="1097" end="1109" title="Kaziuko mugė" label="Kaziuko mugė"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539380" start="1281" end="1311" title="Church of St. Casimir, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Casimir, Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589429" start="1316" end="1344" title="St. Kazimierz Church, Warsaw" label="St. Kazimierz Church, Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977484" start="1456" end="1480" title="Sisters of Saint Casimir" label="Sisters of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="1608" end="1625" title="Jagiellon dynasty" label="Jagiellon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820" start="1647" end="1659" title="Wawel Castle" label="Wawel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="1663" end="1669" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="1768" end="1778" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q93408" start="1789" end="1818" title="Elisabeth of Austria (1436–1505)" label="Elisabeth Habsburg of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="2032" end="2040" title="polyglot" label="polyglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="2050" end="2060" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2062" end="2068" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2070" end="2076" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2081" end="2086" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="2144" end="2154" title="Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary" label="Vladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326493" start="2194" end="2205" title="Jan Długosz" label="Jan Długosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33641" start="2412" end="2433" title="Stanisław Orzechowski" label="Stanisław Orzechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="2475" end="2494" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q878118" start="2679" end="2695" title="Bishop of Kujawy" label="Bishop of Kujawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116382" start="2760" end="2784" title="Ladislaus the Posthumous" label="Ladislaus the Posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="2786" end="2801" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="2806" end="2813" title="King of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="3006" end="3040" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="3051" end="3067" title="Hungarian nobles" label="Hungarian nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="3076" end="3093" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659229" start="3098" end="3113" title="Bohemian nobles" label="Bohemian nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159679" start="3123" end="3142" title="George of Poděbrady" label="George of Poděbrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="3212" end="3222" title="Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary" label="Vladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196939" start="3623" end="3634" title="Piotr Dunin" label="Piotr Dunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="3818" end="3822" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q549965" start="3942" end="3953" title="János Vitéz (archbishop)" label="János Vitéz"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="4143" end="4147" title="Pest, Hungary" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q629849" start="4189" end="4195" title="Hatvan" label="Hatvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="4199" end="4204" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183111" start="4494" end="4501" title="Jihlava" label="Jihlava"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="4688" end="4694" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="5028" end="5041" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q54053" start="5106" end="5129" title="Władysław III of Poland" label="Władysław III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="5151" end="5166" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q70859" start="5226" end="5236" title="Jacob Caro" label="Jacob Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q722544" start="5504" end="5523" title="Filippo Buonaccorsi" label="Filippo Buonaccorsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200416" start="5734" end="5752" title="Ambrogio Contarini" label="Ambrogio Contarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="5960" end="5973" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="6022" end="6048" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122600" start="6054" end="6072" title="War of the Priests (Poland)" label="War of the Priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q596840" start="6083" end="6121" title="Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53451" start="6190" end="6203" title="John I Albert" label="John I Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="6336" end="6343" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4297190" start="6461" end="6480" title="Mikhailo Olelkovich" label="Mikhailo Olelkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965011" start="6579" end="6602" title="Belsky family (Gediminid)" label="Feodor Ivanovich Belsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q237712" start="6787" end="6807" title="Kunigunde of Austria" label="Kunigunde of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150966" start="6829" end="6842" title="Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452397" start="6978" end="6995" title="Maciej Miechowita" label="Maciej Miechowita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="7022" end="7034" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837326" start="7120" end="7137" title="Andrzej Oporowski" label="Andrzej Oporowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070965" start="7150" end="7178" title="Vice-Chancellor of the Crown" label="Vice-Chancellor of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716972" start="7359" end="7370" title="Sejm of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Polish sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="7374" end="7380" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="7501" end="7507" title="Hrodna" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281237" start="7538" end="7555" title="Vilnius Cathedral" label="Vilnius Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11735283" start="7577" end="7604" title="Saint Casimir&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="Saint Casimir&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q66649" start="8062" end="8075" title="Marcin Kromer" label="Marcin Kromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23612101" start="8390" end="8407" title="Zacharias Ferreri" label="Zacharias Ferreri"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="8460" end="8469" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="8487" end="8498" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="8838" end="8843" title="Metre (poetry)" label="meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q381673" start="8872" end="8883" title="acatalectic" label="acatalectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735576" start="8888" end="8898" title="catalectic" label="catalectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208653" start="8899" end="8907" title="trochaic" label="trochaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225726" start="8908" end="8915" title="dimeter" label="dimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098331" start="8921" end="8935" title="internal rhyme" label="internal rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q826271" start="9011" end="9027" title="Bernard of Cluny" label="Bernard of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510315" start="9135" end="9151" title="Siege of Polotsk" label="Siege of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="9223" end="9236" title="Daugava River" label="Daugava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="9287" end="9308" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="9812" end="9829" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="9939" end="9949" title="indulgence" label="indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q827135" start="9997" end="10004" title="vespers" label="vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q515151" start="10110" end="10125" title="Andrzej Krzycki" label="Andrzej Krzycki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="10163" end="10178" title="votive offering" label="votive offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q542845" start="10225" end="10253" title="Fifth Council of the Lateran" label="Fifth Council of the Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="10278" end="10297" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="10382" end="10392" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q23612101" start="10455" end="10472" title="Zacharias Ferreri" label="Zacharias Ferreri"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="10603" end="10614" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="10652" end="10658" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069208" start="10794" end="10810" title="Zenonas Ivinskis" label="Zenonas Ivinskis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10815" end="10834" title="Paulius Rabikauskas" label="Paulius Rabikauskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="10894" end="10904" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="10974" end="10993" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="Sack of Rome (1527)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="10999" end="11021" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705108" start="11158" end="11175" title="Roman Martyrology" label="Roman Martyrology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11278" end="11292" title="Benedykt Woyna" label="Benedykt Woyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="11380" end="11398" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund III Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894488" start="11445" end="11459" title="Roman Breviary" label="Roman Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943256" start="11464" end="11476" title="Roman Missal" label="Roman Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434864" start="11482" end="11510" title="Sacred Congregation of Rites" label="Sacred Congregation of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="11554" end="11571" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268531" start="11581" end="11592" title="papal brief" label="papal brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q118117" start="12024" end="12031" title="labarum" label="labarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133673" start="12186" end="12197" title="cornerstone" label="cornerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539380" start="12219" end="12240" title="Church of St. Casimir, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478335" start="12643" end="12661" title="Eustachy Wołłowicz" label="Eustachy Wołłowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="12673" end="12684" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894488" start="12707" end="12721" title="Roman Breviary" label="Roman Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943256" start="12726" end="12738" title="Roman Missal" label="Roman Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434864" start="12754" end="12782" title="Sacred Congregation of Rites" label="Sacred Congregation of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="12886" end="12901" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896500" start="12958" end="12964" title="Octave (liturgical)" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365873" start="13004" end="13022" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Vilnius" label="Diocese of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="13031" end="13055" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="13106" end="13118" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="13155" end="13170" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q663370" start="13189" end="13207" title="Translation (relic)" label="transfer of relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="13245" end="13263" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="13309" end="13331" title="displaced person" label="displaced war refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="13333" end="13346" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281237" start="13453" end="13470" title="Vilnius Cathedral" label="Vilnius Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14015" end="14026" title="Matthew 6:3" label="Matthew 6:3"/>
<link wikidata="Q274076" start="14096" end="14106" title="palimpsest" label="palimpsest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655953" start="14179" end="14183" title="riza" label="riza"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="14329" end="14334" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585174" start="14710" end="14718" title="Kvėdarna" label="Kvėdarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351318" start="14723" end="14733" title="Nemunaitis" label="Nemunaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="14860" end="14865" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281237" start="14892" end="14909" title="Vilnius Cathedral" label="Vilnius Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="15010" end="15022" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q11735283" start="15128" end="15151" title="Chapel of Saint Casimir" label="Chapel of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15238" end="15263" title="Christopher Johan Szembek" label="Christopher Johan Szembek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087367" start="15468" end="15485" title="Battle of Vilnius (1655)" label="Battle of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="15497" end="15503" title="Deluge (history)" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101567" start="15544" end="15559" title="Jerzy Białłozor" label="Jerzy Białłozor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15571" end="15596" title="Cyprian Paweł Brzostowski" label="Cyprian Paweł Brzostowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q700746" start="15614" end="15622" title="House of Sapieha" label="Sapiehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591054" start="15630" end="15644" title="Ruzhany Palace" label="Ruzhany Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9172660" start="15759" end="15776" title="Battle of Vilnius (1702)" label="Battle of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="15784" end="15802" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283798" start="15858" end="15890" title="Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Peter and St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173761" start="15907" end="15925" title="Lithuanian SSR" label="Soviet authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="16084" end="16101" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="16123" end="16128" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735547" start="16165" end="16180" title="catacomb saints" label="catacomb saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q992253" start="16727" end="16740" title="confraternity" label="confraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q281957" start="16744" end="16772" title="San Giorgio Maggiore, Naples" label="San Giorgio Maggiore, Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="16797" end="16814" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q47292" start="16819" end="16868" title="Cosimo III de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Cosimo III de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q521962" start="16893" end="16913" title="Sodality of Our Lady" label="Sodality of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="16939" end="16947" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="16956" end="16970" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q84276" start="16997" end="17021" title="Maria Josepha of Austria" label="Maria Josepha of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539380" start="17470" end="17491" title="Church of St. Casimir, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17817" end="17825" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="17827" end="17835" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17837" end="17844" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q142430" start="17846" end="17854" title="Portneuf, Quebec" label="Portneuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433048" start="17860" end="17865" title="Ripon, Quebec" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17900" end="17906" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="17911" end="17921" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692584" start="17953" end="17960" title="Vselyub" label="Vselyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q954132" start="17965" end="17971" title="Lepiel" label="Lepiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977484" start="18004" end="18028" title="Sisters of Saint Casimir" label="Sisters of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761305" start="18056" end="18068" title="Maria Kaupas" label="Maria Kaupas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607929" start="18118" end="18142" title="College of Saint Casimir" label="College of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="18461" end="18469" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="18474" end="18481" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="18573" end="18581" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="18583" end="18590" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="18592" end="18598" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428488" start="18799" end="18822" title="Santo Spirito in Sassia" label="Santo Spirito in Sassia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18884" end="18900" title="Giovanni Bicilli" label="Giovanni Bicilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031901" start="18915" end="18940" title="Santa Maria in Vallicella" label="Santa Maria in Vallicella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392324" start="18973" end="18999" title="Michał Kazimierz Radziwiłł" label="Michał Kazimierz Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981246" start="19013" end="19031" title="Katarzyna Sobieska" label="Katarzyna Sobieska"/>
<link wikidata="Q725737" start="19086" end="19101" title="Pietro Ottoboni (cardinal)" label="Pietro Ottoboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q183087" start="19112" end="19132" title="Alessandro Scarlatti" label="Alessandro Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394894" start="19147" end="19161" title="Pietro Novelli" label="Pietro Novelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255652" start="19295" end="19327" title="Galleria Regionale della Sicilia" label="Galleria Regionale della Sicilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461942" start="19350" end="19363" title="Saint-Casimir, Quebec" label="Saint-Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068584" start="19393" end="19405" title="San Casimiro" label="San Casimiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636986" start="19490" end="19506" title="List of royal saints and martyrs" label="canonized royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3669962" start="19524" end="19547" title="San Ferdinando, Livorno" label="San Ferdinando, Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="19559" end="19581" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052195" start="19651" end="19683" title="Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph (San Jose, California)" label="Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="19687" end="19707" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011045" start="19743" end="19752" title="Chevaigné" label="Chevaigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q778997" start="19940" end="19985" title="Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul" label="Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37291" wikidata="Q1154351" url="?curid=37291" title="Spectrum of a ring">
<text>In commutative algebra, the prime spectrum (or simply the spectrum) of a commutative ring formula_1 is the set of all prime ideals of formula_1, and is usually denoted by formula_3; in algebraic geometry it is simultaneously a topological space equipped with the sheaf of rings formula_4.

== Zariski topology ==

For any ideal formula_5 of formula_1, define formula_7 to be the set of prime ideals containing formula_5. We can put a topology on formula_9 by defining the collection of closed sets to be
:formula_10
This topology is called the Zariski topology.

A basis for the Zariski topology can be constructed as follows:

For formula_11, define formula_12 to be the set of prime ideals of formula_1 not containing formula_14. 

Then each formula_12 is an open subset of formula_9, and formula_17 is a basis for the Zariski topology.

formula_9 is a compact space, but almost never Hausdorff: In fact, the maximal ideals in formula_1 are precisely the closed points in this topology. By the same reasoning, formula_9 is not, in general, a T1 space. However, formula_9 is always a Kolmogorov space (satisfies the T0 axiom); it is also a spectral space.

== Sheaves and schemes ==

Given the space formula_22 with the Zariski topology, the structure sheaf formula_23 is defined on the distinguished open subsets formula_12 by setting formula_25 the localization of formula_1 by the powers of formula_14. It can be shown that this defines a B-sheaf and therefore that it defines a sheaf. In more detail, the distinguished open subsets are a basis of the Zariski topology, so for an arbitrary open set formula_28, written as the union of formula_29, we set formula_30 where formula_31 denotes the inverse limit with respect to the natural ring homomorphisms formula_32 One may check that this presheaf is a sheaf, so formula_9 is a ringed space. Any ringed space isomorphic to one of this form is called an affine scheme. General schemes are obtained by gluing affine schemes together.

Similarly, for a module formula_34 over the ring formula_1, we may define a sheaf formula_36 on formula_9. On the distinguished open subsets set formula_38 using the localization of a module. As above, this construction extends to a presheaf on all open subsets of formula_9 and satisfies the gluing axiom. A sheaf of this form is called a quasicoherent sheaf.

If formula_40 is a point in formula_9, that is, a prime ideal, then the stalk of the structure sheaf at formula_40 equals the localization of formula_1 at the ideal formula_40, which is generally denoted formula_45, and this is a local ring. Consequently, formula_9 is a locally ringed space.

If formula_1 is an integral domain, with field of fractions formula_48, then we can describe the ring formula_49 more concretely as follows. We say that an element formula_14 in formula_48 is regular at a point formula_40 in formula_53 if it can be represented as a fraction formula_54 with formula_55. Note that this agrees with the notion of a regular function in algebraic geometry. Using this definition, we can describe formula_49 as precisely the set of elements of formula_48 that are regular at every point formula_40 in formula_28.

== Functorial perspective ==

It is useful to use the language of category theory and observe that formula_60 is a functor. Every ring homomorphism formula_61 induces a continuous map formula_62 (since the preimage of any prime ideal in formula_63 is a prime ideal in formula_1). In this way, formula_60 can be seen as a contravariant functor from the category of commutative rings to the category of topological spaces. Moreover, for every prime formula_40 the homomorphism formula_14 descends to homomorphisms
:formula_68
of local rings. Thus formula_60 even defines a contravariant functor from the category of commutative rings to the category of locally ringed spaces. In fact it is the universal such functor, and hence can be used to define the functor formula_60 up to natural isomorphism.

The functor formula_60 yields a contravariant equivalence between the category of commutative rings and the category of affine schemes; each of these categories is often thought of as the opposite category of the other.

== Motivation from algebraic geometry ==

Following on from the example, in algebraic geometry one studies &quot;algebraic sets&quot;, i.e. subsets of formula_72 (where formula_48 is an algebraically closed field) that are defined as the common zeros of a set of polynomials in formula_74 variables. If formula_75 is such an algebraic set, one considers the commutative ring formula_1 of all polynomial functions formula_77. The &quot;maximal ideals&quot; of formula_1 correspond to the points of formula_75 (because formula_48 is algebraically closed), and the &quot;prime ideals&quot; of formula_1 correspond to the &quot;irreducible subvarieties&quot; of formula_75 (an algebraic set is called irreducible if it cannot be written as the union of two proper algebraic subsets).

The spectrum of formula_1 therefore consists of the points of formula_75 together with elements for all irreducible subvarieties of formula_75. The points of formula_75 are closed in the spectrum, while the elements corresponding to subvarieties have a closure consisting of all their points and subvarieties. If one only considers the points of formula_75, i.e. the maximal ideals in formula_1, then the Zariski topology defined above coincides with the Zariski topology defined on algebraic sets (which has precisely the algebraic subsets as closed sets). Specifically, the maximal ideals in formula_1, i.e. formula_90, together with the Zariski topology, is homeomorphic to formula_75 also with the Zariski topology.

One can thus view the topological space formula_9 as an &quot;enrichment&quot; of the topological space formula_75 (with Zariski topology): for every irreducible subvariety of formula_75, one additional non-closed point has been introduced, and this point &quot;keeps track&quot; of the corresponding irreducible subvariety. One thinks of this point as the generic point for the irreducible subvariety. Furthermore, the structure sheaf on formula_9 and the sheaf of polynomial functions on formula_75 are essentially identical. By studying spectra of polynomial rings instead of algebraic sets with the Zariski topology, one can generalize the concepts of algebraic geometry to non-algebraically closed fields and beyond, eventually arriving at the language of schemes.

== Examples ==
* The spectrum of integers: The affine scheme formula_97 is the final object in the category of affine schemes since formula_98 is the initial object in the category of commutative rings.
* The scheme-theoretic analogue of formula_99: The affine scheme formula_100. From the functor of points perspective, a point formula_101 can be identified with the evaluation morphism formula_102. This fundamental observation allows us to give meaning to other affine schemes.
* The cross: formula_103 looks topologically like the transverse intersection of two complex planes at a point, although typically this is depicted as a formula_104, since the only well defined morphisms to formula_105 are the evaluation morphisms associated with the points formula_106.
* The prime spectrum of a Boolean ring (e.g., a power set ring) is a compact totally disconnected Hausdorff space (that is, a Stone space).
* (M. Hochster) A topological space is homeomorphic to the prime spectrum of a commutative ring (i.e., a spectral space) if and only if it is compact, quasi-separated and sober.

== Non-affine examples ==
Here are some examples of schemes that are not affine schemes. They are constructed from gluing affine schemes together.
* The projective formula_74-space formula_108 over a field formula_109. This can be easily generalized to any base ring, see Proj construction (in fact, we can define projective space for any base scheme). The projective formula_74-space for formula_111 is not affine as the global section of formula_112 is formula_109.
* Affine plane minus the origin. Inside formula_114 are distinguished open affine subschemes formula_115. Their union formula_116 is the affine plane with the origin taken out. The global sections of formula_28 are pairs of polynomials on formula_118 that restrict to the same polynomial on formula_119, which can be shown to be formula_120, the global section of formula_121. formula_28 is not affine as formula_123 in formula_124.

== Non-Zariski topologies on a prime spectrum ==
Some authors (notably M. Hochster) consider topologies on prime spectra other than the Zariski topology.

First, there is the notion of constructible topology: given a ring &quot;A&quot;, the subsets of formula_125 of the form formula_126 satisfy the axioms for closed sets in a topological space. This topology on formula_125 is called the constructible topology.

In , Hochster considers what he calls the patch topology on a prime spectrum. By definition, the patch topology is the smallest topology in which the sets of the forms formula_128 and formula_129 are closed.

== Global or relative Spec ==
There is a relative version of the functor formula_60 called global formula_60, or relative formula_60. If formula_63 is a scheme, then relative formula_60 is denoted by formula_135 or formula_136. If formula_63 is clear from the context, then relative Spec may be denoted by formula_138 or formula_139. For a scheme formula_63 and a quasi-coherent sheaf of formula_141-algebras formula_142, there is a scheme formula_143 and a morphism formula_144 such that for every open affine formula_145, there is an isomorphism formula_146, and such that for open affines formula_147, the inclusion formula_148 is induced by the restriction map formula_149. That is, as ring homomorphisms induce opposite maps of spectra, the restriction maps of a sheaf of algebras induce the inclusion maps of the spectra that make up the Spec of the sheaf.

Global Spec has a universal property similar to the universal property for ordinary Spec. More precisely, just as Spec and the global section functor are contravariant right adjoints between the category of commutative rings and schemes, global Spec and the direct image functor for the structure map are contravariant right adjoints between the category of commutative formula_141-algebras and schemes over formula_63. In formulas,
:formula_152
where formula_153 is a morphism of schemes.

=== Example of a relative Spec ===
The relative spec is the correct tool for parameterizing the family of lines through the origin of formula_154 over formula_155 Consider the sheaf of algebras formula_156 and let formula_157 be a sheaf of ideals of formula_158 Then the relative spec formula_159 parameterizes the desired family. In fact, the fiber over formula_160 is the line through the origin of formula_161 containing the point formula_162 Assuming formula_163 the fiber can be computed by looking at the composition of pullback diagrams
:formula_164
where the composition of the bottom arrows
:formula_165
gives the line containing the point formula_166 and the origin. This example can be generalized to parameterize the family of lines through the origin of formula_167 over formula_168 by letting formula_169 and formula_170

== Representation theory perspective ==
From the perspective of representation theory, a prime ideal &quot;I&quot; corresponds to a module &quot;R&quot;/&quot;I&quot;, and the spectrum of a ring corresponds to irreducible cyclic representations of &quot;R&quot;, while more general subvarieties correspond to possibly reducible representations that need not be cyclic. Recall that abstractly, the representation theory of a group is the study of modules over its group algebra.

The connection to representation theory is clearer if one considers the polynomial ring formula_171 or, without a basis, formula_172 As the latter formulation makes clear, a polynomial ring is the group algebra over a vector space, and writing in terms of formula_173 corresponds to choosing a basis for the vector space. Then an ideal &quot;I,&quot; or equivalently a module formula_174 is a cyclic representation of &quot;R&quot; (cyclic meaning generated by 1 element as an &quot;R&quot;-module; this generalizes 1-dimensional representations).

In the case that the field is algebraically closed (say, the complex numbers), every maximal ideal corresponds to a point in &quot;n&quot;-space, by the Nullstellensatz (the maximal ideal generated by formula_175 corresponds to the point formula_176). These representations of formula_177 are then parametrized by the dual space formula_178 the covector being given by sending each formula_173 to the corresponding formula_180. Thus a representation of formula_72 (&quot;K&quot;-linear maps formula_182) is given by a set of &quot;n&quot; numbers, or equivalently a covector formula_183

Thus, points in &quot;n&quot;-space, thought of as the max spec of formula_184 correspond precisely to 1-dimensional representations of &quot;R&quot;, while finite sets of points correspond to finite-dimensional representations (which are reducible, corresponding geometrically to being a union, and algebraically to not being a prime ideal). The non-maximal ideals then correspond to &quot;infinite&quot;-dimensional representations.

== Functional analysis perspective ==

The term &quot;spectrum&quot; comes from the use in operator theory.
Given a linear operator &quot;T&quot; on a finite-dimensional vector space &quot;V&quot;, one can consider the vector space with operator as a module over the polynomial ring in one variable &quot;R&quot; = &quot;K&quot;[&quot;T&quot;], as in the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain. Then the spectrum of &quot;K&quot;[&quot;T&quot;] (as a ring) equals the spectrum of &quot;T&quot; (as an operator).

Further, the geometric structure of the spectrum of the ring (equivalently, the algebraic structure of the module) captures the behavior of the spectrum of the operator, such as algebraic multiplicity and geometric multiplicity. For instance, for the 2×2 identity matrix has corresponding module:
:formula_185
the 2×2 zero matrix has module
:formula_186
showing geometric multiplicity 2 for the zero eigenvalue,
while a non-trivial 2×2 nilpotent matrix has module
:formula_187
showing algebraic multiplicity 2 but geometric multiplicity 1.

In more detail:
* the eigenvalues (with geometric multiplicity) of the operator correspond to the (reduced) points of the variety, with multiplicity;
* the primary decomposition of the module corresponds to the unreduced points of the variety;
* a diagonalizable (semisimple) operator corresponds to a reduced variety;
* a cyclic module (one generator) corresponds to the operator having a cyclic vector (a vector whose orbit under &quot;T&quot; spans the space);
* the last invariant factor of the module equals the minimal polynomial of the operator, and the product of the invariant factors equals the characteristic polynomial.

== Generalizations ==
The spectrum can be generalized from rings to C*-algebras in operator theory, yielding the notion of the spectrum of a C*-algebra. Notably, for a Hausdorff space, the algebra of scalars (the bounded continuous functions on the space, being analogous to regular functions) is a &quot;commutative&quot; C*-algebra, with the space being recovered as a topological space from formula_188 of the algebra of scalars, indeed functorially so; this is the content of the Banach–Stone theorem. Indeed, any commutative C*-algebra can be realized as the algebra of scalars of a Hausdorff space in this way, yielding the same correspondence as between a ring and its spectrum. Generalizing to &quot;non&quot;-commutative C*-algebras yields noncommutative topology.

== See also ==
* Scheme (mathematics)
* Projective scheme
* Spectrum of a matrix
* Serre&#x27;s theorem on affineness
* Étale spectrum
* Ziegler spectrum
* Primitive spectrum
* Stone duality

== Citations ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* https://mathoverflow.net/questions/441029/intrinsic-topology-on-the-zariski-spectrum

== External links ==

* Kevin R. Coombes: &quot;The Spectrum of a Ring&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="3" end="22" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="28" end="42" title="Spectrum of a ring" label="prime spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="58" end="66" title="Spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="73" end="89" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="118" end="129" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="185" end="203" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="227" end="244" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q168344" start="263" end="277" title="sheaf of rings" label="sheaf of rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="322" end="327" title="ideal (ring theory)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="386" end="398" title="Prime ideal" label="prime ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="434" end="442" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="497" title="Characterizations of the category of topological spaces#Definition via closed sets" label="collection of closed sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q147978" start="544" end="560" title="Zariski topology" label="Zariski topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="565" end="570" title="Base (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="855" end="868" title="compact space" label="compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="887" end="896" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="911" end="924" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="1044" end="1052" title="T1 space" label="T1 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1085" end="1101" title="Kolmogorov space" label="Kolmogorov space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575210" start="1141" end="1155" title="spectral space" label="spectral space"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="1352" end="1364" title="localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572389" start="1443" end="1450" title="B-sheaf" label="B-sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="1483" end="1488" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="1543" end="1548" title="base (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634828" start="1698" end="1711" title="inverse limit" label="inverse limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="1794" end="1802" title="presheaf" label="presheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q168344" start="1833" end="1845" title="ringed space" label="ringed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="1931" end="1938" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="2005" end="2011" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="2154" end="2178" title="localization of a module" label="localization of a module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572389" start="2281" end="2293" title="gluing axiom" label="gluing axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="2328" end="2347" title="quasicoherent sheaf" label="quasicoherent sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103642" start="2422" end="2427" title="stalk (mathematics)" label="stalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="2476" end="2488" title="localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="2580" end="2590" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q168344" start="2621" end="2641" title="locally ringed space" label="locally ringed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="2663" end="2678" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="2685" end="2703" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309604" start="2990" end="3006" title="regular function" label="regular function"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="3252" end="3267" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="3301" end="3308" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="3316" end="3333" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="3355" end="3365" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051859" start="3538" end="3567" title="category of commutative rings" label="category of commutative rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="3575" end="3605" title="category of topological spaces" label="category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q168344" start="3837" end="3857" title="locally ringed space" label="locally ringed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442189" start="3963" end="3982" title="natural isomorphism" label="natural isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082992" start="4031" end="4042" title="equivalence of categories" label="equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051859" start="4055" end="4084" title="category of commutative rings" label="category of commutative rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098616" start="4173" end="4190" title="opposite category" label="opposite category"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="4282" end="4300" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047547" start="4392" end="4418" title="algebraically closed field" label="algebraically closed field"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="4469" end="4479" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="4598" end="4617" title="polynomial function" label="polynomial function"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="4903" end="4914" title="irreducible" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="5648" end="5660" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="6065" end="6078" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="6469" end="6476" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="6558" end="6570" title="final object" label="final object"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="6629" end="6643" title="initial object" label="initial object"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762285" start="6769" end="6786" title="functor of points" label="functor of points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634401" start="7274" end="7286" title="Boolean ring" label="Boolean ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634401" start="7296" end="7310" title="power set ring" label="power set ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544261" start="7325" end="7345" title="totally disconnected" label="totally disconnected"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587585" start="7374" end="7385" title="Stone space" label="Stone space"/>
<link wikidata="Q263909" start="7391" end="7402" title="Melvin Hochster" label="M. Hochster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575210" start="7493" end="7507" title="spectral space" label="spectral space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7539" end="7554" title="quasi-separated space" label="quasi-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="7559" end="7564" title="sober space" label="sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="7720" end="7747" title="projective space" label="projective formula_74-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248935" start="7839" end="7856" title="Proj construction" label="Proj construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164409" start="8654" end="8676" title="constructible topology" label="constructible topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="9457" end="9471" title="quasi-coherent sheaf" label="quasi-coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971898" start="9472" end="9501" title="sheaf of algebras" label="sheaf of formula_141-algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="11348" end="11369" title="representation theory" label="representation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="11708" end="11713" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602722" start="11747" end="11760" title="group ring" label="group algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="11835" end="11850" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="11981" end="11993" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068976" start="12465" end="12480" title="Nullstellensatz" label="Nullstellensatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198874" start="13427" end="13442" title="operator theory" label="operator theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="13452" end="13467" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q929302" start="13487" end="13505" title="finite-dimensional" label="finite-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888360" start="13691" end="13769" title="structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain" label="structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="14289" end="14299" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748035" start="14820" end="14833" title="cyclic vector" label="cyclic vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059514" start="14905" end="14921" title="invariant factor" label="invariant factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163608" start="14947" end="14965" title="Minimal polynomial (linear algebra)" label="minimal polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="15035" end="15060" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="15131" end="15141" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198874" start="15146" end="15161" title="operator theory" label="operator theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575320" start="15190" end="15214" title="spectrum of a C*-algebra" label="spectrum of a C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="15231" end="15246" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15252" end="15270" title="algebra of scalars" label="algebra of scalars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853767" start="15547" end="15567" title="Banach–Stone theorem" label="Banach–Stone theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049229" start="15812" end="15835" title="noncommutative topology" label="noncommutative topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="15855" end="15875" title="Scheme (mathematics)" label="Scheme (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554818" start="15878" end="15895" title="Projective scheme" label="Projective scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490774" start="15898" end="15918" title="Spectrum of a matrix" label="Spectrum of a matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098884" start="15921" end="15955" title="Serre&amp;#x27;s theorem on affineness" label="Serre&amp;#x27;s theorem on affineness"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675392" start="15958" end="15972" title="Étale spectrum" label="Étale spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996495" start="15975" end="15991" title="Ziegler spectrum" label="Ziegler spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243577" start="15994" end="16012" title="Primitive spectrum" label="Primitive spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619060" start="16015" end="16028" title="Stone duality" label="Stone duality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37292" wikidata="Q6601448" url="?curid=37292" title="List of Unitarians, Universalists, and Unitarian Universalists">
<text>:&quot;See also History of Unitarianism&quot;
A number of notable people have considered themselves [[Unitarianism|Unitarians]], [[Christian Universalism|Universalists]], and following the merger of these denominations in the United States and Canada in 1961, [[Unitarian Universalism|Unitarian Universalists]]. Additionally, there are persons who, because of their writings or reputation, are considered to have held Unitarian or Universalist beliefs. Individuals who held unitarian (nontrinitarian) beliefs but were not affiliated with Unitarian organizations are often referred to as &quot;small &#x27;u unitarians. The same principle can be applied to those who believed in universal salvation but were not members of Universalist organizations. This article, therefore, makes the distinction between capitalized &quot;Unitarians&quot; and &quot;Universalists&quot; and lowercase &quot;unitarians&quot; and &quot;universalists&quot;.

The Unitarians and Universalists are groups that existed long before the creation of Unitarian Universalism.

Early Unitarians did not hold Universalist beliefs, and early Universalists did not hold Unitarian beliefs. But beginning in the nineteenth century the theologies of the two groups started becoming more similar.

Additionally, their eventual merger as the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) did not eliminate divergent Unitarian and Universalist congregations, especially outside the US. Even within the US, some congregations still keep only one of the two names, &quot;Unitarian&quot; or &quot;Universalist&quot;. However, with only a few exceptions, all belong to the UUA—even those that maintain dual affiliation (e.g., Unitarian and Quaker). Transcendentalism was a movement that diverged from contemporary American Unitarianism but has been embraced by later Unitarians and Unitarian Universalists.

In Northern Ireland, Unitarian churches are officially called &quot;Non-Subscribing Presbyterian&quot;, but are informally known as &quot;Unitarian&quot; and are affiliated with the Unitarian churches of the rest of the world.

==A==
* Francis Ellingwood Abbot (1836–1903) – Unitarian minister who led a group that attempted to liberalize the Unitarian constitution and preamble. He later helped found the Free Religious Association.
* Abigail Adams (1744–1818) – women&#x27;s rights advocate and first Second Lady and the second First Lady of the United States
* James Luther Adams (1901–1994) – Unitarian theologian.
* John Adams (1735–1826) – second President of the United States.
* John Quincy Adams (1767–1848) – sixth President of the United States. Co-founder, All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)
* Sarah Fuller Adams (1805–1848) – English poet and hymn writer
* Conrad Aiken (1889–1973) – poet
* Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888) – author of Little Women.
* Horatio Alger Sr. (1806–1881) – Unitarian Minister father of Horatio Alger.
* Ethan Allen (1738–1789) – author of &quot;Reason the Only Oracle of Man&quot;, and the chief source of Hosea Ballou&#x27;s universalist ideas
* Joseph Henry Allen (1820–1898) – American Unitarian scholar and minister
* Arthur J. Altmeyer (1891–1972) – father of Social Security
* Oliver Ames Jr. (1807–1877) – Massachusetts businessman and industrialist who commissioned the building of the Unity Church of North Easton
* J. M. Andrews (1871–1956) – Prime Minister of Northern Ireland (a Non-subscribing Presbyterian member)
* Thomas Andrews (1873–1912) – Master-shipbuilder of the RMS &quot;Oceanic&quot; (1899), &quot;Big Four&quot;, and Olympic-class ocean liners (a Non-subscribing Presbyterian member)
* Tom Andrews (born 1953) – Former U.S. Representative from Maine, current United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar
* Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906) – Quaker
* Robert Aspland (1782–1845) – English Unitarian minister, editor and activist, founder of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association
* Robert Brook Aspland (1805–1869) – English Unitarian minister and editor, son of Robert Aspland

==B==
* Samuel Bache (1804–1876) – English Unitarian minister
* E. Burdette Backus (1888–1955) – Unitarian Humanist minister (originally a Universalist)
* Blanche Pentecost Bagley (1858–1928) – British-born American Unitarian minister
* Bill Baird (born 1932) – abortion rights pioneer, Unitarian.
* Sara Josephine Baker (1873–1945) – physician and public health worker.
* Emily Greene Balch (1867–1961) – Nobel Peace Laureate
* Roger Nash Baldwin (1884–1981) – founder of American Civil Liberties Union
* Adin Ballou (1803–1890) – abolitionist and former Baptist who became a Universalist minister, then a Unitarian minister.
* Hosea Ballou (1771–1852) – American Universalist leader. (Universalist minister and a unitarian in theology)
* Aaron Bancroft (1755–1839) – Congregationalist Unitarian minister
* John Bardeen (1908–1991) – physicist, Nobel Laureate 1956 (inventing the transistor) and in 1972 (superconductivity)
* Phineas Taylor Barnum (1810–1891) – American showman and Circus Owner
* Ysaye Maria Barnwell (born 1946) – member of Sweet Honey in the Rock, founded the Jubilee Singers, a choir at All Souls Church in Washington, D.C.
* Béla Bartók (1881–1945) – composer.
* Clara Barton (1821–1912) – organizer of American Red Cross, Universalist
* Clara Bancroft Beatley (1858–1923) – educator, lecturer, author
* Christopher C. Bell (born 1933) – author
* Ami Bera (born 1965) – U.S. Representative for California
* Henry Bergh (1811–1888) – founded the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
* Tim Berners-Lee (born 1955) – inventor of the World Wide Web.
* Paul Blanshard (1892–1980) – activist.
* Joani Blank (1937–2016) – sexuality educator and co-housing activist.
* Chester Bliss Bowles (1901–1986) – Connecticut Governor and diplomat.
* Ray Bradbury (1920–2012) – author.
* Andre Braugher (1962–2023) – American actor
* T. Berry Brazelton (1918–2018) – pediatrician, author, TV show host.
* Alice Williams Brotherton (1848–1930), poet and magazine writer
* Olympia Brown (1835–1926) – suffragist, Universalist minister of the Unitarian Universalist Church of Kent Ohio
* Percival Brundage (1892–1979) – technocrat
* John A. Buehrens (born 1947) – president of the Unitarian Universalist Association from 1993–2001
* Charles Bulfinch (1763–1844) – most notable for being Architect of the Capitol. Co-founder, All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)
* Ralph Wendell Burhoe (1911–1997) – scholar
* Harold Hitz Burton (1888–1964) – U.S. Supreme Court Justice 1945–1958
* Edmund Butcher (1757–1822) – English minister

==C==
* John C. Calhoun (1782–1850) – U.S. Vice President and Senator Co-founder, All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)
* Walter Bradford Cannon (1871–1945) – experimental physiologist
* Louise Whitfield Carnegie (1857–1946) – wife of philanthropist Andrew Carnegie. After Carnegie died Louise made donations to charities.
* Lant Carpenter (1780–1840) – English Unitarian minister, author and educator
* Russell Lant Carpenter (1816–1892) – Unitarian minister. Son and biographer of Dr. Lant Carpenter
* William Herbert Carruth (1859–1924) – educator, poet, President of Pacific Coast Conference of the Unitarian Church
* Samuel Carter (1805–1878) – British MP and early railway solicitor
* Lee Carter (born 1987) — delegate for Virginia&#x27;s 50th House of Delegates district (according to his campaign website, he and his family attend their local Unitarian Universalist Church)
* Joseph Chamberlain (1836–1914) – Manufacturer, Unitarian, founder of local government in Britain.
* Neville Chamberlain (1869–1940) – Unitarian, then an agnostic and, British Prime Minister.
* Augusta Jane Chapin (1836–1905) – American Universalist minister, educator and activist for women&#x27;s rights
* William Ellery Channing (1780–1842) – Unitarian minister, whose 1819 sermon &quot;Unitarian Christianity&quot; laid the foundations for American Unitarianism.
* Charles Chauncy (1592–1672) – Unitarian Congregationalist minister.
* Jesse Chickering (1797–1855) – Unitarian minister and economist
* Brock Chisholm (1896–1971) – director, World Health Organization
* Parley P. Christensen (1869–1954) – Utah and California politician, Esperantist
* Judy Chu (born 1953) – Congressperson representing California&#x27;s 27th Congressional District. First Chinese-American woman elected to the U.S. Congress
* Annie Clark (born 1982) – musician and singer-songwriter, better known by her stage name, St. Vincent (musician). 
* Andrew Inglis Clark (1848–1907) – Tasmanian politician. Responsible for the adoption of the Hare-Clark system of proportional representation by the Parliament of Tasmania
* Grenville Clark (1882–1931) – author
* Joseph S. Clark (1901–1990) – U.S. Senator and mayor of Philadelphia
* Laurel Clark (1961–2003) – U.S. Navy officer and NASA Astronaut who died in the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster
* James Freeman Clarke (1810–1888) – Unitarian minister, theologian and author
* Stanley Cobb (1887–1968) – neurologist and psychiatrist
* William Cohen (born 1940) – U.S. Secretary of Defense (1997–2001), U.S. Senator from Maine (1979–1997)
* Emily Parmely Collins (1814–1909) — American suffragist, activist, writer
* Henry Steele Commager (1902–1998) – American historian and biographer of Theodore Parker
* Kent Conrad (born 1948) – U.S. Senator from North Dakota (1992–2013)
* Maria Cook (1779–1835) – first woman to be recognized as a Universalist preacher.
* Mary Leggett Cooke (1852–1938) – Unitarian minister; member of the Iowa Sisterhood
* William David Coolidge (1873–1975) – inventor, physician, research director
* Peter Cooper (1791–1883) – industrialist, inventor, philanthropist, and politician; founder of The Cooper Union.
* Norman Cousins (1915–1990) – editor and writer, Unitarian friend
* E. E. Cummings (1894–1962) – poet and painter
* William Cushing (1732–1810) – one of the original US Supreme Court Justices, appointed by Geo. Washington and longest serving of the original justices (1789–1810).

==D==
* Cyrus Dallin (1861–1944) – American sculptor
* Charles Darwin (1809–1882) – English naturalist and biologist
* Ferenc Dávid (born as &quot;Franz David Hertel&quot;, often rendered as &quot;Francis David&quot; or &quot;Francis Davidis&quot;) (1510–1579) – Transylvanian priest, minister and bishop, founder of the Unitarian Church of Transylvania, first to use the word &quot;Unitarian&quot; to describe his faith
* A. Powell Davies (1902–1957) Unitarian minister, author
* George de Benneville (1703–1793) – Universalist
* Morris Dees (born 1936) – attorney, cofounder, chief legal counsel of Southern Poverty Law Center
* Karl W. Deutsch (1912–1992) – international political scientist
* John Dewey (1859–1952) – author of &quot;A Common Faith&quot;, Unitarian friend
* Charles Dickens (1812–1870) – English novelist.
* Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) – prison reformer in New England.
* John H. Dietrich (1878–1957) – Unitarian minister
* James Drummond Dole (1877–1958) – entrepreneur
* Emily Taft Douglas (1899–1994) – U.S. Representative, Illinois
* Paul Douglas (1892–1976) – U.S. Senator, also a Quaker
* Madelyn Dunham (1922–2008) – grandmother of U.S. President Barack Obama
* Stanley Armour Dunham (1918–1992) – grandfather of Barack Obama
* Stanley Ann Dunham (1942–1995) – mother of Barack Obama

==E==
* Richard Eddy (1828–1906) – minister and author of 1886 book &quot;Universalism in America&quot;.
* James Chuter Ede (1882–1965) – British teacher, trade unionist and politician, Home Secretary (1945–1951) and President of the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches
* Charles William Eliot (1834–1926) – landscape architect
* Samuel Atkins Eliot (1862–1950) – first president of the Unitarians
* Thomas H. Eliot (1907–1991) – legislator and educator
* Thomas Lamb Eliot (1841–1936) – minister, founder of First Unitarian Church in Portland, Oregon, and Reed College
* Mary Elvira Elliott (1851–1942) – American writer and lecturer
* Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) – Unitarian minister and Transcendentalist
* William Emerson (1873–1957) – MIT dean of architecture
* Ephraim Emerton (1851–1935) – historian and educator
* Marc Estrin (born 1939) – American novelist and political activist
* Charles Carroll Everett (1829–1900) – Unitarian minister and Harvard Divinity professor from Maine
* Charles Wesley Emerson (1837–1908) – Unitarian minister and founder of Emerson College

==F==
* Sophia Lyon Fahs (1876–1978) – liberal religious educator
* Millard Fillmore (1800–1874) – thirteenth President of the United States
* Joseph L. Fisher (1914–1992) – U.S. congressman
* Hermann van Flekwyk (d. 1569) – Dutch anabaptist
* Benjamin Flower (1755–1829) – English radical writer
* James Freeman (1759–1835) – first American preacher to call himself a Unitarian
* Caleb Fleming (1698–1779) – English anti-Trinitarian dissenting minister
* Robert Fulghum (born 1937) – UU minister and writer
* Buckminster Fuller (1895–1983) – inventor, engineer
* Margaret Fuller (1810–1850) – journalist
* János Füzi (1776–1833) – Unitarian minister, teacher

==G==
* Elizabeth Gaskell (1810–1865) – British novelist and social reformer
* Frank Gannett (1876–1957) – newspaper publisher
* Greta Gerwig (born 1983) – actor, screenwriter and director
* Thomas Field Gibson (1803–1889) – English manufacturer who aided the welfare of the Spitalfields silk weavers
* Henry Giles (1809–1882) – British-American Unitarian minister and writer
* Hilary Goodridge – the lead plaintiff in the landmark case &quot;Goodridge v. Department of Public Health&quot;
* Eleanor Gordon (1852–1942) – minister and member of the Iowa Sisterhood.
* Mike Gravel (1930–2021) – U.S. Senator; 2008 Democratic presidential candidate
* Mary H. Graves (1839–1908) – minister, literary editor, writer
* Dana Greeley (1908–1986) – the first president of the Unitarian Universalist Association
* Horace Greeley (1811–1872) – newspaper editor, presidential candidate, Universalist
* Robert Joseph Greene (born 1973) – Canadian author and LGBT Activist
* Chester Greenwood (1858–1937) – inventor
* Gary Gygax (1938–2008) – game designer and creator of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, called himself a Christian, &quot;albeit one that is of the Arian (Unitarian) persuasion.&quot;

==H==
* Edward Everett Hale (1822–1909) – American author, historian and Unitarian clergyman
* George Ernest Hale (1884–1966), Unitarian minister in South Australia
* Ellen L. Hamilton (1921–1996) – artist, author, advocate for homeless teens, and member of UUA Board of Trustees (1973–1977).
* Phebe Ann Coffin Hannaford (1829–1921) – first lesbian minister, biographer
* Frances Harper (1825–1911) – abolitionist, suffragist, poet, teacher, public speaker, and writer; one of the first African-American women to be published in the United States. Unitarian.
* Donald S. Harrington (1914–2005)
* Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000) – theologian, who developed Process Theology
* John Hayward – philosopher of religion and the arts
* William Hazlitt (1737–1820) – influential Unitarian minister and father of the writer of the same name
* Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925) – self-taught English electrical engineer, mathematician, and physicist
* Iacob Heraclid (1527–1563) – Greek Maltese adventurer, missionary, Prince of Moldavia
* Thomas Wentworth Higginson (1823–1911) – Unitarian Minister and member of the Secret Six who funded John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harper&#x27;s Ferry.
* Lotta Hitschmanova (1909–1990) – founder, Unitarian Service Committee of Canada
* Jessica Holmes (born 1973) – cast member of &quot;Air Farce&quot;.
* John Holmes (1904–1962) – poet
* Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. (1841–1935) – American jurist who served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1902 to 1932. Unitarian
* W. R. Holway (1893–1981) – engineer in Tulsa, co-founded All Souls Unitarian Church in 1921.
* Julia Ward Howe (1819–1910) – author of &quot;The Battle Hymn of the Republic&quot;.
* Roman Hruska (1904–1999) – conservative Republican Senator from Nebraska
* David Hubel (1926–2013) – Nobel Prize Laureate in Medicine 1981
* Charles Hudson (1795–1881) – Universalist minister and politician
* Harm Jan Huidekoper (1776–1854) – businessman, essayist and lay theologian, a vice president of the American Unitarian Association, and co-founder of the Meadville Theological School
* Michelle Huneven (born August 14, 1953) – American novelist and journalist. She attends Neighborhood Unitarian Universalist Church in Pasadena, California.

==J==
* Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) – third president of the U.S., unitarian but not affiliated with any sect
* Joseph Johnson (1738–1809) – English publisher
* Jenkin Lloyd Jones (1843–1918) – Unitarian missionary and minister in the United States
* Richard Lloyd Jones (1873–1963) – son of Jenkin Lloyd Jones, editor and publisher of the &quot;Tulsa Tribune&quot;, also co-founder of All Souls Unitarian Church in 1921.
* Annie Bizzell Jordan Willis (1893–1977) – daughter of Rev. Joseph Fletcher Jordan, a religious educator and integrationist

==K==
* György Kepes (1906–2001) – visual artist
* Naomi King (born 1970) – Unitarian minister, daughter of author Stephen King
* Thomas Starr King (1824–1864) – minister who during his career served both in Universalist and in Unitarian churches. Namesake of Starr King School.
* James R. Killian (1904–1988) – president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* W.M. Kiplinger (1891–1967) – publisher of the &quot;Kiplinger Letters&quot;
* Webster Kitchell (1931–2009) – theologian
* Abner Kneeland (1774–1844) – Universalist minister and denominational leader who, after leaving the denomination to become a leader in the freethought movement, was convicted and jailed for blasphemy.
* Richard Knight (1768–1844) – friend, colleague and follower of Joseph Priestley, developed the first method to make platinum malleable. Stored Priestley&#x27;s library during his escape to America.
* Penney Kome (born 1948) – Canadian author and journalist

==L==
* William L. Langer (1896–1977) – historian of diplomacy
* Margaret Laurence (1926–1987) – author
* Alfred McClung Lee (1906–1992) – sociologist
* John Lewis (philosopher) (1889–1976) – British Unitarian minister and Marxist philosopher and author of many works on philosophy, anthropology, and religion.
* Arthur Lismer (1885–1969) – Canadian painter, educator
* Viola Liuzzo (1925–1965) – civil rights activist
* Mary Livermore (1820–1905) – Universalist
* James W. Loewen (1942–2021) – sociologist
* Arthur Lovejoy (1873–1962) – founder of the History of Ideas movement

==M==
* Carrie Mac (born 1975) – Canadian author
* John P. Marquand (1893–1960) – author
* Peter Finch Martineau (1755–1847) – English businessman and community benefactor 
* Charlotte Garrigue Masaryk(ová) (1850–1923) – wife of first President of Czechoslovakia Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk
* Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk (1850–1937) – first President of Czechoslovakia
* Bernard Maybeck (1862–1957) – architect, Unitarian
* Scotty McLennan (born 1948) – dean for Religious Life at Stanford University, Minister of Stanford Memorial Church, and inspiration for the Reverend Scot Sloan character in the comic strip &quot;Doonesbury&quot;
* Adrian Melott (born 1947) – physicist and cosmologist
* Herman Melville (1819–1891) – American writer best known for &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;.
* Samuel Freeman Miller (1816–1890) – United States Supreme Court Justice from 1862 to 1890
* Robert Millikan (1868–1953) – Nobel Laureate in Physics 1923 for determining the charge of the electron, taught at Caltech in Pasadena CA
* Walt Minnick (born 1942) – Politician and representative for Idaho&#x27;s 1st congressional district, United States House of Representatives
* Théodore Monod (1902–2000) – French activist. Founding president of the Francophone Unitarian Association
* Ashley Montagu (1905–1999) – anthropologist and social biologist
* Slim Moon (born 1967) – American music producer
* Christopher Moore – founder of the Chicago Children&#x27;s Choir
* Mary Carr Moore (1873–1957) – composer, teacher, Far Western activist for American Music
* Peter Morales – eighth president of the Unitarian Universalist Association
* Arthur E. Morgan (1878–1975) – human engineer and college president
* John Murray (1741–1815) – Universalist minister and leader
* Judith Sargent Murray (1751–1820) – American writer, held a local Universalist preacher&#x27;s license in the 1790s, an advocate of Universalism and women&#x27;s rights

==N==
* Isaac Newton (1642–1726) – English physicist and mathematician
* Maurine Neuberger (1907–2000) – U.S. Senator
* Paul Newman (1925–2008) – actor, film director
* Andrews Norton (1786–1853) – Once known as the “Unitarian Pope”
* Joseph Nye (born 1937) Rhodes Scholar and former dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

==O==
* Keith Olbermann (born 1959) – news anchor, political commentator, and sports journalist
* Mary White Ovington (1865–1951) – NAACP founder

==P==
* Bob Packwood (born 1932) – U.S. Senator from Oregon (1969–1995)
* John Palmer (1742–1786) – English Unitarian minister
* David Park (1911–1960) – West coast painter.
* Isaac Parker (1768–1830) – Massachusetts Congressman and jurist, including Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court from 1814 to his death.
* Theodore Parker (1810–1860) – Unitarian minister and transcendentalist
* Linus Pauling (1901–1994) – Nobel Laureate for Peace and for Chemistry
* Randy Pausch (1960–2008) – computer science professor at Carnegie Mellon University, Author of &quot;The Last Lecture&quot;
* Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin (1900–1979) – astronomer and astrophysicist.
* Richard Peacock (1820–1889) – British locomotive engineer and philanthropist
* Laura Pedersen (born 1965) – American author, journalist, playwright and humorist. Books and plays with humanist themes. Lifelong UU, Interfaith minister. 
* Sarah Maria Clinton Perkins (1824–1905) – American Universalist minister, social reformer, lecturer, editor, author
* Melissa Harris-Perry (born 1973) – professor, author, and political commentator on MSNBC hosting the &quot;Melissa Harris-Perry&quot; TV program.
* William James Perry, (born 1927) – former United States Secretary of Defense
* William T. Pheiffer (1898–1986) – American lawyer/politician
* Utah Phillips, (1935–2008) – American singer, songwriter and homeless advocate
* William Pickering (1910–2004) – space explorer
* James Pierpont (1822–1893) – songwriter (&quot;Jingle Bells&quot;)
* Daniel Pinkham (1923–2006) – composer
* John Platts (1775–1837) – English Unitarian minister and author
* Van Rensselaer Potter (1911–2001) – global bioethicist
* Joseph Priestley (1733–1804) – discoverer of oxygen and Unitarian minister
* George Pullman (1831–1897) – Universalist
* Sylvia Plath (1932–1963) – American writer, poet
* Beatrix Potter (1866–1943) – British children&#x27;s writer of the famous &quot;Peter Rabbit&quot; stories

==R==
* Bonnie Raitt, singer and guitarist
* Mary Jane Rathbun (1860–1943) – marine zoologist
* James Reeb (1927–1965) – civil-rights martyr
* Curtis W. Reese (1887–1961) – religious humanist
* Christopher Reeve (1952–2004) – actor and Unitarian Universalist
* James Relly (c. 1722–1778) – Universalist
* Paul Revere (1735–1818) – American silversmith, industrialist and patriot
* David Ricardo (1772–1823) – British classical economist noted for creating the concept of comparative advantage
* Malvina Reynolds (1900–1978) – songwriter / singer / activist
* Mark Ritchie (born 1951) – Minnesota Secretary of State (2007–)
* Amber E. Robinson (1867–1961), educator, postmaster, poet, reporter, and social reformer
* Hugh Ronalds (1760–1833) – British horticulturalist and nurseryman
* Francis Ronalds (1788–1873) – English inventor of the electric telegraph
* Benjamin Rush (1745–1813) – very active in the Universalist movement, although never technically joined a Universalist congregation

==S==
* Mary Augusta Safford (1851–1927) – Unitarian Minister and leader of the Iowa Sisterhood.
* Leverett Saltonstall (1892–1979) – U.S. Senator from Massachusetts
* Franklin Benjamin Sanborn (1831–1917) – one of the Secret Six who funded John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harper&#x27;s Ferry; social scientist and memorialist of transcendentalism.
* May Sarton (1912–1995) – poet
* Ellery Schempp (born 1940) – physicist who was the primary student involved in the landmark 1963 United States Supreme Court case of &quot;Abington School District v. Schempp&quot;, which declared that public school-sanctioned Bible readings were unconstitutional.
* Arthur Schlesinger (1917–2007) – American historian
* Richard Schultes (1915–2001) – explorer of the Amazon jungle
* William F. Schulz (born 1949) – former executive director of Amnesty International USA, former president of the Unitarian Universalist Association
* Ferdinand Schumacher (1822–1908) – one of the founders of companies which merged to become the Quaker Oats Company.
* Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965) – Nobel Peace Laureate 1953, late in life unitarian; honorary member of the Church of the Larger Fellowship (Unitarian Friend)
* Pete Seeger (1919–2014) – folk singer and song writer
* Roy Wood Sellars (1880–1973) – philosopher of religious humanism
* Rod Serling (1924–1975) – writer; creator of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; television series.
* Martha Sharp (1905–1999) – an American Unitarian who was named by the Yad Vashem organization as &quot;Righteous Among the Nations.&quot;
* Waitstill Sharp (1902–1983) – a Unitarian minister who along with his wife Martha were named by Yad Vashem as &quot;Righteous Among the Nations.&quot;
* Lemuel Shaw (1781–1861) – Unitarian and chief justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court. Under his leadership, the court convicted Abner Kneeland, a former Universalist, of blasphemy.
* Robert Gould Shaw (1837–1863) – colonel of the 54th Massachusetts, first regiment of free blacks in the Union Army.
* Herbert A. Simon (1916–2001) – Nobel Laureate in Economics 1978, artificial intelligence pioneer
* Rev. William G. Sinkford (born 1946) – seventh president of the Unitarian Universalist Association
* Fred Small (born 1952) – Singer-songwriter and UU minister.
* Caroline Soule (1824–1903) – American writer, ordained Universalist minister, first woman ordained as a minister in the UK in 1880
* Vanessa Southern, minister of the Unitarian Church in Summit
* Catherine Helen Spence (1825–1910) – Australian suffragette and political reformer
*Lysander Spooner (1808–1887) – American abolitionist and anarchist.
* Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) – American suffragist, abolitionist, and leading figure of the early women&#x27;s rights movement
* Pete Stark (1931–2020) – U.S. Representative, D-California.
* Vilhjalmur Stefansson (1879–1962) – Arctic explorer and champion of Native American rights
* Charles Proteus Steinmetz (1865–1923) – Prussian-American electrical engineer and mathematician
* Adlai Stevenson (1900–1965) – Illinois governor, and Democratic presidential candidate in 1952 and 1956
* George D. Stoddard (1897–1981) – president of University of Illinois and the University of the State of New York.
* Lucy Stone (1818—1893) American orator, abolitionist, and suffragist
* Joseph Story (1779–1845) – United States Supreme Court Justice from 1811 to 1845.
* Dirk Jan Struik (1894–2000) – mathematician
* Jedediah Strutt (1726–1797) – pioneer cotton spinner and philanthropic employer.
* Margaret Sutton (1903–2001) – author of the Judy Bolton series and other children&#x27;s books
*Jude Sylvan (b. 1982) American poet, author, performer, producer, and performing artist and UU minister.

==T==
* William Howard Taft (1857–1930) – President of the United States (1909–1913) and Chief Justice of the United States
* Robin Tanner – American Unitarian Universalist Minister and advocate for LBGT rights and voting rights.
* Clementia Taylor (1810–1908) – women&#x27;s activist and radical
* Joyce Tischler – Founder of Animal Legal Defense Fund, referred to as the &quot;Mother of Animal Law.&quot;
* Clyde Tombaugh (1906–1997) – American astronomer who discovered Pluto
* Amos G. Throop (1811–1894) – Founder of Throop University, which later became the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, where he was also the city&#x27;s third mayor. Throop Unitarian Universalist Church in Pasadena, a Unitarian Universalist congregation founded in 1923, was named after him.

==V==
* William Vidler (1758–1816) – English Universalist and Unitarian minister
* Kurt Vonnegut (1922–2007) – writer

==W==
* George Wald (1906–1997) – Nobel Laureate in Medicine 1967
* Zach Wahls (born 1991) – LGBT activist, Iowa State Senator-elect
* Caroline Farrar Ware (1899–1990) – historian and social activist
* William D. Washburn (1831–1912) – Universalist American politician and businessman
* Daniel Webster (1782–1852) – lawyer and statesman
* Dawud Wharnsby (born 1972) – poet, singer and songwriter (Unitarian Universalist and Muslim)
* Alfred Tredway White (1846–1921) – housing reformer and philanthropist
* Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) – philosopher (Unitarian Friend)
* Willis Rodney Whitney (1868–1958) – the &quot;Father of Basic Research in Industry&quot;
* Thomas Whittemore (1800–1861) – Universalist Minister, author and publisher
* David Rhys Williams (1890–1970) – American Unitarian minister
* Edward Williams (bardic name Iolo Morganwg) (1747–1826) – Welsh antiquarian, poet, collector, forger
* William Carlos Williams (1883–1963) – physician and author
* Samuel Williston (1861–1963) – dean of America&#x27;s legal profession.
* Edwin H. Wilson (1898–1993) – Unitarian Humanist leader
* Ross Winans (1796–1877) – inventor and railroad pioneer
* John Crawford Woods (1824–1906), Unitarian minister of Adelaide, South Australia
* Joanne Woodward (born 1930) – actress, wife of Paul Newman
* Theodore Paul Wright (1895–1970) – aeronautical engineer
* Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959) – among Wright&#x27;s architectural works were Unity Temple in Oak Park, Illinois, and First Unitarian Society in Madison, Wisconsin.
* Quincy Wright (1890–1970) – author of &quot;A Study of War&quot;
* Richard Wright (1764–1836) – English Unitarian minister and missionary
* Sewall Wright (1889–1988) – evolutionary theorist.
* N. C. Wyeth (1882–1945) – illustrator and painter

==Y==
* Owen D. Young (1874–1962) – president and chairman of General Electric. Founder of Radio Corporation of America which helped found National Broadcasting Company. Drafted the Young Plan after World War I.
* Whitney M. Young (1921–1971) – social work administrator

==Z==
* John II Sigismund Zápolya (1540–1570) – king of Hungary, then prince of Transylvania.

==See also==

*List of Christian Universalists
*List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist churches
*Lists of people by belief

==Footnotes, citations and references==
==External links==
* Dictionary of Unitarian and Universalist Biography
* Famous UUs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16249954" start="16" end="39" title="History of Unitarianism" label="History of Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601448" start="100" end="127" title="List of Unitarians, Universalists, and Unitarian Universalists" label="[[Unitarianism|Unitarians]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601448" start="129" end="169" title="List of Unitarians, Universalists, and Unitarian Universalists" label="[[Christian Universalism|Universalists]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="205" end="218" title="religious denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601448" start="260" end="310" title="List of Unitarians, Universalists, and Unitarian Universalists" label="[[Unitarian Universalism|Unitarian Universalists]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="485" end="499" title="nontrinitarian" label="nontrinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360416" start="678" end="697" title="universal salvation" label="universal salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="958" end="971" title="Universalism" label="Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="1305" end="1339" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1693" end="1699" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="1702" end="1719" title="Transcendentalism" label="Transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q648042" start="1929" end="1957" title="Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland" label="Non-Subscribing Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513783" start="2097" end="2121" title="Francis Ellingwood Abbot" label="Francis Ellingwood Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500044" start="2267" end="2293" title="Free Religious Association" label="Free Religious Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q206191" start="2297" end="2310" title="Abigail Adams" label="Abigail Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138304" start="2425" end="2443" title="James Luther Adams" label="James Luther Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2482" end="2492" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="2548" end="2565" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="2630" end="2676" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269879" start="2679" end="2697" title="Sarah Flower Adams" label="Sarah Fuller Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q380645" start="2743" end="2755" title="Conrad Aiken" label="Conrad Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="2777" end="2794" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="2819" end="2831" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q453251" start="2896" end="2909" title="Horatio Alger" label="Horatio Alger"/>
<link wikidata="Q552007" start="2913" end="2924" title="Ethan Allen" label="Ethan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283902" start="3057" end="3075" title="Joseph Henry Allen" label="Joseph Henry Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799174" start="3132" end="3150" title="Arthur J. Altmeyer" label="Arthur J. Altmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087387" start="3193" end="3208" title="Oliver Ames Jr." label="Oliver Ames Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3304" end="3332" title="Unity Church of North Easton" label="Unity Church of North Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701101" start="3335" end="3348" title="J. M. Andrews" label="J. M. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q684914" start="3363" end="3397" title="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland" label="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q648042" start="3401" end="3429" title="Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland" label="Non-subscribing Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q275937" start="3440" end="3454" title="Thomas Andrews" label="Thomas Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302040" start="3495" end="3525" title="RMS Oceanic (1899)" label="RMS &amp;quot;Oceanic&amp;quot; (1899)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902230" start="3527" end="3547" title="Big Four (White Star Line)" label="&amp;quot;Big Four&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q767166" start="3553" end="3578" title="Olympic-class ocean liner" label="Olympic-class ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q648042" start="3583" end="3611" title="Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland" label="Non-subscribing Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q364484" start="3622" end="3633" title="Thomas Andrews (American politician)" label="Tom Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q117421679" start="3695" end="3755" title="United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar" label="United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192245" start="3758" end="3774" title="Susan B. Anthony" label="Susan B. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341632" start="3798" end="3812" title="Robert Aspland" label="Robert Aspland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971273" start="3891" end="3932" title="British and Foreign Unitarian Association" label="British and Foreign Unitarian Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342382" start="3935" end="3955" title="Robert Brook Aspland" label="Robert Brook Aspland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341632" start="4016" end="4030" title="Robert Aspland" label="Robert Aspland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410845" start="4040" end="4052" title="Samuel Bache" label="Samuel Bache"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342077" start="4096" end="4114" title="E. Burdette Backus" label="E. Burdette Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63874476" start="4187" end="4211" title="Blanche Pentecost Bagley" label="Blanche Pentecost Bagley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908013" start="4269" end="4279" title="Bill Baird (activist)" label="Bill Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793362" start="4332" end="4352" title="Sara Josephine Baker" label="Sara Josephine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q215139" start="4405" end="4423" title="Emily Greene Balch" label="Emily Greene Balch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439311" start="4461" end="4479" title="Roger Nash Baldwin" label="Roger Nash Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="4505" end="4535" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104729" start="4538" end="4549" title="Adin Ballou" label="Adin Ballou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907257" start="4661" end="4673" title="Hosea Ballou" label="Hosea Ballou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820021" start="4772" end="4786" title="Aaron Bancroft" label="Aaron Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="4840" end="4852" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="4959" end="4980" title="Phineas Taylor Barnum" label="Phineas Taylor Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832125" start="5031" end="5051" title="Ysaye Maria Barnwell" label="Ysaye Maria Barnwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316518" start="5076" end="5099" title="Sweet Honey in the Rock" label="Sweet Honey in the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="5141" end="5157" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="5180" end="5191" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q188039" start="5218" end="5230" title="Clara Barton" label="Clara Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q112000553" start="5293" end="5315" title="Clara Bancroft Beatley" label="Clara Bancroft Beatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727443" start="5359" end="5378" title="Christopher C. Bell" label="Christopher C. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389105" start="5402" end="5410" title="Ami Bera" label="Ami Bera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718098" start="5462" end="5473" title="Henry Bergh" label="Henry Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="5500" end="5557" title="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="5619" end="5634" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149409" start="5683" end="5697" title="Paul Blanshard" label="Paul Blanshard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205694" start="5724" end="5735" title="Joani Blank" label="Joani Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q880817" start="5796" end="5816" title="Chester Bowles" label="Chester Bliss Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="5868" end="5880" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q463397" start="5905" end="5919" title="Andre Braugher" label="Andre Braugher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106664" start="5951" end="5969" title="T. Berry Brazelton" label="T. Berry Brazelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28380990" start="6022" end="6047" title="Alice Williams Brotherton" label="Alice Williams Brotherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088941" start="6088" end="6101" title="Olympia Brown" label="Olympia Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134470" start="6157" end="6199" title="Unitarian Universalist Church of Kent Ohio" label="Unitarian Universalist Church of Kent Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167098" start="6202" end="6219" title="Percival Brundage" label="Percival Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699448" start="6247" end="6263" title="John A. Buehrens" label="John A. Buehrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="6295" end="6329" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063849" start="6347" end="6363" title="Charles Bulfinch" label="Charles Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q635012" start="6401" end="6425" title="Architect of the Capitol" label="Architect of the Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="6439" end="6485" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418311" start="6488" end="6508" title="Ralph Wendell Burhoe" label="Ralph Wendell Burhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q507177" start="6533" end="6551" title="Harold Hitz Burton" label="Harold Hitz Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339345" start="6605" end="6619" title="Edmund Butcher" label="Edmund Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="6660" end="6675" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="6734" end="6780" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q503192" start="6783" end="6805" title="Walter Bradford Cannon" label="Walter Bradford Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689005" start="6848" end="6873" title="Louise Whitfield Carnegie" label="Louise Whitfield Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="6911" end="6926" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487512" start="6986" end="7000" title="Lant Carpenter" label="Lant Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381640" start="7065" end="7087" title="Russell Lant Carpenter" label="Russell Lant Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487512" start="7148" end="7162" title="Lant Carpenter" label="Lant Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664274" start="7165" end="7188" title="William Herbert Carruth" label="William Herbert Carruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811231" start="7283" end="7296" title="Samuel Carter (Coventry MP)" label="Samuel Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42886824" start="7352" end="7362" title="Lee Carter (politician)" label="Lee Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="7545" end="7563" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="7645" end="7664" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="7698" end="7706" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820941" start="7738" end="7757" title="Augusta Jane Chapin" label="Augusta Jane Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352783" start="7852" end="7875" title="William Ellery Channing" label="William Ellery Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076206" start="8013" end="8028" title="Charles Chauncy" label="Charles Chauncy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186221" start="8083" end="8099" title="Jesse Chickering" label="Jesse Chickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q923514" start="8149" end="8163" title="Brock Chisholm" label="Brock Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893970" start="8216" end="8237" title="Parley P. Christensen" label="Parley P. Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460035" start="8298" end="8306" title="Judy Chu" label="Judy Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="8456" end="8467" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="Annie Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="8546" end="8568" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846641" start="8573" end="8592" title="Andrew Inglis Clark" label="Andrew Inglis Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="8686" end="8713" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365524" start="8721" end="8743" title="Parliament of Tasmania" label="Parliament of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607510" start="8746" end="8761" title="Grenville Clark" label="Grenville Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609429" start="8785" end="8800" title="Joseph S. Clark" label="Joseph S. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q232441" start="8856" end="8868" title="Laurel Clark" label="Laurel Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="8936" end="8967" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q323362" start="8970" end="8990" title="James Freeman Clarke" label="James Freeman Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599527" start="9049" end="9061" title="Stanley Cobb" label="Stanley Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q710721" start="9107" end="9120" title="William Cohen" label="William Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="9135" end="9160" title="U.S. Secretary of Defense" label="U.S. Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="9174" end="9186" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="9192" end="9197" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60389514" start="9212" end="9233" title="Emily Parmely Collins" label="Emily Parmely Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785004" start="9288" end="9309" title="Henry Steele Commager" label="Henry Steele Commager"/>
<link wikidata="Q553349" start="9379" end="9390" title="Kent Conrad" label="Kent Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="9405" end="9417" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="9423" end="9435" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q110221240" start="9450" end="9460" title="Maria Cook" label="Maria Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q64692292" start="9534" end="9552" title="Mary Leggett Cooke" label="Mary Leggett Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064583" start="9601" end="9616" title="Iowa Sisterhood" label="Iowa Sisterhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q674299" start="9619" end="9641" title="William David Coolidge" label="William David Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q935291" start="9697" end="9709" title="Peter Cooper" label="Peter Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q130981" start="9792" end="9808" title="Cooper Union" label="The Cooper Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364026" start="9812" end="9826" title="Norman Cousins" label="Norman Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="9879" end="9893" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063381" start="9927" end="9942" title="William Cushing" label="William Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148931" start="10100" end="10112" title="Cyrus Dallin" label="Cyrus Dallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="10147" end="10161" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559685" start="10211" end="10223" title="Ferenc Dávid" label="Ferenc Dávid"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="10355" end="10368" title="Principality of Transylvania (1570–1711)" label="Transylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q582355" start="10413" end="10445" title="Unitarian Church of Transylvania" label="Unitarian Church of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800015" start="10515" end="10531" title="A. Powell Davies" label="A. Powell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546679" start="10573" end="10593" title="George de Benneville" label="George de Benneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525083" start="10623" end="10634" title="Morris Dees" label="Morris Dees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="10693" end="10720" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q77454" start="10723" end="10738" title="Karl W. Deutsch" label="Karl W. Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="10789" end="10799" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="10871" end="10886" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q452469" start="10921" end="10933" title="Dorothea Dix" label="Dorothea Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236781" start="10982" end="10998" title="John H. Dietrich" label="John H. Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132697" start="11034" end="11053" title="James Drummond Dole" label="James Drummond Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372390" start="11083" end="11101" title="Emily Taft Douglas" label="Emily Taft Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372141" start="11148" end="11160" title="Paul Douglas (Illinois politician)" label="Paul Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="11196" end="11202" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856311" start="11205" end="11219" title="Madelyn Dunham" label="Madelyn Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="11264" end="11276" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856335" start="11279" end="11300" title="Stanley Armour Dunham" label="Stanley Armour Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q766106" start="11345" end="11363" title="Stanley Ann Dunham" label="Stanley Ann Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325427" start="11410" end="11422" title="Richard Eddy (clergyman)" label="Richard Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334318" start="11509" end="11525" title="James Chuter Ede" label="James Chuter Ede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501533" start="11636" end="11693" title="General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches" label="General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066447" start="11696" end="11717" title="Charles William Eliot" label="Charles William Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410794" start="11754" end="11773" title="Samuel A. Eliot (minister)" label="Samuel Atkins Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116034" start="11824" end="11839" title="Thomas H. Eliot" label="Thomas H. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791675" start="11880" end="11897" title="Thomas Lamb Eliot" label="Thomas Lamb Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="11981" end="11993" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q64984202" start="11996" end="12015" title="Mary Elvira Elliott" label="Mary Elvira Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="12061" end="12080" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="12095" end="12104" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="12118" end="12135" title="Transcendentalist" label="Transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018407" start="12138" end="12153" title="William Emerson (American architect)" label="William Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382264" start="12195" end="12210" title="Ephraim Emerton" label="Ephraim Emerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755542" start="12250" end="12261" title="Marc Estrin" label="Marc Estrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076120" start="12319" end="12342" title="Charles Carroll Everett" label="Charles Carroll Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083459" start="12420" end="12442" title="Charles Wesley Emerson" label="Charles Wesley Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="12491" end="12506" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562897" start="12516" end="12532" title="Sophia Lyon Fahs" label="Sophia Lyon Fahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="12576" end="12592" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q556945" start="12651" end="12667" title="Joseph L. Fisher" label="Joseph L. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741109" start="12701" end="12720" title="Hermann van Flekwyk" label="Hermann van Flekwyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888593" start="12752" end="12767" title="Benjamin Flower" label="Benjamin Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134244" start="12807" end="12820" title="James Freeman (clergyman)" label="James Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019238" start="12889" end="12902" title="Caleb Fleming" label="Caleb Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491146" start="12964" end="12978" title="Robert Fulghum" label="Robert Fulghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="13018" end="13036" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q257953" start="13072" end="13087" title="Margaret Fuller" label="Margaret Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q570608" start="13115" end="13125" title="János Füzi" label="János Füzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q229226" start="13177" end="13194" title="Elizabeth Gaskell" label="Elizabeth Gaskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346077" start="13248" end="13261" title="Frank Gannett" label="Frank Gannett"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="13298" end="13310" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375724" start="13360" end="13379" title="Thomas Field Gibson" label="Thomas Field Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123219" start="13444" end="13456" title="Spitalfields" label="Spitalfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721962" start="13472" end="13483" title="Henry Giles" label="Henry Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072607" start="13612" end="13652" title="Goodridge v. Department of Public Health" label="Goodridge v. Department of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248073" start="13661" end="13675" title="Eleanor Gordon" label="Eleanor Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064583" start="13717" end="13732" title="Iowa Sisterhood" label="Iowa Sisterhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="13736" end="13747" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38103276" start="13817" end="13831" title="Mary H. Graves" label="Mary H. Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214789" start="13882" end="13894" title="Dana Greeley" label="Dana Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="13973" end="13987" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13489917" start="14059" end="14079" title="Robert Joseph Greene" label="Robert Joseph Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070724" start="14130" end="14147" title="Chester Greenwood" label="Chester Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379" start="14173" end="14183" title="Gary Gygax" label="Gary Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="14233" end="14255" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="14323" end="14328" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q786616" start="14368" end="14387" title="Edward Everett Hale" label="Edward Everett Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q56253528" start="14455" end="14473" title="George Ernest Hale" label="George Ernest Hale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14527" end="14544" title="Ellen L. Hamilton" label="Ellen L. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16037679" start="14655" end="14681" title="Phebe Ann Coffin Hannaford" label="Phebe Ann Coffin Hannaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478699" start="14733" end="14747" title="Frances Harper" label="Frances Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240323" start="14922" end="14942" title="Donald S. Harrington" label="Donald S. Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064777" start="14957" end="14975" title="Charles Hartshorne" label="Charles Hartshorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277683" start="15016" end="15032" title="Process Theology" label="Process Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011799" start="15089" end="15104" title="William Hazlitt (Unitarian minister)" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="15168" end="15191" title="William Hazlitt" label="writer of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="15194" end="15210" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060091" start="15297" end="15311" title="Iacob Heraclid" label="Iacob Heraclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q707838" start="15385" end="15411" title="Thomas Wentworth Higginson" label="Thomas Wentworth Higginson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954090" start="15463" end="15473" title="Secret Six" label="Secret Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684883" start="15534" end="15552" title="Lotta Hitschmanova" label="Lotta Hitschmanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177664" start="15616" end="15630" title="Jessica Holmes (comedian)" label="Jessica Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002170" start="15666" end="15675" title="Air Farce Live" label="Air Farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239670" start="15685" end="15696" title="John Holmes (poet)" label="John Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="15718" end="15743" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="15791" end="15850" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009590" start="15882" end="15894" title="W. R. Holway" label="W. R. Holway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729657" start="15939" end="15965" title="All Souls Unitarian Church (Tulsa, Oklahoma)" label="All Souls Unitarian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q241299" start="15977" end="15992" title="Julia Ward Howe" label="Julia Ward Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q583210" start="16023" end="16054" title="The Battle Hymn of the Republic" label="The Battle Hymn of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164620" start="16064" end="16076" title="Roman Hruska" label="Roman Hruska"/>
<link wikidata="Q295644" start="16139" end="16150" title="David Hubel" label="David Hubel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064907" start="16205" end="16219" title="Charles Hudson (Massachusetts)" label="Charles Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22752740" start="16273" end="16292" title="Harm Jan Huidekoper" label="Harm Jan Huidekoper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837086" start="16458" end="16474" title="Michelle Huneven" label="Michelle Huneven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="16623" end="16639" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047162" start="16728" end="16742" title="Joseph Johnson (publisher)" label="Joseph Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177549" start="16777" end="16795" title="Jenkin Lloyd Jones" label="Jenkin Lloyd Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327419" start="16867" end="16886" title="Richard Lloyd Jones" label="Richard Lloyd Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729657" start="17002" end="17028" title="All Souls Unitarian Church (Tulsa, Oklahoma)" label="All Souls Unitarian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113701" start="17040" end="17067" title="Annie Bizzell Jordan Willis" label="Annie Bizzell Jordan Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q721633" start="17172" end="17184" title="György Kepes" label="György Kepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="17215" end="17225" title="Naomi King" label="Naomi King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590865" start="17294" end="17311" title="Thomas Starr King" label="Thomas Starr King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602223" start="17424" end="17441" title="Starr King School for the Ministry" label="Starr King School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49618" start="17445" end="17461" title="James R. Killian" label="James R. Killian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945818" start="17533" end="17547" title="W.M. Kiplinger" label="W.M. Kiplinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978934" start="17611" end="17627" title="Webster Kitchell" label="Webster Kitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668142" start="17655" end="17669" title="Abner Kneeland" label="Abner Kneeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="17794" end="17805" title="freethought" label="freethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163414" start="18058" end="18069" title="Penney Kome" label="Penney Kome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020067" start="18124" end="18141" title="William L. Langer" label="William L. Langer"/>
<link wikidata="Q443591" start="18181" end="18198" title="Margaret Laurence" label="Margaret Laurence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723145" start="18222" end="18240" title="Alfred McClung Lee" label="Alfred McClung Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999078" start="18269" end="18293" title="John Lewis (philosopher)" label="John Lewis (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18308" end="18315" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501533" start="18316" end="18325" title="General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="18339" end="18358" title="Marxist philosopher" label="Marxist philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="18387" end="18397" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="18399" end="18411" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="18417" end="18425" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q952000" start="18429" end="18442" title="Arthur Lismer" label="Arthur Lismer"/>
<link wikidata="Q443621" start="18486" end="18498" title="Viola Liuzzo" label="Viola Liuzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780099" start="18537" end="18551" title="Mary Livermore" label="Mary Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681252" start="18581" end="18596" title="James W. Loewen" label="James W. Loewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q504753" start="18625" end="18639" title="Arthur Lovejoy" label="Arthur Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="18669" end="18685" title="History of Ideas" label="History of Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006462" start="18704" end="18714" title="Carrie Mac" label="Carrie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190579" start="18747" end="18763" title="John P. Marquand" label="John P. Marquand"/>
<link wikidata="Q50975499" start="18787" end="18808" title="Peter Finch Martineau" label="Peter Finch Martineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490671" start="18871" end="18902" title="Charlotte Garrigue" label="Charlotte Garrigue Masaryk(ová)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="18944" end="18958" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="18959" end="18981" title="Tomáš Masaryk" label="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="18984" end="19006" title="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="19040" end="19054" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758593" start="19057" end="19072" title="Bernard Maybeck" label="Bernard Maybeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438233" start="19110" end="19125" title="Scotty McLennan" label="Scotty McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="19140" end="19144" title="Dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="19167" end="19186" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="19188" end="19196" title="Minister (religion)" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547699" start="19200" end="19224" title="Stanford Memorial Church" label="Stanford Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569224" start="19259" end="19269" title="Scot Sloan" label="Scot Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q429433" start="19305" end="19315" title="Doonesbury" label="Doonesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685216" start="19324" end="19337" title="Adrian Melott" label="Adrian Melott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="19380" end="19395" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="19447" end="19456" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218270" start="19466" end="19487" title="Samuel Freeman Miller" label="Samuel Freeman Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="19558" end="19573" title="Robert Millikan" label="Robert Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q446795" start="19698" end="19710" title="Walt Minnick" label="Walt Minnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q956408" start="19841" end="19855" title="Théodore Monod" label="Théodore Monod"/>
<link wikidata="Q725974" start="19949" end="19963" title="Ashley Montagu" label="Ashley Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540599" start="20016" end="20025" title="Slim Moon" label="Slim Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20066" end="20083" title="Christopher Moore (minister)" label="Christopher Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022004" start="20101" end="20130" title="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Choir" label="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q995851" start="20133" end="20148" title="Mary Carr Moore" label="Mary Carr Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077131" start="20224" end="20237" title="Peter Morales" label="Peter Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="20264" end="20298" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798613" start="20301" end="20317" title="Arthur Ernest Morgan" label="Arthur E. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310128" start="20371" end="20382" title="John Murray (minister)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q44922" start="20432" end="20453" title="Judith Sargent Murray" label="Judith Sargent Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="20610" end="20622" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q434765" start="20675" end="20692" title="Maurine Neuberger" label="Maurine Neuberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="20722" end="20733" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759097" start="20771" end="20785" title="Andrews Norton" label="Andrews Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210362" start="20837" end="20847" title="Joseph Nye" label="Joseph Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q463229" start="20967" end="20982" title="Keith Olbermann" label="Keith Olbermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296259" start="21057" end="21076" title="Mary White Ovington" label="Mary White Ovington"/>
<link wikidata="Q888183" start="21114" end="21126" title="Bob Packwood" label="Bob Packwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="21141" end="21153" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="21159" end="21165" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251808" start="21180" end="21191" title="John Palmer (Unitarian, 1742–1786)" label="John Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018587" start="21235" end="21245" title="David Park (painter)" label="David Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q927036" start="21282" end="21294" title="Isaac Parker (congressman)" label="Isaac Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="21339" end="21345" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="21378" end="21414" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q709002" start="21441" end="21456" title="Theodore Parker" label="Theodore Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="21514" end="21527" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49828" start="21587" end="21599" title="Randy Pausch" label="Randy Pausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="21713" end="21737" title="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin" label="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150364" start="21785" end="21800" title="Richard Peacock" label="Richard Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499303" start="21864" end="21878" title="Laura Pedersen" label="Laura Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65503876" start="22022" end="22049" title="Sarah Maria Clinton Perkins" label="Sarah Maria Clinton Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305117" start="22140" end="22160" title="Melissa Harris-Perry" label="Melissa Harris-Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812722" start="22241" end="22284" title="Melissa Harris-Perry (TV program)" label="&amp;quot;Melissa Harris-Perry&amp;quot; TV program"/>
<link wikidata="Q539791" start="22288" end="22307" title="William J. Perry" label="William James Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019112" start="22367" end="22386" title="William T. Pheiffer" label="William T. Pheiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q366306" start="22430" end="22443" title="Utah Phillips" label="Utah Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447874" start="22511" end="22528" title="William Hayward Pickering" label="William Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344188" start="22560" end="22574" title="James Pierpont (musician)" label="James Pierpont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309772" start="22629" end="22643" title="Daniel Pinkham" label="Daniel Pinkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253033" start="22669" end="22680" title="John Platts (Unitarian)" label="John Platts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926153" start="22735" end="22756" title="Van Rensselaer Potter" label="Van Rensselaer Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="22792" end="22808" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362760" start="22869" end="22883" title="George Pullman" label="George Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="22913" end="22925" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="22964" end="22978" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="23080" end="23092" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679156" start="23117" end="23134" title="Mary Jane Rathbun (zoologist)" label="Mary Jane Rathbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141913" start="23168" end="23178" title="James Reeb" label="James Reeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195907" start="23215" end="23230" title="Curtis W. Reese" label="Curtis W. Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q174311" start="23266" end="23283" title="Christopher Reeve" label="Christopher Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141972" start="23333" end="23344" title="James Relly" label="James Relly"/>
<link wikidata="Q327071" start="23377" end="23388" title="Paul Revere" label="Paul Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="23453" end="23466" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="23499" end="23508" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215551" start="23543" end="23564" title="comparative advantage" label="comparative advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q268478" start="23567" end="23583" title="Malvina Reynolds" label="Malvina Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769447" start="23631" end="23643" title="Mark Ritchie (politician)" label="Mark Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q125705601" start="23697" end="23714" title="Amber E. Robinson" label="Amber E. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38465716" start="23788" end="23800" title="Hugh Ronalds" label="Hugh Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482339" start="23857" end="23872" title="Francis Ronalds" label="Francis Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23911" end="23929" title="Electric telegraph#First working systems" label="electric telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="23932" end="23945" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248084" start="24073" end="24093" title="Mary Augusta Safford" label="Mary Augusta Safford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064583" start="24145" end="24160" title="Iowa Sisterhood" label="Iowa Sisterhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q880369" start="24164" end="24184" title="Leverett Saltonstall" label="Leverett Saltonstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="24199" end="24211" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="24217" end="24230" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068191" start="24233" end="24258" title="Franklin Benjamin Sanborn" label="Franklin Benjamin Sanborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954090" start="24284" end="24294" title="Secret Six" label="Secret Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="24353" end="24369" title="social scientist" label="social scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="24389" end="24406" title="transcendentalism" label="transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587411" start="24410" end="24420" title="May Sarton" label="May Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365229" start="24442" end="24456" title="Ellery Schempp" label="Ellery Schempp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667872" start="24581" end="24616" title="Abington School District v. Schempp" label="Abington School District v. Schempp"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="24709" end="24727" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr." label="Arthur Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124975" start="24763" end="24779" title="Richard Schultes" label="Richard Schultes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747635" start="24826" end="24843" title="William F. Schulz" label="William F. Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843739" start="24887" end="24912" title="Amnesty International USA" label="Amnesty International USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="24938" end="24972" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443902" start="24975" end="24995" title="Ferdinand Schumacher" label="Ferdinand Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699694" start="25070" end="25089" title="Quaker Oats Company" label="Quaker Oats Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="25093" end="25110" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117975" start="25199" end="25230" title="Church of the Larger Fellowship" label="Church of the Larger Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="25252" end="25263" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177579" start="25308" end="25324" title="Roy Wood Sellars" label="Roy Wood Sellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="25375" end="25386" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="25426" end="25443" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774561" start="25471" end="25483" title="Martha Sharp" label="Martha Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960651" start="25611" end="25626" title="Waitstill Sharp" label="Waitstill Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521576" start="25764" end="25775" title="Lemuel Shaw" label="Lemuel Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="25825" end="25861" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668142" start="25905" end="25919" title="Abner Kneeland" label="Abner Kneeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q713931" start="25960" end="25977" title="Robert Gould Shaw" label="Robert Gould Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140668" start="26007" end="26025" title="54th Massachusetts" label="54th Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="26078" end="26094" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Herbert A. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580557" start="26182" end="26201" title="William G. Sinkford" label="William G. Sinkford"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="26241" end="26275" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496281" start="26278" end="26288" title="Fred Small (singer-songwriter)" label="Fred Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045224" start="26340" end="26354" title="Caroline Soule" label="Caroline Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887185" start="26507" end="26533" title="Unitarian Church in Summit" label="Unitarian Church in Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q542217" start="26536" end="26558" title="Catherine Helen Spence" label="Catherine Helen Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q538091" start="26620" end="26636" title="Lysander Spooner" label="Lysander Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q465335" start="26690" end="26712" title="Elizabeth Cady Stanton" label="Elizabeth Cady Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q965768" start="26825" end="26835" title="Pete Stark" label="Pete Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q712715" start="26887" end="26908" title="Vilhjalmur Stefansson" label="Vilhjalmur Stefansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60677" start="26980" end="27005" title="Charles Proteus Steinmetz" label="Charles Proteus Steinmetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="27078" end="27093" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661962" start="27184" end="27202" title="George D. Stoddard" label="George D. Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="27230" end="27252" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896774" start="27261" end="27296" title="University of the State of New York" label="University of the State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q452281" start="27300" end="27310" title="Lucy Stone" label="Lucy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="27371" end="27383" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q932815" start="27455" end="27470" title="Dirk Jan Struik" label="Dirk Jan Struik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639521" start="27501" end="27516" title="Jedediah Strutt" label="Jedediah Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759941" start="27584" end="27599" title="Margaret Sutton" label="Margaret Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705310" start="27680" end="27691" title="Jade Sylvan" label="Jude Sylvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="27794" end="27813" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="27828" end="27858" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="27875" end="27909" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q25190167" start="27912" end="27924" title="Robin Tanner (minister)" label="Robin Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131481" start="28018" end="28034" title="Clementia Taylor" label="Clementia Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28085" end="28099" title="Joyce Tischler" label="Joyce Tischler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491695" start="28113" end="28138" title="Animal Legal Defense Fund" label="Animal Legal Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q190232" start="28195" end="28209" title="Clyde Tombaugh" label="Clyde Tombaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="28259" end="28264" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747874" start="28267" end="28281" title="Amos G. Throop" label="Amos G. Throop"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="28349" end="28383" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019729" start="28579" end="28593" title="William Vidler" label="William Vidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="28654" end="28667" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q295724" start="28698" end="28709" title="George Wald" label="George Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228998" start="28758" end="28768" title="Zach Wahls" label="Zach Wahls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044488" start="28825" end="28845" title="Caroline Farrar Ware" label="Caroline Farrar Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578413" start="28892" end="28911" title="William D. Washburn" label="William D. Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="28977" end="28991" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242719" start="29029" end="29043" title="Dawud Wharnsby" label="Dawud Wharnsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16037924" start="29124" end="29144" title="Alfred Tredway White" label="Alfred Tredway White"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="29197" end="29219" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q554890" start="29267" end="29288" title="Willis Rodney Whitney" label="Willis Rodney Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795085" start="29358" end="29375" title="Thomas Whittemore (Universalist)" label="Thomas Whittemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239022" start="29436" end="29455" title="David Rhys Williams" label="David Rhys Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q547716" start="29500" end="29515" title="Iolo Morganwg" label="Edward Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="29603" end="29626" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412945" start="29664" end="29680" title="Samuel Williston" label="Samuel Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470061" start="29738" end="29753" title="Edwin H. Wilson" label="Edwin H. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369719" start="29796" end="29807" title="Ross Winans" label="Ross Winans"/>
<link wikidata="Q55979093" start="29854" end="29873" title="John Crawford Woods" label="John Crawford Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111542" start="29937" end="29952" title="Joanne Woodward" label="Joanne Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="29984" end="29995" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781944" start="29998" end="30018" title="Theodore Paul Wright" label="Theodore Paul Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="30057" end="30075" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680814" start="30135" end="30147" title="Unity Temple" label="Unity Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q331397" start="30151" end="30169" title="Oak Park, Illinois" label="Oak Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453960" start="30175" end="30198" title="First Unitarian Society of Madison" label="First Unitarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="30202" end="30220" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349539" start="30224" end="30237" title="Quincy Wright" label="Quincy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330100" start="30291" end="30305" title="Richard Wright (Unitarian)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="30364" end="30377" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q983349" start="30417" end="30428" title="N. C. Wyeth" label="N. C. Wyeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q944509" start="30476" end="30489" title="Owen D. Young" label="Owen D. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="30530" end="30546" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="30559" end="30587" title="Radio Corporation of America" label="Radio Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="30607" end="30636" title="National Broadcasting Company" label="National Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="30650" end="30660" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025297" start="30682" end="30698" title="Whitney Young" label="Whitney M. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q313396" start="30748" end="30773" title="John II Sigismund Zápolya" label="John II Sigismund Zápolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567159" start="30850" end="30881" title="List of Christian Universalists" label="List of Christian Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601443" start="30883" end="30951" title="List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist churches" label="List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q60449688" start="30953" end="30978" title="Lists of people by belief" label="Lists of people by belief"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37297" wikidata="Q146071" url="?curid=37297" title="Criminal procedure">
<text>Criminal procedure is the adjudication process of the criminal law. While criminal procedure differs dramatically by jurisdiction, the process generally begins with a formal criminal charge with the person on trial either being free on bail or incarcerated, and results in the conviction or acquittal of the defendant. Criminal procedure can be either in form of inquisitorial or adversarial criminal procedure.

==Basic rights==
Currently, in many countries with a democratic system and the rule of law, criminal procedure puts the burden of proof on the prosecution – that is, it is up to the prosecution to prove that the defendant is guilty beyond any reasonable doubt, as opposed to having the defense prove that they are innocent, and any doubt is resolved in favor of the defendant. This provision, known as the presumption of innocence, is required, for example, in the 46 countries that are members of the Council of Europe, under Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, and it is included in other human rights documents. However, in practice, it operates somewhat differently in different countries. Such basic rights also include the right for the defendant to know what offence he or she has been arrested for or is being charged with, and the right to appear before a judicial official within a certain time of being arrested. Many jurisdictions also allow the defendant the right to legal counsel and provide any defendant who cannot afford their own lawyer with a lawyer paid for at the public expense.

==Difference between criminal and civil cases==
Countries using the common law tend to make a clear distinction between civil and criminal procedures. For example, an English criminal court may force a convicted accused to pay a fine to the Crown as punishment for the crime, and sometimes to pay the legal costs of the prosecution, but does not normally order the convicted accused to pay any compensation to the victim of the crime. The victim must pursue their claim for compensation in a civil, not a criminal, action. In countries using the continental civil law system, such as France and Italy, the victim of a crime (known as the &quot;injured party&quot;) may be awarded damages by a criminal court judge.

The standards of proof are higher in a criminal action than in a civil one since the loser risks not only financial penalties but also being sent to prison (or, in some countries, execution). In English law, the prosecution must prove the guilt of a criminal &quot;beyond reasonable doubt&quot;, while the plaintiff in a civil action is required to prove his case &quot;on the balance of probabilities&quot;. &quot;Beyond reasonable doubt&quot; is not defined for the jury which decides the verdict, but it has been said by appeal courts that proving guilt beyond reasonable doubt requires the prosecution to exclude any reasonable hypothesis consistent with innocence: &quot;Plomp v. R&quot;. In a civil case, however, the court simply weighs the evidence and decides what is most probable.

Criminal and civil procedure are different. Although some systems, including the English, allow a private citizen to bring a criminal prosecution against another citizen, criminal actions are nearly always started by the state. Civil actions, on the other hand, are usually started by individuals.

In Anglo-American law, the party bringing a criminal action (that is, in most cases, the state) is called the prosecution, but the party bringing a civil action is the plaintiff. In a civil action the other party is known as the defendant. In a criminal case, the private party may be known as the &quot;defendant&quot; or the &quot;accused&quot;. A criminal case in the United States against a person named Ms. Sanchez would be entitled &quot;United States v.&quot; (short for &quot;versus&quot;, or against) &quot;Sanchez&quot; if initiated by the federal government; if brought by a state, the case would typically be called &quot;State v. Sanchez&quot; or &quot;People v. Sanchez.&quot; In the United Kingdom, the criminal case would be styled &quot;R.&quot; (short for Rex or Regina, that is, the King or Queen) &quot;v. Sanchez.&quot; In both the United States and the United Kingdom, a civil action between Ms. Sanchez and a Mr. Smith would be &quot;Sanchez v. Smith&quot; if started by Sanchez and &quot;Smith v. Sanchez&quot; if begun by Smith.

Evidence given at a criminal trial is not necessarily admissible in a civil action about the same matter, just as evidence given in a civil cause is not necessarily admissible on a criminal trial. For example, the victim of a road accident does not directly benefit if the driver who injured him is found guilty of the crime of careless driving. He still has to prove his case in a civil action. In fact he may be able to prove his civil case even when the driver is found not guilty in the criminal trial. If the accused has given evidence on his trial he may be cross-examined on those statements in a subsequent civil action regardless of the criminal verdict.

Once the plaintiff has shown that the defendant is liable, the main argument in a civil court is about the amount of money, or damages, which the defendant should pay to the plaintiff.

==Differences between civil law and common law systems==
* The majority of civil law jurisdictions (&#x27;civil law&#x27; as a type of law system, not as opposed to criminal law) follow an inquisitorial system of adjudication, in which judges undertake an active investigation of the claims by examining the evidence at the trial (while other judges contribute likewise by preparing reports).
* In common law systems, the trial judge presides over proceedings grounded in the adversarial system of dispute resolution, where both the prosecution and the defence prepare arguments to be presented before the court. Some civil law systems have adopted adversarial procedures.

Proponents of either system tend to consider that their system defends best the rights of the innocent. There is a tendency in common law countries to believe that civil law / inquisitorial systems do not have the so-called &quot;presumption of innocence&quot;, and do not provide the defence with adequate rights. Conversely, there is a tendency in countries with an inquisitorial system to believe that accusatorial proceedings unduly favour rich defendants who can afford large legal teams, and therefore disfavour poorer defendants.

==See also==
* Offence (law)
* Trial (law)
* Civil procedure
* Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 of India
* Court Appointed Special Advocates
* Criminal Procedure Act
* Criminal procedure in the United States
* Formal procedure law in Switzerland
* Italian Criminal Procedure
* Code of Criminal Procedure (Japan)
* Criminal Procedure Code (Malaysia)
* Criminal Procedure Code (Ukraine)

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="0" end="18" title="Criminal procedure" label="Criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q357789" start="26" end="38" title="adjudication" label="adjudication"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="54" end="66" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q329525" start="174" end="189" title="criminal charge" label="criminal charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="236" end="240" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="244" end="256" title="incarcerated" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916183" start="277" end="287" title="Conviction (law)" label="conviction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="291" end="300" title="acquittal" label="acquittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="308" end="317" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="533" end="548" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="556" end="567" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275462" start="819" end="843" title="presumption of innocence" label="presumption of innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="915" end="932" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="957" end="992" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131110" start="1418" end="1425" title="counsel" label="counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1480" end="1486" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1602" end="1612" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="1709" end="1723" title="Criminal law" label="criminal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366571" start="1835" end="1846" title="legal costs" label="legal costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="1854" end="1865" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="2008" end="2020" title="Damages" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="2080" end="2108" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="continental civil law system"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2118" end="2124" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2129" end="2134" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="2214" end="2221" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="2242" end="2247" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2289" end="2304" title="criminal action" label="criminal action"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="2399" end="2405" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2445" end="2456" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="2556" end="2565" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="2571" end="2583" title="civil action" label="civil action"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="2949" end="2959" title="civil case" label="civil case"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="3056" end="3071" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3124" end="3131" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="3168" end="3188" title="criminal prosecution" label="criminal prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="3205" end="3212" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="3264" end="3269" title="State (law)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="3271" end="3283" title="Civil action" label="Civil action"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="3328" end="3338" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3713" end="3726" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="4144" end="4148" title="King" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="4152" end="4157" title="Queen regnant" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="4467" end="4479" title="civil action" label="civil action"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="4716" end="4721" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="5179" end="5184" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="5189" end="5196" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="5323" end="5332" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25669" start="5437" end="5457" title="inquisitorial system" label="inquisitorial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="5646" end="5656" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="5724" end="5742" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282696" start="5746" end="5764" title="dispute resolution" label="dispute resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25669" start="6098" end="6118" title="inquisitorial system" label="inquisitorial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q275462" start="6152" end="6176" title="presumption of innocence" label="presumption of innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="6475" end="6488" title="Offence (law)" label="Offence (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="6491" end="6502" title="Trial (law)" label="Trial (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="6505" end="6520" title="Civil procedure" label="Civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185605" start="6523" end="6555" title="Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" label="Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178212" start="6567" end="6600" title="Court Appointed Special Advocates" label="Court Appointed Special Advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185598" start="6603" end="6625" title="Criminal Procedure Act" label="Criminal Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630781" start="6628" end="6667" title="Criminal procedure in the United States" label="Criminal procedure in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371463" start="6670" end="6705" title="Formal procedure law in Switzerland" label="Formal procedure law in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682144" start="6708" end="6734" title="Italian Criminal Procedure" label="Italian Criminal Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6737" end="6771" title="Code of Criminal Procedure (Japan)" label="Code of Criminal Procedure (Japan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184392" start="6774" end="6808" title="Criminal Procedure Code (Malaysia)" label="Criminal Procedure Code (Malaysia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184949" start="6811" end="6844" title="Criminal Procedure Code (Ukraine)" label="Criminal Procedure Code (Ukraine)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37298" wikidata="Q1727518" url="?curid=37298" title="Media">
<text>Media may refer to:

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==
* &quot;Media&quot; (album), the 1998 album by The Faint
* &quot;Media&quot;, a 2017 American TV thriller film directed by Craig Ross Jr.
* List of art media, materials and techniques used by an artist to produce a work of art

== Communication ==
* Media (communication), tools used to deliver information or data
** Advertising media, various media, content, buying and placement for advertising
** Broadcast media, communications delivered over mass electronic communication networks
** Digital media, electronic media used to store, transmit, and receive digitized information
** Electronic media, communications delivered via electronic or electromechanical energy
** Hypermedia, media with hyperlinks
** Interactive media, media that is interactive
** Mass media, technologies that reach a large audience via mass communication
** MEDIA Programme, a European Union initiative to support the European audiovisual sector
** Media-adequacy, refers to specific (i.e. media) aspects that are important for a successful transfer of information
** Multimedia, communications that incorporate multiple forms of information content and processing
** New media, the combination of traditional media and computer and communications technology
** News media, mass media focused on communicating news
** Print media, communications delivered via paper or canvas
** Published media, any media made available to the public
** Recording medium, devices used to store information
** Social media, media disseminated through social interactions

== Computing ==
* Media player (software), for playing audio and video
* Storage media, in data storage devices

== Life sciences ==
* Media, a group of insect wing veins in the Comstock-Needham system
* Growth medium, objects in which microorganisms or cells can experience growth
* Media filter, a filter consisting of several different filter materials
* &quot;Tunica media&quot;, the middle layer of the wall of a blood vessel

== Places ==
=== United States ===
* Media, Illinois
* Media, Kansas
* Media, Pennsylvania
* Media Township, Henderson County, Illinois

===Elsewhere===
* Media, Africa, an Ancient city and former bishopric, now a Latin Catholic titular see in Algeria
* Media (castra), a fort in the Roman province of Dacia
* Media (region), a region of and former empire based in north-western Iran

==Transport==
* Media (automobile company)
* , a World War II US Navy ship that was never commissioned
* , a Cunard Line cargo liner in service 1948–61

== See also ==

* Mediaș, Sibiu, Transylvania, Romania
* 
* Medium (disambiguation)
* Medea (disambiguation)
* Midea (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1727518" start="0" end="5" title="Media" label="Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805437" start="60" end="85" title="Media (album)" label="&amp;quot;Media&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181397" start="181" end="195" title="Craig Ross Jr." label="Craig Ross Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q547989" start="198" end="215" title="List of art media" label="List of art media"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="308" end="329" title="Media (communication)" label="Media (communication)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="376" end="393" title="Advertising media" label="Advertising media"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="459" end="474" title="Broadcast media" label="Broadcast media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="548" end="561" title="Digital media" label="Digital media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209283" start="642" end="658" title="Electronic media" label="Electronic media"/>
<link wikidata="Q837900" start="731" end="741" title="Hypermedia" label="Hypermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="768" end="785" title="Interactive media" label="Interactive media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="816" end="826" title="Mass media" label="Mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q597738" start="895" end="910" title="MEDIA Programme" label="MEDIA Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q129905865" start="986" end="1000" title="Media-adequacy" label="Media-adequacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="1105" end="1115" title="Multimedia" label="Multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="1205" end="1214" title="New media" label="New media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="1299" end="1309" title="News media" label="News media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="1355" end="1366" title="Print media" label="Print media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="1416" end="1431" title="Published media" label="Published media"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="1475" end="1491" title="Recording medium" label="Recording medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="1530" end="1542" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q210337" start="1610" end="1633" title="Media player (software)" label="Media player (software)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1665" end="1678" title="Computer data storage#Storage media" label="Storage media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122835" start="1770" end="1793" title="Comstock-Needham system" label="Comstock-Needham system"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="1796" end="1809" title="Growth medium" label="Growth medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805618" start="1876" end="1888" title="Media filter" label="Media filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740954" start="1956" end="1968" title="Tunica media" label="Tunica media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451108" start="2061" end="2076" title="Media, Illinois" label="Media, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706990" start="2079" end="2092" title="Media, Kansas" label="Media, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187804" start="2095" end="2114" title="Media, Pennsylvania" label="Media, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748274" start="2117" end="2159" title="Media Township, Henderson County, Illinois" label="Media Township, Henderson County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672707" start="2179" end="2192" title="Media, Africa" label="Media, Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12723651" start="2278" end="2292" title="Media (castra)" label="Media (castra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853673" start="2334" end="2348" title="Media (region)" label="Media (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805438" start="2425" end="2451" title="Media (automobile company)" label="Media (automobile company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q374465" start="2580" end="2586" title="Mediaș" label="Mediaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q225664" start="2622" end="2645" title="Medium (disambiguation)" label="Medium (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555830" start="2648" end="2670" title="Medea (disambiguation)" label="Medea (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013596" start="2673" end="2695" title="Midea (disambiguation)" label="Midea (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
