<doc id="37080" wikidata="Q9420" url="?curid=37080" title="Thought">
<text>In their most common sense, the terms thought and thinking refer to cognitive processes that can happen independently of sensory stimulation. Their most paradigmatic forms are judging, reasoning, concept formation, problem solving, and deliberation. But other mental processes, like considering an idea, memory, or imagination, are also often included. These processes can happen internally independent of the sensory organs, unlike perception. But when understood in the widest sense, any mental event may be understood as a form of thinking, including perception and unconscious mental processes. In a slightly different sense, the term &quot;thought&quot; refers not to the mental processes themselves but to mental states or systems of ideas brought about by these processes.

Various theories of thinking have been proposed, some of which aim to capture the characteristic features of thought. &quot;Platonists&quot; hold that thinking consists in discerning and inspecting Platonic forms and their interrelations. It involves the ability to discriminate between the pure Platonic forms themselves and the mere imitations found in the sensory world. According to &quot;Aristotelianism&quot;, to think about something is to instantiate in one&#x27;s mind the universal essence of the object of thought. These universals are abstracted from sense experience and are not understood as existing in a changeless intelligible world, in contrast to Platonism. Conceptualism is closely related to Aristotelianism: it identifies thinking with mentally evoking concepts instead of instantiating essences. &quot;Inner speech theories&quot; claim that thinking is a form of inner speech in which words are silently expressed in the thinker&#x27;s mind. According to some accounts, this happens in a regular language, like English or French. The &quot;language of thought hypothesis&quot;, on the other hand, holds that this happens in the medium of a unique mental language called &quot;Mentalese&quot;. Central to this idea is that linguistic representational systems are built up from atomic and compound representations and that this structure is also found in thought. &quot;Associationists&quot; understand thinking as the succession of ideas or images. They are particularly interested in the laws of association that govern how the train of thought unfolds. &quot;Behaviorists&quot;, by contrast, identify thinking with behavioral dispositions to engage in public intelligent behavior as a reaction to particular external stimuli. &quot;Computationalism&quot; is the most recent of these theories. It sees thinking in analogy to how computers work in terms of the storage, transmission, and processing of information.

Various types of thinking are discussed in academic literature. A &quot;judgment&quot; is a mental operation in which a proposition is evoked and then either affirmed or denied. &quot;Reasoning&quot;, on the other hand, is the process of drawing conclusions from premises or evidence. Both judging and reasoning depend on the possession of the relevant concepts, which are acquired in the process of &quot;concept formation&quot;. In the case of &quot;problem solving&quot;, thinking aims at reaching a predefined goal by overcoming certain obstacles. &quot;Deliberation&quot; is an important form of practical thought that consists in formulating possible courses of action and assessing the reasons for and against them. This may lead to a decision by choosing the most favorable option. Both &quot;episodic memory&quot; and &quot;imagination&quot; present objects and situations internally, in an attempt to accurately reproduce what was previously experienced or as a free rearrangement, respectively. &quot;Unconscious thought&quot; is thought that happens without being directly experienced. It is sometimes posited to explain how difficult problems are solved in cases where no conscious thought was employed.

Thought is discussed in various academic disciplines. &quot;Phenomenology&quot; is interested in the experience of thinking. An important question in this field concerns the experiential character of thinking and to what extent this character can be explained in terms of sensory experience. &quot;Metaphysics&quot; is, among other things, interested in the relation between mind and matter. This concerns the question of how thinking can fit into the material world as described by the natural sciences. &quot;Cognitive psychology&quot; aims to understand thought as a form of information processing. &quot;Developmental psychology&quot;, on the other hand, investigates the development of thought from birth to maturity and asks which factors this development depends on. &quot;Psychoanalysis&quot; emphasizes the role of the unconscious in mental life. Other fields concerned with thought include linguistics, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, biology, and sociology. Various concepts and theories are closely related to the topic of thought. The term &quot;law of thought&quot; refers to three fundamental laws of logic: the law of contradiction, the law of excluded middle, and the principle of identity. &quot;Counterfactual thinking&quot; involves mental representations of non-actual situations and events in which the thinker tries to assess what would be the case if things had been different. &quot;Thought experiments&quot; often employ counterfactual thinking in order to illustrate theories or to test their plausibility. &quot;Critical thinking&quot; is a form of thinking that is reasonable, reflective, and focused on determining what to believe or how to act. &quot;Positive thinking&quot; involves focusing one&#x27;s attention on the positive aspects of one&#x27;s situation and is intimately related to optimism.

==Definition==
The terms &quot;thought&quot; and &quot;thinking&quot; refer to a wide variety of psychological activities. In their most common sense, they are understood as conscious processes that can happen independently of sensory stimulation. This includes various different mental processes, like considering an idea or proposition or judging it to be true. In this sense, memory and imagination are forms of thought but perception is not. In a more restricted sense, only the most paradigmatic cases are considered thought. These involve conscious processes that are conceptual or linguistic and sufficiently abstract, like judging, inferring, problem solving, and deliberating. Sometimes the terms &quot;thought&quot; and &quot;thinking&quot; are understood in a very wide sense as referring to any form of mental process, conscious or unconscious. In this sense, they may be used synonymously with the term &quot;mind&quot;. This usage is encountered, for example, in the Cartesian tradition, where minds are understood as thinking things, and in the cognitive sciences. But this sense may include the restriction that such processes have to lead to intelligent behavior to be considered thought. A contrast sometimes found in the academic literature is that between thinking and feeling. In this context, thinking is associated with a sober, dispassionate, and rational approach to its topic while feeling involves a direct emotional engagement.

The terms &quot;thought&quot; and &quot;thinking&quot; can also be used to refer not to the mental processes themselves but to mental states or systems of ideas brought about by these processes. In this sense, they are often synonymous with the term &quot;belief&quot; and its cognates and may refer to the mental states which either belong to an individual or are common among a certain group of people. Discussions of thought in the academic literature often leave it implicit which sense of the term they have in mind.

The word &quot;thought&quot; comes from Old English &quot;þoht&quot;, or &quot;geþoht&quot;, from the stem of &quot;þencan&quot; &quot;to conceive of in the mind, consider&quot;.

==Theories of thinking==
Various theories of thinking have been proposed. They aim to capture the characteristic features of thinking. The theories listed here are not exclusive: it may be possible to combine some without leading to a contradiction.

===Platonism===
According to Platonism, thinking is a spiritual activity in which Platonic forms and their interrelations are discerned and inspected. This activity is understood as a form of silent inner speech in which the soul talks to itself. Platonic forms are seen as universals that exist in a changeless realm different from the sensible world. Examples include the forms of goodness, beauty, unity, and sameness. On this view, the difficulty of thinking consists in being unable to grasp the Platonic forms and to distinguish them as the original from the mere imitations found in the sensory world. This means, for example, distinguishing beauty itself from derivative images of beauty. One problem for this view is to explain how humans can learn and think about Platonic forms belonging to a different realm. Plato himself tries to solve this problem through his theory of recollection, according to which the soul already was in contact with the Platonic forms before and is therefore able to remember what they are like. But this explanation depends on various assumptions usually not accepted in contemporary thought.

===Aristotelianism and conceptualism===
Aristotelians hold that the mind is able to think about something by instantiating the essence of the object of thought. So while thinking about trees, the mind instantiates tree-ness. This instantiation does not happen in matter, as is the case for actual trees, but in mind, though the universal essence instantiated in both cases is the same. In contrast to Platonism, these universals are not understood as Platonic forms existing in a changeless intelligible world. Instead, they only exist to the extent that they are instantiated. The mind learns to discriminate universals through abstraction from experience. This explanation avoids various of the objections raised against Platonism.

Conceptualism is closely related to Aristotelianism. It states that thinking consists in mentally evoking concepts. Some of these concepts may be innate, but most have to be learned through abstraction from sense experience before they can be used in thought.

It has been argued against these views that they have problems in accounting for the logical form of thought. For example, to think that it will either rain or snow, it is not sufficient to instantiate the essences of rain and snow or to evoke the corresponding concepts. The reason for this is that the disjunctive relation between the rain and the snow is not captured this way. Another problem shared by these positions is the difficulty of giving a satisfying account of how essences or concepts are learned by the mind through abstraction.

===Inner speech theory===
Inner speech theories claim that thinking is a form of inner speech. This view is sometimes termed &quot;psychological nominalism&quot;. It states that thinking involves silently evoking words and connecting them to form mental sentences. The knowledge a person has of their thoughts can be explained as a form of overhearing one&#x27;s own silent monologue. Three central aspects are often ascribed to inner speech: it is in an important sense similar to hearing sounds, it involves the use of language and it constitutes a motor plan that could be used for actual speech. This connection to language is supported by the fact that thinking is often accompanied by muscle activity in the speech organs. This activity may facilitate thinking in certain cases but is not necessary for it in general. According to some accounts, thinking happens not in a regular language, like English or French, but has its own type of language with the corresponding symbols and syntax. This theory is known as the language of thought hypothesis.

Inner speech theory has a strong initial plausibility since introspection suggests that indeed many thoughts are accompanied by inner speech. But its opponents usually contend that this is not true for all types of thinking. It has been argued, for example, that forms of daydreaming constitute non-linguistic thought. This issue is relevant to the question of whether animals have the capacity to think. If thinking is necessarily tied to language then this would suggest that there is an important gap between humans and animals since only humans have a sufficiently complex language. But the existence of non-linguistic thoughts suggests that this gap may not be that big and that some animals do indeed think.

====Language of thought hypothesis====
There are various theories about the relation between language and thought. One prominent version in contemporary philosophy is called the language of thought hypothesis. It states that thinking happens in the medium of a mental language. This language, often referred to as &quot;Mentalese&quot;, is similar to regular languages in various respects: it is composed of words that are connected to each other in syntactic ways to form sentences. This claim does not merely rest on an intuitive analogy between language and thought. Instead, it provides a clear definition of the features a representational system has to embody in order to have a linguistic structure. On the level of syntax, the representational system has to possess two types of representations: atomic and compound representations. Atomic representations are basic whereas compound representations are constituted either by other compound representations or by atomic representations. On the level of semantics, the semantic content or the meaning of the compound representations should depend on the semantic contents of its constituents. A representational system is linguistically structured if it fulfills these two requirements.

The language of thought hypothesis states that the same is true for thinking in general. This would mean that thought is composed of certain atomic representational constituents that can be combined as described above. Apart from this abstract characterization, no further concrete claims are made about how human thought is implemented by the brain or which other similarities to natural language it has. The language of thought hypothesis was first introduced by Jerry Fodor. He argues in favor of this claim by holding that it constitutes the best explanation of the characteristic features of thinking. One of these features is &quot;productivity&quot;: a system of representations is &quot;productive&quot; if it can generate an infinite number of unique representations based on a low number of atomic representations. This applies to thought since human beings are capable of entertaining an infinite number of distinct thoughts even though their mental capacities are quite limited. Other characteristic features of thinking include &quot;systematicity&quot; and &quot;inferential coherence&quot;. Fodor argues that the language of thought hypothesis is true as it explains how thought can have these features and because there is no good alternative explanation. Some arguments against the language of thought hypothesis are based on neural networks, which are able to produce intelligent behavior without depending on representational systems. Other objections focus on the idea that some mental representations happen non-linguistically, for example, in the form of maps or images.

Computationalists have been especially interested in the language of thought hypothesis since it provides ways to close the gap between thought in the human brain and computational processes implemented by computers. The reason for this is that processes over representations that respect syntax and semantics, like inferences according to the modus ponens, can be implemented by physical systems using causal relations. The same linguistic systems may be implemented through different material systems, like brains or computers. In this way, computers can &quot;think&quot;.

===Associationism===
An important view in the empiricist tradition has been associationism, the view that thinking consists in the succession of ideas or images. This succession is seen as being governed by laws of association, which determine how the train of thought unfolds. These laws are different from logical relations between the contents of thoughts, which are found in the case of drawing inferences by moving from the thought of the premises to the thought of the conclusion. Various laws of association have been suggested. According to the laws of similarity and contrast, ideas tend to evoke other ideas that are either very similar to them or their opposite. The law of contiguity, on the other hand, states that if two ideas were frequently experienced together, then the experience of one tends to cause the experience of the other. In this sense, the history of an organism&#x27;s experience determines which thoughts the organism has and how these thoughts unfold. But such an association does not guarantee that the connection is meaningful or rational. For example, because of the association between the terms &quot;cold&quot; and &quot;Idaho&quot;, the thought &quot;this coffee shop is cold&quot; might lead to the thought &quot;Russia should annex Idaho&quot;.

One form of associationism is imagism. It states that thinking involves entertaining a sequence of images where earlier images conjure up later images based on the laws of association. One problem with this view is that we can think about things that we cannot imagine. This is especially relevant when the thought involves very complex objects or infinities, which is common, for example, in mathematical thought. One criticism directed at associationism in general is that its claim is too far-reaching. There is wide agreement that associative processes as studied by associationists play some role in how thought unfolds. But the claim that this mechanism is sufficient to understand all thought or all mental processes is usually not accepted.

===Behaviorism===
According to behaviorism, thinking consists in behavioral dispositions to engage in certain publicly observable behavior as a reaction to particular external stimuli. On this view, having a particular thought is the same as having a disposition to behave in a certain way. This view is often motivated by empirical considerations: it is very difficult to study thinking as a private mental process but it is much easier to study how organisms react to a certain situation with a given behavior. In this sense, the capacity to solve problems not through existing habits but through creative new approaches is particularly relevant. The term &quot;behaviorism&quot; is also sometimes used in a slightly different sense when applied to thinking to refer to a specific form of inner speech theory. This view focuses on the idea that the relevant inner speech is a derivative form of regular outward speech. This sense overlaps with how behaviorism is understood more commonly in philosophy of mind since these inner speech acts are not observed by the researcher but merely inferred from the subject&#x27;s intelligent behavior. This remains true to the general behaviorist principle that behavioral evidence is required for any psychological hypothesis.

One problem for behaviorism is that the same entity often behaves differently despite being in the same situation as before. This problem consists in the fact that individual thoughts or mental states usually do not correspond to one particular behavior. So thinking that the pie is tasty does not automatically lead to eating the pie, since various other mental states may still inhibit this behavior, for example, the belief that it would be impolite to do so or that the pie is poisoned.

===Computationalism===
Computationalist theories of thinking, often found in the cognitive sciences, understand thinking as a form of information processing. These views developed with the rise of computers in the second part of the 20th century, when various theorists saw thinking in analogy to computer operations. On such views, the information may be encoded differently in the brain, but in principle, the same operations take place there as well, corresponding to the storage, transmission, and processing of information. But while this analogy has some intuitive attraction, theorists have struggled to give a more explicit explanation of what computation is. A further problem consists in explaining the sense in which thinking is a form of computing. The traditionally dominant view defines computation in terms of Turing machines, though contemporary accounts often focus on neural networks for their analogies. A Turing machine is capable of executing any algorithm based on a few very basic principles, such as reading a symbol from a cell, writing a symbol to a cell, and executing instructions based on the symbols read. This way it is possible to perform deductive reasoning following the inference rules of formal logic as well as simulating many other functions of the mind, such as language processing, decision making, and motor control. But computationalism does not only claim that thinking is in some sense similar to computation. Instead, it is claimed that thinking just is a form of computation or that the mind is a Turing machine.

Computationalist theories of thought are sometimes divided into functionalist and representationalist approaches. Functionalist approaches define mental states through their causal roles but allow both external and internal events in their causal network. Thought may be seen as a form of program that can be executed in the same way by many different systems, including humans, animals, and even robots. According to one such view, whether something is a thought only depends on its role &quot;in producing further internal states and verbal outputs&quot;. Representationalism, on the other hand, focuses on the representational features of mental states and defines thoughts as sequences of intentional mental states. In this sense, computationalism is often combined with the language of thought hypothesis by interpreting these sequences as symbols whose order is governed by syntactic rules.

Various arguments have been raised against computationalism. In one sense, it seems trivial since almost any physical system can be described as executing computations and therefore as thinking. For example, it has been argued that the molecular movements in a regular wall can be understood as computing an algorithm since they are &quot;isomorphic to the formal structure of the program&quot; in question under the right interpretation. This would lead to the implausible conclusion that the wall is thinking. Another objection focuses on the idea that computationalism captures only some aspects of thought but is unable to account for other crucial aspects of human cognition.

==Types of thinking==
A great variety of types of thinking are discussed in the academic literature. A common approach divides them into those forms that aim at the creation of theoretical knowledge and those that aim at producing actions or correct decisions, but there is no universally accepted taxonomy summarizing all these types.

===Entertaining, judging, and reasoning===
Thinking is often identified with the act of judging. A judgment is a mental operation in which a proposition is evoked and then either affirmed or denied. It involves deciding what to believe and aims at determining whether the judged proposition is true or false. Various theories of judgment have been proposed. The traditionally dominant approach is the combination theory. It states that judgments consist in the combination of concepts. On this view, to judge that &quot;all men are mortal&quot; is to combine the concepts &quot;man&quot; and &quot;mortal&quot;. The same concepts can be combined in different ways, corresponding to different forms of judgment, for example, as &quot;some men are mortal&quot; or &quot;no man is mortal&quot;.

Other theories of judgment focus more on the relation between the judged proposition and reality. According to Franz Brentano, a judgment is either a belief or a disbelief in the existence of some entity. In this sense, there are only two fundamental forms of judgment: &quot;A exists&quot; and &quot;A does not exist&quot;. When applied to the sentence &quot;all men are mortal&quot;, the entity in question is &quot;immortal men&quot;, of whom it is said that they do not exist. Important for Brentano is the distinction between the mere representation of the content of the judgment and the affirmation or the denial of the content. The mere representation of a proposition is often referred to as &quot;entertaining a proposition&quot;. This is the case, for example, when one considers a proposition but has not yet made up one&#x27;s mind about whether it is true or false. The term &quot;thinking&quot; can refer both to judging and to mere entertaining. This difference is often explicit in the way the thought is expressed: &quot;thinking that&quot; usually involves a judgment whereas &quot;thinking about&quot; refers to the neutral representation of a proposition without an accompanying belief. In this case, the proposition is merely &quot;entertained&quot; but not yet &quot;judged&quot;. Some forms of thinking may involve the representation of objects without any propositions, as when someone is thinking about their grandmother.

Reasoning is one of the most paradigmatic forms of thinking. It is the process of drawing conclusions from premises or evidence. Types of reasoning can be divided into deductive and non-deductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning is governed by certain rules of inference, which guarantee the truth of the conclusion if the premises are true. For example, given the premises &quot;all men are mortal&quot; and &quot;Socrates is a man&quot;, it follows deductively that &quot;Socrates is mortal&quot;. Non-deductive reasoning, also referred to as defeasible reasoning or non-monotonic reasoning, is still rationally compelling but the truth of the conclusion is not ensured by the truth of the premises. Induction is one form of non-deductive reasoning, for example, when one concludes that &quot;the sun will rise tomorrow&quot; based on one&#x27;s experiences of all the previous days. Other forms of non-deductive reasoning include the inference to the best explanation and analogical reasoning.

Fallacies are faulty forms of thinking that go against the norms of correct reasoning. Formal fallacies concern faulty inferences found in deductive reasoning. Denying the antecedent is one type of formal fallacy, for example, &quot;If Othello is a bachelor, then he is male. Othello is not a bachelor. Therefore, Othello is not male&quot;. Informal fallacies, on the other hand, apply to all types of reasoning. The source of their flaw is to be found in the &quot;content&quot; or the &quot;context&quot; of the argument. This is often caused by ambiguous or vague expressions in natural language, as in &quot;Feathers are light. What is light cannot be dark. Therefore, feathers cannot be dark&quot;. An important aspect of fallacies is that they seem to be rationally compelling on the first look and thereby seduce people into accepting and committing them. Whether an act of reasoning constitutes a fallacy does not depend on whether the premises are true or false but on their relation to the conclusion and, in some cases, on the context.

===Concept formation===
Concepts are general notions that constitute the fundamental building blocks of thought. They are rules that govern how objects are sorted into different classes. A person can only think about a proposition if they possess the concepts involved in this proposition. For example, the proposition &quot;wombats are animals&quot; involves the concepts &quot;wombat&quot; and &quot;animal&quot;. Someone who does not possess the concept &quot;wombat&quot; may still be able to read the sentence but cannot entertain the corresponding proposition. Concept formation is a form of thinking in which new concepts are acquired. It involves becoming familiar with the characteristic features shared by all instances of the corresponding type of entity and developing the ability to identify positive and negative cases. This process usually corresponds to learning the meaning of the word associated with the type in question. There are various theories concerning how concepts and concept possession are to be understood. The use of metaphor may aid in the processes of concept formation.

According to one popular view, concepts are to be understood in terms of abilities. On this view, two central aspects characterize concept possession: the ability to discriminate between positive and negative cases and the ability to draw inferences from this concept to related concepts. Concept formation corresponds to acquiring these abilities. It has been suggested that animals are also able to learn concepts to some extent, due to their ability to discriminate between different types of situations and to adjust their behavior accordingly.

===Problem solving===
In the case of problem solving, thinking aims at reaching a predefined goal by overcoming certain obstacles. This process often involves two different forms of thinking. On the one hand, &quot;divergent thinking&quot; aims at coming up with as many alternative solutions as possible. On the other hand, &quot;convergent thinking&quot; tries to narrow down the range of alternatives to the most promising candidates. Some researchers identify various steps in the process of problem solving. These steps include recognizing the problem, trying to understand its nature, identifying general criteria the solution should meet, deciding how these criteria should be prioritized, monitoring the progress, and evaluating the results.

An important distinction concerns the type of problem that is faced. For &quot;well-structured problems&quot;, it is easy to determine which steps need to be taken to solve them, but executing these steps may still be difficult. For ill-structured problems, on the other hand, it is not clear what steps need to be taken, i.e. there is no clear formula that would lead to success if followed correctly. In this case, the solution may sometimes come in a flash of insight in which the problem is suddenly seen in a new light. Another way to categorize different forms of problem solving is by distinguishing between algorithms and heuristics. An algorithm is a formal procedure in which each step is clearly defined. It guarantees success if applied correctly. The long multiplication usually taught in school is an example of an algorithm for solving the problem of multiplying big numbers. Heuristics, on the other hand, are informal procedures. They are rough rules-of-thumb that tend to bring the thinker closer to the solution but success is not guaranteed in every case even if followed correctly. Examples of heuristics are working forward and working backward. These approaches involve planning one step at a time, either starting at the beginning and moving forward or starting at the end and moving backward. So when planning a trip, one could plan the different stages of the trip from origin to destiny in the chronological order of how the trip will be realized, or in the reverse order.

Obstacles to problem solving can arise from the thinker&#x27;s failure to take certain possibilities into account by fixating on one specific course of action. There are important differences between how novices and experts solve problems. For example, experts tend to allocate more time for conceptualizing the problem and work with more complex representations whereas novices tend to devote more time to executing putative solutions.

===Deliberation and decision===
Deliberation is an important form of practical thinking. It aims at formulating possible courses of action and assessing their value by considering the reasons for and against them. This involves foresight to anticipate what might happen. Based on this foresight, different courses of action can be formulated in order to influence what will happen. Decisions are an important part of deliberation. They are about comparing alternative courses of action and choosing the most favorable one. Decision theory is a formal model of how ideal rational agents would make decisions. It is based on the idea that they should always choose the alternative with the highest expected value. Each alternative can lead to various possible outcomes, each of which has a different value. The expected value of an alternative consists in the sum of the values of each outcome associated with it multiplied by the probability that this outcome occurs. According to decision theory, a decision is rational if the agent chooses the alternative associated with the highest expected value, as assessed from the agent&#x27;s own perspective.

Various theorists emphasize the practical nature of thought, i.e. that thinking is usually guided by some kind of task it aims to solve. In this sense, thinking has been compared to trial-and-error seen in animal behavior when faced with a new problem. On this view, the important difference is that this process happens inwardly as a form of simulation. This process is often much more efficient since once the solution is found in thought, only the behavior corresponding to the found solution has to be outwardly carried out and not all the others.

===Episodic memory and imagination===
When thinking is understood in a wide sense, it includes both episodic memory and imagination. In episodic memory, events one experienced in the past are relived. It is a form of mental time travel in which the past experience is re-experienced. But this does not constitute an exact copy of the original experience since the episodic memory involves additional aspects and information not present in the original experience. This includes both a feeling of familiarity and chronological information about the past event in relation to the present. Memory aims at representing how things actually were in the past, in contrast to imagination, which presents objects without aiming to show how things actually are or were. Because of this missing link to actuality, more freedom is involved in most forms of imagination: its contents can be freely varied, changed, and recombined to create new arrangements never experienced before. Episodic memory and imagination have in common with other forms of thought that they can arise internally without any stimulation of the sensory organs. But they are still closer to sensation than more abstract forms of thought since they present sensory contents that could, at least in principle, also be perceived.

===Unconscious thought===
Conscious thought is the paradigmatic form of thinking and is often the focus of the corresponding research. But it has been argued that some forms of thought also happen on the unconscious level. Unconscious thought is thought that happens in the background without being experienced. It is therefore not observed directly. Instead, its existence is usually inferred by other means. For example, when someone is faced with an important decision or a difficult problem, they may not be able to solve it straight away. But then, at a later time, the solution may suddenly flash before them even though no conscious steps of thinking were taken towards this solution in the meantime. In such cases, the cognitive labor needed to arrive at a solution is often explained in terms of unconscious thoughts. The central idea is that a cognitive transition happened and we need to posit unconscious thoughts to be able to explain how it happened.

It has been argued that conscious and unconscious thoughts differ not just concerning their relation to experience but also concerning their capacities. According to unconscious thought theorists, for example, conscious thought excels at simple problems with few variables but is outperformed by unconscious thought when complex problems with many variables are involved. This is sometimes explained through the claim that the number of items one can consciously think about at the same time is rather limited whereas unconscious thought lacks such limitations. But other researchers have rejected the claim that unconscious thought is often superior to conscious thought. Other suggestions for the difference between the two forms of thinking include that conscious thought tends to follow formal logical laws while unconscious thought relies more on associative processing and that only conscious thinking is conceptually articulated and happens through the medium of language.

==In various disciplines==
===Phenomenology===
Phenomenology is the science of the structure and contents of experience. The term &quot;cognitive phenomenology&quot; refers to the experiential character of thinking or what it feels like to think. Some theorists claim that there is no distinctive cognitive phenomenology. On such a view, the experience of thinking is just one form of sensory experience. According to one version, thinking just involves hearing a voice internally. According to another, there is no experience of thinking apart from the indirect effects thinking has on sensory experience. A weaker version of such an approach allows that thinking may have a distinct phenomenology but contends that thinking still depends on sensory experience because it cannot occur on its own. On this view, sensory contents constitute the foundation from which thinking may arise.

An often-cited thought experiment in favor of the existence of a distinctive cognitive phenomenology involves two persons listening to a radio broadcast in French, one who understands French and the other who does not. The idea behind this example is that both listeners hear the same sounds and therefore have the same non-cognitive experience. In order to explain the difference, a distinctive cognitive phenomenology has to be posited: only the experience of the first person has this additional cognitive character since it is accompanied by a thought that corresponds to the meaning of what is said. Other arguments for the experience of thinking focus on the direct introspective access to thinking or on the thinker&#x27;s knowledge of their own thoughts.

Phenomenologists are also concerned with the characteristic features of the experience of thinking. Making a judgment is one of the prototypical forms of cognitive phenomenology. It involves epistemic agency, in which a proposition is entertained, evidence for and against it is considered, and, based on this reasoning, the proposition is either affirmed or rejected. It is sometimes argued that the experience of truth is central to thinking, i.e. that thinking aims at representing how the world is. It shares this feature with perception but differs from it in the way how it represents the world: without the use of sensory contents.

One of the characteristic features often ascribed to thinking and judging is that they are predicative experiences, in contrast to the pre-predicative experience found in immediate perception. On such a view, various aspects of perceptual experience resemble judgments without being judgments in the strict sense. For example, the perceptual experience of the front of a house brings with it various expectations about aspects of the house not directly seen, like the size and shape of its other sides. This process is sometimes referred to as apperception. These expectations resemble judgments and can be wrong. This would be the case when it turns out upon walking around the &quot;house&quot; that it is no house at all but only a front facade of a house with nothing behind it. In this case, the perceptual expectations are frustrated and the perceiver is surprised. There is disagreement as to whether these pre-predicative aspects of regular perception should be understood as a form of cognitive phenomenology involving thinking. This issue is also important for understanding the relation between thought and language. The reason for this is that the pre-predicative expectations do not depend on language, which is sometimes taken as an example for non-linguistic thought. Various theorists have argued that pre-predicative experience is more basic or fundamental since predicative experience is in some sense built on top of it and therefore depends on it.

Another way how phenomenologists have tried to distinguish the experience of thinking from other types of experiences is in relation to &quot;empty intentions&quot; in contrast to &quot;intuitive intentions&quot;. In this context, &quot;intention&quot; means that some kind of object is experienced. In &quot;intuitive intentions&quot;, the object is presented through sensory contents. &quot;Empty intentions&quot;, on the other hand, present their object in a more abstract manner without the help of sensory contents. So when perceiving a sunset, it is presented through sensory contents. The same sunset can also be presented non-intuitively when merely thinking about it without the help of sensory contents. In these cases, the same properties are ascribed to objects. The difference between these modes of presentation concerns not what properties are ascribed to the presented object but how the object is presented. Because of this commonality, it is possible for representations belonging to different modes to overlap or to diverge. For example, when searching one&#x27;s glasses one may think to oneself that one left them on the kitchen table. This empty intention of the glasses lying on the kitchen table are then intuitively fulfilled when one sees them lying there upon arriving in the kitchen. This way, a perception can confirm or refute a thought depending on whether the empty intuitions are later fulfilled or not.

===Metaphysics===
The mind–body problem concerns the explanation of the relationship that exists between minds, or mental processes, and bodily states or processes. The main aim of philosophers working in this area is to determine the nature of the mind and mental states/processes, and how—or even if—minds are affected by and can affect the body.

Human perceptual experiences depend on stimuli which arrive at one&#x27;s various sensory organs from the external world and these stimuli cause changes in one&#x27;s mental state, ultimately causing one to feel a sensation, which may be pleasant or unpleasant. Someone&#x27;s desire for a slice of pizza, for example, will tend to cause that person to move his or her body in a specific manner and in a specific direction to obtain what he or she wants. The question, then, is how it can be possible for conscious experiences to arise out of a lump of gray matter endowed with nothing but electrochemical properties. A related problem is to explain how someone&#x27;s propositional attitudes (e.g. beliefs and desires) can cause that individual&#x27;s neurons to fire and his muscles to contract in exactly the correct manner. These comprise some of the puzzles that have confronted epistemologists and philosophers of mind from at least the time of René Descartes.

The above reflects a classical, functional description of how we work as cognitive, thinking systems. However the apparently irresolvable mind–body problem is said to be overcome, and bypassed, by the embodied cognition approach, with its roots in the work of Heidegger, Piaget, Vygotsky, Merleau-Ponty and the pragmatist John Dewey.

This approach states that the classical approach of separating the mind and analysing its processes is misguided: instead, we should see that the mind, actions of an embodied agent, and the environment it perceives and envisions, are all parts of a whole which determine each other. Therefore, functional analysis of the mind alone will always leave us with the mind–body problem which cannot be solved.

===Psychology===

Psychologists have concentrated on thinking as an intellectual exertion aimed at finding an answer to a question or the solution of a practical problem. Cognitive psychology is a branch of psychology that investigates internal mental processes such as problem solving, memory, and language; all of which are used in thinking. The school of thought arising from this approach is known as cognitivism, which is interested in how people mentally represent information processing. It had its foundations in the Gestalt psychology of Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang Köhler, and Kurt Koffka, and in the work of Jean Piaget, who provided a theory of stages/phases that describes children&#x27;s cognitive development.

Cognitive psychologists use psychophysical and experimental approaches to understand, diagnose, and solve problems, concerning themselves with the mental processes which mediate between stimulus and response. They study various aspects of thinking, including the psychology of reasoning, and how people make decisions and choices, solve problems, as well as engage in creative discovery and imaginative thought. Cognitive theory contends that solutions to problems either take the form of algorithms: rules that are not necessarily understood but promise a solution, or of heuristics: rules that are understood but that do not always guarantee solutions. Cognitive science differs from cognitive psychology in that algorithms that are intended to simulate human behavior are implemented or implementable on a computer. In other instances, solutions may be found through insight, a sudden awareness of relationships.

In developmental psychology, Jean Piaget was a pioneer in the study of the development of thought from birth to maturity. In his theory of cognitive development, thought is based on actions on the environment. That is, Piaget suggests that the environment is understood through assimilations of objects in the available schemes of action and these accommodate to the objects to the extent that the available schemes fall short of the demands. As a result of this interplay between assimilation and accommodation, thought develops through a sequence of stages that differ qualitatively from each other in mode of representation and complexity of inference and understanding. That is, thought evolves from being based on perceptions and actions at the sensorimotor stage in the first two years of life to internal representations in early childhood. Subsequently, representations are gradually organized into logical structures which first operate on the concrete properties of the reality, in the stage of concrete operations, and then operate on abstract principles that organize concrete properties, in the stage of formal operations. In recent years, the Piagetian conception of thought was integrated with information processing conceptions. Thus, thought is considered as the result of mechanisms that are responsible for the representation and processing of information. In this conception, speed of processing, cognitive control, and working memory are the main functions underlying thought. In the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development, the development of thought is considered to come from increasing speed of processing, enhanced cognitive control, and increasing working memory.

Positive psychology emphasizes the positive aspects of human psychology as equally important as the focus on mood disorders and other negative symptoms. In &quot;Character Strengths and Virtues&quot;, Peterson and Seligman list a series of positive characteristics. One person is not expected to have every strength, nor are they meant to fully capsulate that characteristic entirely. The list encourages positive thought that builds on a person&#x27;s strengths, rather than how to &quot;fix&quot; their &quot;symptoms&quot;.

===Psychoanalysis===

The &quot;id&quot;, &quot;ego&quot; and &quot;super-ego&quot; are the three parts of the &quot;psychic apparatus&quot; defined in Sigmund Freud&#x27;s structural model of the psyche; they are the three theoretical constructs in terms of whose activity and interaction mental life is described. According to this model, the uncoordinated instinctual trends are encompassed by the &quot;id&quot;, the organized realistic part of the psyche is the &quot;ego&quot;, and the critical, moralizing function is the &quot;super-ego&quot;.

For psychoanalysis, the unconscious does not include all that is not conscious, rather only what is actively repressed from conscious thought or what the person is averse to knowing consciously. In a sense this view places the self in relationship to their unconscious as an adversary, warring with itself to keep what is unconscious hidden. If a person feels pain, all he can think of is alleviating the pain. Any of his desires, to get rid of pain or enjoy something, command the mind what to do. For Freud, the unconscious was a repository for socially unacceptable ideas, wishes or desires, traumatic memories, and painful emotions put out of mind by the mechanism of psychological repression. However, the contents did not necessarily have to be solely negative. In the psychoanalytic view, the unconscious is a force that can only be recognized by its effects—it expresses itself in the symptom.

The collective unconscious, sometimes known as collective subconscious, is a term of analytical psychology, coined by Carl Jung. It is a part of the unconscious mind, shared by a society, a people, or all humanity, in an interconnected system that is the product of all common experiences and contains such concepts as science, religion, and morality. While Freud did not distinguish between &quot;individual psychology&quot; and &quot;collective psychology&quot;, Jung distinguished the collective unconscious from the personal subconscious particular to each human being. The collective unconscious is also known as &quot;a reservoir of the experiences of our species&quot;.

In the &quot;Definitions&quot; chapter of Jung&#x27;s work &quot;Psychological Types&quot;, under the definition of &quot;collective&quot; Jung references &quot;representations collectives&quot;, a term coined by Lucien Lévy-Bruhl in his 1910 book &quot;How Natives Think&quot;. Jung says this is what he describes as the collective unconscious. Freud, on the other hand, did not accept the idea of a collective unconscious.

==Related concepts and theories==
===Laws of thought===
Traditionally, the term &quot;laws of thought&quot; refers to three fundamental laws of logic: the law of contradiction, the law of excluded middle, and the principle of identity. These laws by themselves are not sufficient as axioms of logic but they can be seen as important precursors to the modern axiomatization of logic. The &quot;law of contradiction&quot; states that for any proposition, it is impossible that both it and its negation are true: formula_1. According to the &quot;law of excluded middle&quot;, for any proposition, either it or its opposite is true: formula_2. The principle of identity asserts that any object is identical to itself: formula_3. There are different conceptions of how the laws of thought are to be understood. The interpretations most relevant to thinking are to understand them as prescriptive laws of how one should think or as formal laws of propositions that are true only because of their form and independent of their content or context. Metaphysical interpretations, on the other hand, see them as expressing the nature of &quot;being as such&quot;.

While there is a very wide acceptance of these three laws among logicians, they are not universally accepted. Aristotle, for example, held that there are some cases in which the law of excluded middle is false. This concerns primarily uncertain future events. On his view, it is currently &quot;not ... either true or false that there will be a naval battle tomorrow&quot;. Modern intuitionist logic also rejects the law of excluded middle. This rejection is based on the idea that mathematical truth depends on verification through a proof. The law fails for cases where no such proof is possible, which exist in every sufficiently strong formal system, according to Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorems. Dialetheists, on the other hand, reject the law of contradiction by holding that some propositions are both true and false. One motivation of this position is to avoid certain paradoxes in classical logic and set theory, like the liar&#x27;s paradox and Russell&#x27;s paradox. One of its problems is to find a formulation that circumvents the principle of explosion, i.e. that anything follows from a contradiction.

Some formulations of the laws of thought include a fourth law: the principle of sufficient reason. It states that everything has a sufficient reason, ground, or cause. It is closely connected to the idea that everything is intelligible or can be explained in reference to its sufficient reason. According to this idea, there should always be a full explanation, at least in principle, to questions like why the sky is blue or why World War II happened. One problem for including this principle among the laws of thought is that it is a metaphysical principle, unlike the other three laws, which pertain primarily to logic.

===Counterfactual thinking===
Counterfactual thinking involves mental representations of non-actual situations and events, i.e. of what is &quot;contrary to the facts&quot;. It is usually &quot;conditional&quot;: it aims at assessing what would be the case if a certain condition had obtained. In this sense, it tries to answer &quot;What if&quot;-questions. For example, thinking after an accident that one would be dead if one had not used the seatbelt is a form of counterfactual thinking: it assumes, contrary to the facts, that one had not used the seatbelt and tries to assess the result of this state of affairs. In this sense, counterfactual thinking is normally counterfactual only to a small degree since just a few facts are changed, like concerning the seatbelt, while most other facts are kept in place, like that one was driving, one&#x27;s gender, the laws of physics, etc. When understood in the widest sense, there are forms of counterfactual thinking that do not involve anything contrary to the facts at all. This is the case, for example, when one tries to anticipate what might happen in the future if an uncertain event occurs and this event actually occurs later and brings with it the anticipated consequences. In this wider sense, the term &quot;subjunctive conditional&quot; is sometimes used instead of &quot;counterfactual conditional&quot;. But the paradigmatic cases of counterfactual thinking involve alternatives to past events.

Counterfactual thinking plays an important role since we evaluate the world around us not only by what actually happened but also by what could have happened. Humans have a greater tendency to engage in counterfactual thinking after something bad happened because of some kind of action the agent performed. In this sense, many regrets are associated with counterfactual thinking in which the agent contemplates how a better outcome could have been obtained if only they had acted differently. These cases are known as upward counterfactuals, in contrast to downward counterfactuals, in which the counterfactual scenario is worse than actuality. Upward counterfactual thinking is usually experienced as unpleasant, since it presents the actual circumstances in a bad light. This contrasts with the positive emotions associated with downward counterfactual thinking. But both forms are important since it is possible to learn from them and to adjust one&#x27;s behavior accordingly to get better results in the future.

===Thought experiments===
Thought experiments involve thinking about imaginary situations, often with the aim of investigating the possible consequences of a change to the actual sequence of events. It is a controversial issue to what extent thought experiments should be understood as actual experiments. They are experiments in the sense that a certain situation is set up and one tries to learn from this situation by understanding what follows from it. They differ from regular experiments in that imagination is used to set up the situation and counterfactual reasoning is employed to evaluate what follows from it, instead of setting it up physically and observing the consequences through perception. Counterfactual thinking, therefore, plays a central role in thought experiments.

The Chinese room argument is a famous thought experiment proposed by John Searle. It involves a person sitting inside a closed-off room, tasked with responding to messages written in Chinese. This person does not know Chinese but has a giant rule book that specifies exactly how to reply to any possible message, similar to how a computer would react to messages. The core idea of this thought experiment is that neither the person nor the computer understands Chinese. This way, Searle aims to show that computers lack a mind capable of deeper forms of understanding despite acting intelligently.

Thought experiments are employed for various purposes, for example, for entertainment, education, or as arguments for or against theories. Most discussions focus on their use as arguments. This use is found in fields like philosophy, the natural sciences, and history. It is controversial since there is a lot of disagreement concerning the epistemic status of thought experiments, i.e. how reliable they are as evidence supporting or refuting a theory. Central to the rejection of this usage is the fact that they pretend to be a source of knowledge without the need to leave one&#x27;s armchair in search of any new empirical data. Defenders of thought experiments usually contend that the intuitions underlying and guiding the thought experiments are, at least in some cases, reliable. But thought experiments can also fail if they are not properly supported by intuitions or if they go beyond what the intuitions support. In the latter sense, sometimes counter thought experiments are proposed that modify the original scenario in slight ways in order to show that initial intuitions cannot survive this change. Various taxonomies of thought experiments have been suggested. They can be distinguished, for example, by whether they are successful or not, by the discipline that uses them, by their role in a theory, or by whether they accept or modify the actual laws of physics.

===Critical thinking===
Critical thinking is a form of thinking that is reasonable, reflective, and focused on determining what to believe or how to act. It holds itself to various standards, like clarity and rationality. In this sense, it involves not just cognitive processes trying to solve the issue at hand but at the same time meta-cognitive processes ensuring that it lives up to its own standards. This includes assessing both that the reasoning itself is sound and that the evidence it rests on is reliable. This means that logic plays an important role in critical thinking. It concerns not just formal logic, but also informal logic, specifically to avoid various informal fallacies due to vague or ambiguous expressions in natural language. No generally accepted standard definition of &quot;critical thinking&quot; exists but there is significant overlap between the proposed definitions in their characterization of critical thinking as careful and goal-directed. According to some versions, only the thinker&#x27;s own observations and experiments are accepted as evidence in critical thinking. Some restrict it to the formation of judgments but exclude action as its goal.

A concrete everyday example of critical thinking, due to John Dewey, involves observing foam bubbles moving in a direction that is contrary to one&#x27;s initial expectations. The critical thinker tries to come up with various possible explanations of this behavior and then slightly modifies the original situation in order to determine which one is the right explanation. But not all forms of cognitively valuable processes involve critical thinking. Arriving at the correct solution to a problem by blindly following the steps of an algorithm does not qualify as critical thinking. The same is true if the solution is presented to the thinker in a sudden flash of insight and accepted straight away.

Critical thinking plays an important role in education: fostering the student&#x27;s ability to think critically is often seen as an important educational goal. In this sense, it is important to convey not just a set of true beliefs to the student but also the ability to draw one&#x27;s own conclusions and to question pre-existing beliefs. The abilities and dispositions learned this way may profit not just the individual but also society at large. Critics of the emphasis on critical thinking in education have argued that there is no universal form of correct thinking. Instead, they contend that different subject matters rely on different standards and education should focus on imparting these subject-specific skills instead of trying to teach universal methods of thinking. Other objections are based on the idea that critical thinking and the attitude underlying it involve various unjustified biases, like egocentrism, distanced objectivity, indifference, and an overemphasis of the theoretical in contrast to the practical.

===Positive thinking===
Positive thinking is an important topic in positive psychology. It involves focusing one&#x27;s attention on the positive aspects of one&#x27;s situation and thereby withdrawing one&#x27;s attention from its negative sides. This is usually seen as a global outlook that applies especially to thinking but includes other mental processes, like feeling, as well. In this sense, it is closely related to optimism. It includes expecting positive things to happen in the future. This positive outlook makes it more likely for people to seek to attain new goals. It also increases the probability of continuing to strive towards pre-existing goals that seem difficult to reach instead of just giving up.

The effects of positive thinking are not yet thoroughly researched, but some studies suggest that there is a correlation between positive thinking and well-being. For example, students and pregnant women with a positive outlook tend to be better at dealing with stressful situations. This is sometimes explained by pointing out that stress is not inherent in stressful situations but depends on the agent&#x27;s interpretation of the situation. Reduced stress may therefore be found in positive thinkers because they tend to see such situations in a more positive light. But the effects also include the practical domain in that positive thinkers tend to employ healthier coping strategies when faced with difficult situations. This effects, for example, the time needed to fully recover from surgeries and the tendency to resume physical exercise afterward.

But it has been argued that whether positive thinking actually leads to positive outcomes depends on various other factors. Without these factors, it may lead to negative results. For example, the tendency of optimists to keep striving in difficult situations can backfire if the course of events is outside the agent&#x27;s control. Another danger associated with positive thinking is that it may remain only on the level of unrealistic fantasies and thereby fail to make a positive practical contribution to the agent&#x27;s life. Pessimism, on the other hand, may have positive effects since it can mitigate disappointments by anticipating failures.

Positive thinking is a recurrent topic in the self-help literature. Here, often the claim is made that one can significantly improve one&#x27;s life by trying to think positively, even if this means fostering beliefs that are contrary to evidence. Such claims and the effectiveness of the suggested methods are controversial and have been criticized due to their lack of scientific evidence. In the New Thought movement, positive thinking figures in the law of attraction, the pseudoscientific claim that positive thoughts can directly influence the external world by attracting positive outcomes.

==See also==

* Animal cognition
* Freethought
* Outline of human intelligence – topic tree presenting the traits, capacities, models, and research fields of human intelligence, and more
* Outline of thought – topic tree that identifies many types of thoughts, types of thinking, aspects of thought, related fields, and more
* Rethinking

==References==
==Further reading==

* Bayne, Tim (21 September 2013), &quot;Thoughts&quot;, &quot;New Scientist&quot;. 7-page feature article on the topic.
* Fields, R. Douglas, &quot;The Brain Learns in Unexpected Ways: Neuroscientists have discovered a set of unfamiliar cellular mechanisms for making fresh memories&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot;, vol. 322, no. 3 (March 2020), pp. 74–79. &quot;Myelin, long considered inert insulation on axons, is now seen as making a contribution to learning by controlling the speed at which signals travel along neural wiring.&quot; (p. 79.)
* Rajvanshi, Anil K. (2010), &quot;Nature of Human Thought&quot;, .
* Simon, Herbert, &quot;Models of Thought&quot;, Vol I, 1979, ; Vol II, 1989, , Yale University Press.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="14" end="26" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="38" end="45" title="Thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="50" end="58" title="Thought" label="thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="68" end="77" title="cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="121" end="140" title="sensory stimulation" label="sensory stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621536" start="176" end="183" title="judgment" label="judging"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="185" end="194" title="reasoning" label="reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="215" end="230" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q358652" start="236" end="248" title="deliberation" label="deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="298" end="302" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="304" end="310" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34516" start="315" end="326" title="imagination" label="imagination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="410" end="424" title="Sense#Sensory organs" label="sensory organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817455" start="490" end="502" title="mental event" label="mental event"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="905" end="915" title="Platonists" label="Platonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="1140" end="1147" title="Perception" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="1174" end="1189" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="1273" end="1280" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044174" start="1412" end="1424" title="Intelligibility (philosophy)" label="intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q848969" start="1458" end="1471" title="Conceptualism" label="Conceptualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436149" start="1667" end="1679" title="Internal monologue" label="inner speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q279161" start="1844" end="1874" title="language of thought hypothesis" label="language of thought hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144192" start="2172" end="2187" title="Associationists" label="Associationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888844" start="2332" end="2348" title="train of thought" label="train of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="2364" end="2376" title="Behaviorists" label="Behaviorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771842" start="2522" end="2529" title="Stimulus (psychology)" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573697" start="2537" end="2553" title="Computationalism" label="Computationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="2839" end="2850" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="2903" end="2912" title="Reasoning" label="Reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491893" start="3125" end="3142" title="concept formation" label="concept formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q358652" start="3277" end="3289" title="Deliberation" label="Deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="3520" end="3535" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34516" start="3552" end="3563" title="imagination" label="imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="3731" end="3750" title="Unconscious thought" label="Unconscious thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="3856" end="3885" title="Problem solving" label="difficult problems are solved"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="3997" end="4010" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="Phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="4235" end="4246" title="Metaphysics" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="4312" end="4316" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="4321" end="4327" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="4424" end="4440" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="4448" end="4468" title="Cognitive psychology" label="Cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="4545" end="4569" title="Developmental psychology" label="Developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="4717" end="4731" title="Psychoanalysis" label="Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="4765" end="4776" title="Unconscious mind" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="4837" end="4848" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="4850" end="4862" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="4864" end="4887" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="4889" end="4896" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4902" end="4911" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187945" start="5003" end="5017" title="law of thought" label="law of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783253" start="5158" end="5181" title="Counterfactual thinking" label="Counterfactual thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="5352" end="5371" title="Thought experiments" label="Thought experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="5484" end="5501" title="Critical thinking" label="Critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="5766" end="5774" title="optimism" label="optimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="6758" end="6777" title="Descartes" label="Cartesian tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="6837" end="6854" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q205555" start="7066" end="7073" title="feeling" label="feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="7148" end="7156" title="rational" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="7211" end="7218" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="7797" end="7808" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="8217" end="8226" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="8270" end="8283" title="Platonic form" label="Platonic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="9362" end="9375" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelians"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="10622" end="10642" title="Exclusive or" label="disjunctive relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436149" start="10945" end="10957" title="inner speech" label="inner speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q279161" start="11888" end="11918" title="language of thought hypothesis" label="language of thought hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q279161" start="12814" end="12844" title="language of thought hypothesis" label="language of thought hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319186" start="14345" end="14356" title="Jerry Fodor" label="Jerry Fodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="15790" end="15799" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="15818" end="15830" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144192" start="16127" end="16141" title="associationism" label="associationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="18119" end="18130" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573697" start="19873" end="19889" title="Computationalism" label="Computationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="20675" end="20689" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811862" start="20736" end="20750" title="neural network" label="neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="21055" end="21069" title="inference rule" label="inference rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="21074" end="21086" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621536" start="23415" end="23422" title="Judgment" label="judging"/>
<link wikidata="Q57196" start="24231" end="24245" title="Franz Brentano" label="Franz Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="25776" end="25795" title="Deductive reasoning" label="Deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="25819" end="25837" title="rules of inference" label="rules of inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q840067" start="26112" end="26132" title="defeasible reasoning" label="defeasible reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488768" start="26136" end="26159" title="non-monotonic reasoning" label="non-monotonic reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="26269" end="26278" title="Inductive reasoning" label="Induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q308495" start="26504" end="26537" title="inference to the best explanation" label="inference to the best explanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185816" start="26542" end="26562" title="analogical reasoning" label="analogical reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q186150" start="26565" end="26574" title="Fallacies" label="Fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q962165" start="26652" end="26668" title="Formal fallacies" label="Formal fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296529" start="26725" end="26747" title="Denying the antecedent" label="Denying the antecedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312438" start="26906" end="26924" title="Informal fallacies" label="Informal fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="27147" end="27163" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="27637" end="27644" title="Concept" label="Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q23175" start="27938" end="27944" title="wombat" label="wombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="28661" end="28669" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28791" end="28800" title="Ability#Concepts and concept possession" label="abilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="29305" end="29320" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="30634" end="30643" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="30649" end="30658" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30783" end="30802" title="Multiplication algorithm#Long multiplication" label="long multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q358652" start="31990" end="32002" title="Deliberation" label="Deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="32481" end="32496" title="Decision theory" label="Decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="33764" end="33779" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34516" start="33784" end="33795" title="imagination" label="imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="34979" end="34988" title="Conscious" label="Conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="35157" end="35174" title="Unconscious mind" label="unconscious level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882912" start="36085" end="36114" title="Unconscious thought theory" label="unconscious thought theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="36947" end="36960" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="Phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="37009" end="37019" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="37802" end="37820" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39326" end="39352" title="pre-predicative experience" label="pre-predicative experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q620995" start="39735" end="39747" title="apperception" label="apperception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="42120" end="42137" title="mind–body problem" label="mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="42203" end="42207" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114622" start="42487" end="42494" title="stimulation" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="42530" end="42544" title="sensory system" label="sensory organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q267508" start="43117" end="43139" title="propositional attitude" label="propositional attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="43201" end="43207" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="43332" end="43346" title="epistemologist" label="epistemologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="43399" end="43413" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="43617" end="43635" title="embodied cognition" label="embodied cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="43676" end="43685" title="Heidegger" label="Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="43687" end="43693" title="Jean Piaget" label="Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q180819" start="43695" end="43703" title="Vygotsky" label="Vygotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="43705" end="43718" title="Merleau-Ponty" label="Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="43738" end="43748" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="44363" end="44373" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23382" start="44561" end="44572" title="cognitivism (psychology)" label="cognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272021" start="44681" end="44699" title="Gestalt psychology" label="Gestalt psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213674" start="44703" end="44717" title="Max Wertheimer" label="Max Wertheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213672" start="44719" end="44734" title="Wolfgang Köhler" label="Wolfgang Köhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q61323" start="44740" end="44751" title="Kurt Koffka" label="Kurt Koffka"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="44772" end="44783" title="Jean Piaget" label="Jean Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="44907" end="44921" title="psychophysics" label="psychophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256422" start="45142" end="45165" title="psychology of reasoning" label="psychology of reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="45368" end="45377" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="45452" end="45462" title="heuristics" label="heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="45534" end="45551" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="45799" end="45823" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="45825" end="45836" title="Jean Piaget" label="Jean Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q551897" start="45925" end="45956" title="theory of cognitive development" label="theory of cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907383" start="47192" end="47211" title="cognitive processing speed" label="speed of processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="47213" end="47230" title="cognitive control" label="cognitive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="47236" end="47250" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166043" start="47301" end="47348" title="neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development" label="neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="47445" end="47462" title="cognitive control" label="cognitive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="47496" end="47515" title="Positive psychology" label="Positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912791" start="47658" end="47689" title="Character Strengths and Virtues" label="Character Strengths and Virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113060" start="47697" end="47705" title="Christopher Peterson (psychologist)" label="Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q320927" start="47710" end="47718" title="Martin Seligman" label="Seligman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858613" start="48141" end="48158" title="psychic apparatus" label="psychic apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="48176" end="48189" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656208" start="48197" end="48213" title="ego psychology" label="structural model"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="49249" end="49273" title="psychological repression" label="psychological repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="49470" end="49477" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28995" start="49484" end="49506" title="collective unconscious" label="collective unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="49565" end="49586" title="analytical psychology" label="analytical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="49588" end="49594" title="Neologism" label="coined"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="49598" end="49607" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="49629" end="49645" title="unconscious mind" label="unconscious mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="49659" end="49666" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="49685" end="49690" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="49799" end="49806" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="49808" end="49816" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="49822" end="49830" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="49838" end="49843" title="Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657001" start="50000" end="50008" title="personal unconscious" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="50009" end="50021" title="unconscious mind" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q324932" start="50371" end="50388" title="Lucien Lévy-Bruhl" label="Lucien Lévy-Bruhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187945" start="50670" end="50685" title="laws of thought" label="laws of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="50739" end="50759" title="law of contradiction" label="law of contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="50765" end="50787" title="law of excluded middle" label="law of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372261" start="50797" end="50818" title="principle of identity" label="principle of identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q792542" start="50942" end="50956" title="Axiomatic system" label="axiomatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="51625" end="51637" title="Metaphysics" label="Metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="52120" end="52138" title="intuitionist logic" label="intuitionist logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="52274" end="52279" title="Mathematical proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="52407" end="52443" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844169" start="52445" end="52457" title="Dialetheism" label="Dialetheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="52675" end="52694" title="liar&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="liar&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="52699" end="52721" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60190" start="52789" end="52811" title="principle of explosion" label="principle of explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="52930" end="52960" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="53005" end="53011" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="53024" end="53029" title="cause" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="53293" end="53305" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783253" start="53517" end="53540" title="Counterfactual thinking" label="Counterfactual thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783264" start="54823" end="54849" title="counterfactual conditional" label="counterfactual conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="55994" end="56012" title="Thought experiment" label="Thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="56762" end="56783" title="Chinese room argument" label="Chinese room argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="56827" end="56838" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="57769" end="57777" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="58765" end="58782" title="Critical thinking" label="Critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="58813" end="58819" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126970" start="59074" end="59088" title="Meta-cognition" label="meta-cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="59224" end="59232" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="59274" end="59279" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="59347" end="59359" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506807" start="59370" end="59384" title="informal logic" label="informal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312438" start="59416" end="59434" title="informal fallacies" label="informal fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="59988" end="59998" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="61740" end="61759" title="positive psychology" label="positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="62098" end="62106" title="optimism" label="optimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182638" start="63789" end="63798" title="Defensive pessimism" label="Pessimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q940573" start="64309" end="64329" title="New Thought movement" label="New Thought movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q901617" start="64364" end="64381" title="Law of attraction (New Thought)" label="law of attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q499210" start="64525" end="64541" title="Animal cognition" label="Animal cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="64544" end="64555" title="Freethought" label="Freethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112658" start="64558" end="64587" title="Outline of human intelligence" label="Outline of human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112801" start="64698" end="64716" title="Outline of thought" label="Outline of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761444" start="64836" end="64846" title="Rethinking" label="Rethinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q525592" start="64946" end="64959" title="New Scientist" label="New Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65006" end="65024" title="R. Douglas Fields" label="Fields, R. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="65180" end="65199" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="65254" end="65260" title="Myelin" label="Myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="65298" end="65302" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764642" start="65441" end="65459" title="Anil K. Rajvanshi" label="Rajvanshi, Anil K."/>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="65509" end="65523" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Simon, Herbert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37081" wikidata="Q554211" url="?curid=37081" title="State of the Union">
<text>The State of the Union Address (sometimes abbreviated to SOTU) is an annual message delivered by the president of the United States to a joint session of the United States Congress near the beginning of most calendar years on the current condition of the nation. The speech generally includes reports on the nation&#x27;s budget, economy, news, agenda, progress, achievements and the president&#x27;s priorities and legislative proposals.

The address fulfills the requirement in Article II, Section 3, Clause 1 of the U.S. Constitution for the president to periodically &quot;give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.&quot; During most of the country&#x27;s first century, the president primarily submitted only a written report to Congress. After 1913, Woodrow Wilson, the 28th U.S. president, began the regular practice of delivering the address to Congress in person as a way to rally support for the president&#x27;s agenda, while also submitting a more detailed report. With the advent of radio and television, the address is now broadcast live in all United States time zones on many networks.

The speech is generally held in January or February, and an invitation to the president is extended to use the chamber of the House by the speaker of the House. Starting in 1981, Ronald Reagan, the 40th U.S. president, began the practice of newly inaugurated presidents delivering an address to Congress in the first year of their term but not designating that speech an official &quot;State of the Union&quot;.

==Formality==
The practice arises from a duty of the president under the State of the Union Clause of the U.S. Constitution:
Though the language of the clause is not specific, since the 1930s, the president has made this report annually in late January or early February. Between 1934 and 2024 the date has been as early as January 3, and as late as March 7.

While not required to deliver a speech, every president since Woodrow Wilson, with the notable exception of Herbert Hoover, has made at least one State of the Union report as a speech delivered before a joint session of Congress. Before then, most presidents delivered the State of the Union as a written report.

Since Franklin Roosevelt, the State of the Union is given typically each January before a joint session of the United States Congress and is held in the House of Representatives chamber of the United States Capitol. Newly inaugurated presidents generally deliver an address to Congress in February of the first year of their term, but this speech is not officially considered to be a &quot;State of the Union&quot;.

What began as a communication between president and Congress has become in effect a communication between the president and the people of the United States. Since the advent of radio, and then television, the speech has been broadcast live in all United States time zones on most networks, preempting scheduled programming. Since at least the 1960s, in order to reach the largest audience, the speech has typically been given at 9 p.m. (Eastern Time, UTC-5).

==History==
George Washington delivered the first regular annual message before a joint session of Congress on January 8, 1790, in New York City, then the provisional U.S. capital. In 1801, Thomas Jefferson discontinued the practice of delivering the address in person, regarding it as too monarchical (similar to the Speech from the Throne). Instead, the address was written and then sent to Congress to be read by a clerk until 1913 when Woodrow Wilson re-established the practice despite some initial controversy, and an in-person address to Congress has been delivered nearly every year since. However, there have been exceptions to this rule, with some messages being given solely in writing, and others given both in writing and orally (either in a speech to Congress or through broadcast media). The last president to give a written message without a spoken address was Jimmy Carter in 1981, days before his term ended after his defeat by Ronald Reagan.

For many years, the speech was referred to as &quot;the President&#x27;s Annual Message to Congress&quot;. The actual term &quot;State of the Union&quot; first emerged in 1934 when Franklin D. Roosevelt used the phrase, becoming its generally accepted name since 1947.
Prior to 1934, the annual message was delivered at the end of the calendar year, in December. The ratification of the 20th Amendment on January 23, 1933, changed the opening of Congress from early March to early January, affecting the delivery of the annual message. Since 1934, the message or address has been delivered to Congress early in the calendar year.

The Twentieth Amendment also established January 20 as the beginning of the presidential term. In years when a new president is inaugurated, the outgoing president may deliver a final State of the Union message, but none has done so since Jimmy Carter sent a written message in 1981. In 1953 and 1961, Congress received both a written State of the Union message from the outgoing president and a separate State of the Union speech by the incoming president. Since 1981, in recognition that the responsibility of reporting the State of the Union formally belongs to the president who held office during the past year, newly inaugurated presidents have not officially called their first speech before Congress a &quot;State of the Union&quot; message.

Warren Harding&#x27;s 1922 speech was the first to be broadcast on radio, albeit to a limited audience, while Calvin Coolidge&#x27;s 1923 speech was the first to be broadcast across the nation. President Roosevelt&#x27;s address in 1936 was the first delivered in the evening, but this precedent was not followed again until the 1960s. Harry S. Truman&#x27;s 1947 address was the first to be broadcast on television. In 1968, television networks in the United States for the first time imposed no time limit for their coverage of a State of the Union address. Delivered by Lyndon B. Johnson, this address was followed by extensive televised commentary by, among others, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Milton Friedman. Bill Clinton&#x27;s 1997 address was the first broadcast available live on the World Wide Web.

Ronald Reagan&#x27;s 1986 State of the Union Address was the first to have been postponed. He had planned to deliver the speech on January 28, 1986, but it was delayed for a week following the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster that morning. Reagan instead addressed the nation from the Oval Office about the disaster.

In 1999, Bill Clinton became the first president to deliver an in-person State of the Union address while standing trial for impeachment; the speech occurred the same day that Clinton&#x27;s defense team made its opening statement in Clinton&#x27;s impeachment trial, though he did not mention the proceeding.

On January 23, 2019, the 2019 State of the Union speech by Donald Trump, originally planned for January 29 was canceled after an exchange of letters with Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi in which she stated she would not proceed with a vote on a resolution to permit him to deliver the speech in the House chamber until the end of 2018–19 United States federal government shutdown. This decision rescinded an earlier invitation from the speaker, reportedly the first time in American history that a Speaker had &quot;disinvited&quot; the president from delivering the address. Trump and Pelosi later agreed to hold the speech on February 5.

==Delivery of the speech==
Because the address is made to a joint session of Congress, the House and Senate must each pass a resolution setting a date and time for the joint session. Then, a formal invitation is made by the speaker of the House to the president typically several weeks before the appointed date.

===Invitations===
Every member of Congress can bring one guest to the State of the Union address. The president may invite up to 24 guests to be seated in a box with the First Lady. The Speaker of the House may invite up to 24 guests in the Speaker&#x27;s box. Seating for Congress on the main floor is by a first-in, first-served basis with no reservations. The Cabinet, Supreme Court justices, members of the Diplomatic Corps, and military leaders (the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Commandant of the Coast Guard) have reserved seating.

===Protocol of entry into the House chamber===
By approximately 8:30 p.m. on the night of the address, the members of the House have gathered in their seats for the joint session. Then, the Deputy Sergeant at Arms addresses the Speaker and loudly announces the Vice-President and members of the Senate, who enter and take the seats assigned for them.

The Speaker, and then the Vice-President, specify the members of the House and Senate, respectively, who will escort the President into the House chamber. The Deputy Sergeant at Arms addresses the speaker again and loudly announces, in order, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, the Chief Justice of the United States and the Associate Justices, and the Cabinet, each of whom enters and takes their seats when called. The justices take the seats nearest to the Speaker&#x27;s rostrum and adjacent to the sections reserved for the Cabinet and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Just after 9:00 pm, as the President reaches the door to the chamber, the House Sergeant at Arms stands just inside the doors, faces the speaker, and waits until the president is ready to enter the chamber. When the president is ready, the Sergeant at Arms announces the entrance, loudly stating the phrase: &quot;Mister/Madam Speaker, the president of the United States!&quot;

As applause and cheering begin, the President slowly walks toward the Speaker&#x27;s rostrum, followed by members of the Congressional escort committee. The President&#x27;s approach is slowed by pausing to shake hands, hug, kiss, and autograph copies of the speech for Members of Congress. After taking a place at the Clerk&#x27;s desk, the president hands two envelopes containing copies of the speech to the speaker and vice president.

After continuing applause from the attendees has diminished, the speaker introduces the president to the representatives and senators, typically stating: &quot;Members of Congress, I have the high privilege and distinct honor of presenting to you the President of the United States.&quot; This leads to a further round of applause and, eventually, the beginning of the address by the President. The Speaker may opt not to introduce the President, as was demonstrated in 2019 and 2024.

===Designated survivor and other logistics===
Customarily, one cabinet member (the designated survivor) does not attend the speech, in order to provide continuity in the line of succession if a catastrophe disables the President, the Vice-President, and other succeeding officers gathered in the House chamber. Additionally, since the September 11 attacks in 2001, a few members of Congress have been asked to relocate to undisclosed locations for the duration of the speech to form a rump Congress in the event of a disaster. Since 2003, each chamber of Congress has formally named a separate designated survivor.

Both the speaker and the vice president sit at the speaker&#x27;s desk, behind the President for the duration of the speech. If either is unavailable, the next highest-ranking member of the respective house substitutes. Once the chamber settles down from the President&#x27;s arrival, the speaker officially presents the President to the joint session of Congress. The president then delivers the speech from the podium at the front of the House Chamber.

For the 2011 address, Senator Mark Udall of Colorado proposed a break in the tradition of seating Republicans and Democrats on opposite sides of the House; this was in response to the 2011 Tucson Shooting in which Representative Gabby Giffords was shot and wounded in an assassination attempt. Approximately 60 legislators signed on to Udall&#x27;s proposal; a similar plan for the 2012 address garnered bipartisan seating commitments from more than 160 lawmakers. Efforts to intersperse the parties during the State of the Union have since waned, and by the 2016 address, seating had largely returned to the traditional partisan arrangement.

===Content of the speech===

The contents of the speeches typically contain information and status updates of the country and federal government during the incumbent president&#x27;s administration. It has become customary to use the phrase &quot;The State of the Union is strong,&quot; sometimes with slight variations, since President Ronald Reagan introduced it in his 1983 address. It has been repeated by every president in nearly every year since, with the exception of George H. W. Bush. Gerald Ford&#x27;s 1975 address had been the first to use the phrasing &quot;The State of the Union is...&quot;, though Ford completed the sentence with &quot;not good.&quot;

Since Reagan&#x27;s 1982 address, it has also become common for presidents of both parties to honor special guests sitting in the gallery, such as American citizens or visiting heads of state. During that 1982 address, Reagan acknowledged Lenny Skutnik for his act of heroism following the crash of Air Florida Flight 90. Since then, the term &quot;Lenny Skutniks&quot; has been used to refer to individuals invited to sit in the gallery, and then cited by the president, during the State of the Union.

State of the Union speeches usually last a little over an hour, partly because of the large amounts of applause that occur from the audience throughout. The applause is often political in tone, with many portions of the speech being applauded only by members of the president&#x27;s own party. As non-political officeholders, members of the Supreme Court or the Joint Chiefs of Staff rarely applaud in order to retain the appearance of political impartiality. In recent years, the presiding officers of the House and the Senate, the speaker and the vice president, respectively, have departed from the neutrality expected of presiding officers of deliberative bodies, as they, too, stand and applaud in response to the remarks of the president with which they agree.

==Opposition response==
Since 1966, the speech has been followed on television by a response or rebuttal by a member of the major political party opposing the president&#x27;s party. The response is typically broadcast from a studio with no audience. In 1970, the Democratic Party put together a TV program with their speech to reply to President Nixon, as well as a televised response to Nixon&#x27;s written speech in 1973. The same was done by Democrats for President Reagan&#x27;s speeches in 1982 and 1985. The response is not always produced in a studio; in 1997, the Republicans for the first time delivered the response in front of high school students. In 2010, Virginia Governor Bob McDonnell gave the Republican response from the House of Delegates chamber of the Virginia State Capitol in Richmond, in front of about 250 attendees.

In 2004, the Democratic Party&#x27;s response was delivered in Spanish for the first time, by New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson. In 2011, Minnesota Congresswoman Michele Bachmann also gave a televised response for the Tea Party Express, a first for a political movement. In 2024, the Republican Response was delivered by Senator Katie Britt on March 8 (Women&#x27;s International Day) from her kitchen table. The first Independent response was delivered by Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

==Significance==
Although much of the pomp and ceremony behind the State of the Union address is governed by tradition rather than law, in modern times, the event is seen as one of the most important in the US political calendar. It is one of the few instances when all three branches of the US government are assembled under one roof: members of both houses of Congress constituting the legislature, the president and Cabinet constituting the executive, and the Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court constituting the judiciary. In addition, the military is represented by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, while foreign governments are represented by the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps. The address has also been used as an opportunity to honor the achievements of some ordinary Americans, who are typically invited by the president to sit with the First Lady.

==Local versions==
Certain U.S. states have a similar annual address given by the governor. For most of them, it is called the State of the State address. In Iowa, it is called the Condition of the State Address; in Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, the speech is called the State of the Commonwealth address. The mayor of the District of Columbia gives a State of the District address. American Samoa has a State of the Territory address given by the governor. Puerto Rico has a State Address given by the governor. In Guam, the governor delivers an annual State of the Island Address.

Some cities or counties also have an annual State of the City Address given by the mayor, county commissioner or board chair, including Sonoma County, California; Orlando, Florida; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Cincinnati, Ohio; New Haven, Connecticut; Parma, Ohio; Detroit, Michigan; Seattle, Washington; Birmingham, Alabama; Boston, Massachusetts; Los Angeles, California; Buffalo, New York; Rochester, New York; San Antonio, Texas; McAllen, Texas; and San Diego, California. The Mayor of the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County in Nashville, Tennessee gives a speech similar called the State of Metro Address. Some university presidents give a State of the University address at the beginning of every academic term. Some elementary and secondary schools and school districts also hold a &quot;State of the School(s)&quot; address at the beginning of each calendar year. Private companies usually have a &quot;State of the Corporation&quot; or &quot;State of the Company&quot; address given by the respective CEO. As well, the commissioners of some North American professional sports leagues, in particular Major League Soccer and the Canadian Football League, deliver annual &quot;State of the League&quot; addresses, usually in conjunction with events surrounding their respective leagues&#x27; championship games.

The State of the Union model has also been adopted by the European Union. In France, president Emmanuel Macron initiated a similar event in 2017, again in 2018, but the practice did not continue the following years.

In Spain, the Congress of Deputies adopted the tradition under the name &quot;Debate on the State of the Nation&quot; in 1983. The Prime Minister gives an address for an undetermined length of time, and afterwards each of the parliamentary groups have the chance to respond in an address with a maximum length of thirty minutes. These are sorted by the amount of deputies that each parliamentary group holds, thus starting with the Leader of the Opposition. Since its creation, it has taken place in every non-election year except for 2021, where Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez was forced to cancel it due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Historic speeches==

* President James Monroe first stated the Monroe Doctrine during his seventh annual State of the Union Address to Congress on December 2, 1823. It became a defining moment in the foreign policy of the United States and one of its longest-standing tenets, and would be invoked by many U.S. statesmen and several U.S. presidents, including Theodore Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, and Ronald Reagan.
* The Four Freedoms were goals first articulated by Franklin D. Roosevelt on January 6, 1941. In an address known as the Four Freedoms speech, he proposed four fundamental freedoms that people &quot;everywhere in the world&quot; ought to enjoy: freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear.
* During his State of the Union Address on January 11, 1944, FDR proposed the Second Bill of Rights. Roosevelt&#x27;s argument was that the &quot;political rights&quot; guaranteed by the constitution and the Bill of Rights had &quot;proved inadequate to assure us equality in the pursuit of happiness&quot;. This was technically a &quot;Message&quot; and not a speech, as Roosevelt had &quot;a case of the grippe&quot; and could not come; there was no joint session, and a Senate clerk read the message. (Although he did manage to read it as a Fireside Chat over the radio, from his office that same day.)
* During his State of the Union address on January 8, 1964, Lyndon B. Johnson introduced legislation that would come to be known as the &quot;War on Poverty&quot;. This legislation was proposed by Johnson in response to a national poverty rate of around nineteen percent. The speech led the United States Congress to pass the Economic Opportunity Act, which established the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) to administer the local application of federal funds targeted against poverty.
* During his State of the Union address on January 15, 1975, Gerald R. Ford very bluntly stated that &quot;the state of the Union is not good: Millions of Americans are out of work...We depend on others for essential energy. Some people question their Government&#x27;s ability to make hard decisions and stick with them; they expect Washington politics as usual.&quot; Ford said he did not &quot;expect much if any, applause. The American people want action, and it will take both the Congress and the president to give them what they want. Progress and solutions can be achieved, and they will be achieved.&quot;
* During his State of the Union address on January 29, 2002, President Bush identified North Korea, Iran, and Iraq as representing significant threats to the United States. He said, &quot;States like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the world&quot;. In this speech, he would outline the objectives for the War on Terror.
==TV ratings==
==See also==
* List of State of the Union addresses
* List of joint sessions of the United States Congress
* State Opening of Parliament
* Weekly address of the president of the United States

==References==
==External links==
* The American Presidency Project: State of the Union Messages, table of all State of the Union Addresses from 1790 to present, with additional data such as word count and guests, from the American Presidency Project at UCSB; as well as other documents related to the presidency
* State of the Union videos and transcripts at C-SPAN (since 1945)
* State of the Union (Visualizations, statistical analysis, and searchable texts)
* State of the Union Addresses of American Presidents (1790–2002) (in downloadable electronic file formats)
* Top 10 State of the Union Addresses, &quot;RealClearPolitics.com&quot;
* Corpus of Political Speeches: free access to political speeches by American and other politicians, developed by Hong Kong Baptist University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="4" end="30" title="State of the Union" label="State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="57" end="61" title="State of the Union" label="SOTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="101" end="131" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="137" end="150" title="Joint session of the United States Congress" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="158" end="180" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883083" start="308" end="328" title="United States federal budget" label="nation&amp;#x27;s budget"/>
<link wikidata="" start="480" end="511" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 3: Presidential responsibilities" label="Article II, Section 3, Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="519" end="536" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169545" start="630" end="635" title="Perpetual Union" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="867" end="881" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q187200" start="1170" end="1194" title="Time in the United States" label="United States time zones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1340" end="1345" title="US Capitol#House Chamber" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="1353" end="1373" title="Speaker of the U.S. House" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1393" end="1406" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="1461" end="1472" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="1700" end="1725" title="State of the Union Clause" label="State of the Union Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1733" end="1750" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="2049" end="2063" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="2095" end="2109" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="2391" end="2434" title="joint session of the United States Congress" label="joint session of the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2454" end="2478" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="2494" end="2515" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="2523" end="2534" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="3155" end="3167" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390" start="3169" end="3174" title="UTC-5" label="UTC-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3190" end="3207" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="3260" end="3285" title="Joint session of the United States Congress" label="joint session of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3309" end="3322" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3368" end="3384" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="3496" end="3518" title="Speech from the Throne" label="Speech from the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="3618" end="3632" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4055" end="4067" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="4124" end="4137" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4321" end="4342" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="4527" end="4541" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="20th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="5010" end="5022" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="5522" end="5536" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="5632" end="5647" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020261" start="5655" end="5666" title="1923 State of the Union Address" label="1923 speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035132" start="5754" end="5758" title="1936 State of the Union Address" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="5858" end="5873" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="6095" end="6112" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q713505" start="6192" end="6215" title="Daniel Patrick Moynihan" label="Daniel Patrick Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="6220" end="6235" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="6237" end="6249" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592816" start="6257" end="6269" title="1997 State of the Union Address" label="1997 address"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="6316" end="6330" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6333" end="6346" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583231" start="6354" end="6377" title="1986 State of the Union Address" label="1986 State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="6526" end="6571" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q338067" start="6631" end="6642" title="Oval Office" label="Oval Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595129" start="6667" end="6671" title="1999 State of the Union Address" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702285" start="6770" end="6784" title="Federal impeachment trial in the United States" label="standing trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="6789" end="6800" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q105715892" start="6898" end="6930" title="impeachment trial of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton&amp;#x27;s impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q60467358" start="7000" end="7023" title="2019 State of the Union Address" label="2019 State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="7034" end="7046" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="7129" end="7149" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="7150" end="7162" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60175839" start="7307" end="7356" title="2018–19 United States federal government shutdown" label="2018–19 United States federal government shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="7842" end="7862" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="8102" end="8112" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="8295" end="8302" title="United States Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8304" end="8326" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q938711" start="8343" end="8359" title="Diplomatic Corps" label="Diplomatic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="8387" end="8408" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q688856" start="8413" end="8442" title="Commandant of the Coast Guard" label="Commandant of the Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="8665" end="8681" title="Serjeant-at-arms" label="Sergeant at Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q938711" start="9067" end="9095" title="Dean of the Diplomatic Corps" label="Dean of the Diplomatic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="9101" end="9135" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809126" start="9144" end="9161" title="Associate Justice" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="9348" end="9355" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453413" start="9477" end="9499" title="Sergeant at Arms of the United States House of Representatives" label="House Sergeant at Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q60142" start="9867" end="9874" title="Podium" label="rostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300494" start="10101" end="10106" title="Reading Clerk of the United States House of Representatives" label="Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q60467358" start="10692" end="10696" title="2019 State of the Union Address" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q124455049" start="10701" end="10705" title="2024 State of the Union Address" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q596135" start="10791" end="10810" title="designated survivor" label="designated survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="10878" end="10896" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="11043" end="11063" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379373" start="11193" end="11206" title="Rump legislature" label="rump Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622490" start="11788" end="11800" title="2011 State of the Union Address" label="2011 address"/>
<link wikidata="Q631195" start="11810" end="11820" title="Mark Udall" label="Mark Udall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="11824" end="11832" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11878" end="11889" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11894" end="11903" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q757986" start="11964" end="11984" title="2011 Tucson Shooting" label="2011 Tucson Shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193703" start="12009" end="12023" title="Gabby Giffords" label="Gabby Giffords"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352804" start="12162" end="12174" title="2012 State of the Union Address" label="2012 address"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152163" start="12339" end="12351" title="2016 State of the Union Address" label="2016 address"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="12761" end="12774" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="12900" end="12917" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="12919" end="12930" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="13272" end="13286" title="Head of state" label="heads of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522995" start="13334" end="13347" title="Lenny Skutnik" label="Lenny Skutnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372837" start="13394" end="13415" title="Air Florida Flight 90" label="Air Florida Flight 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576658" start="13444" end="13458" title="List of Lenny Skutniks" label="Lenny Skutniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="14631" end="14647" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="14714" end="14719" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="15038" end="15055" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Virginia Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q456924" start="15056" end="15069" title="Bob McDonnell" label="Bob McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="15108" end="15126" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="15142" end="15164" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="15168" end="15176" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="15225" end="15241" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="15275" end="15282" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089908" start="15306" end="15325" title="Governor of New Mexico" label="New Mexico Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311782" start="15326" end="15341" title="Bill Richardson (politician)" label="Bill Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="15352" end="15361" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q160582" start="15376" end="15392" title="Michele Bachmann" label="Michele Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691082" start="15432" end="15449" title="Tea Party Express" label="Tea Party Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352872" start="15671" end="15692" title="Robert F. Kennedy Jr." label="Robert F. Kennedy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="16056" end="16064" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="16082" end="16093" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="16113" end="16120" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="16138" end="16147" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="16157" end="16170" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="16175" end="16193" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="16201" end="16214" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="16232" end="16241" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="16291" end="16312" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q938711" start="16363" end="16391" title="Diplomatic corps" label="Dean of the Diplomatic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="16555" end="16565" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="16595" end="16605" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q889821" start="16650" end="16658" title="Governor (United States)" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030216" start="16695" end="16721" title="State of the State address" label="State of the State address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="16875" end="16887" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="16914" end="16934" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="16974" end="16988" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="17049" end="17060" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="17107" end="17111" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17145" end="17172" title="List of Governors of Guam#Powers and Duties" label="State of the Island Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603820" start="17219" end="17244" title="State of the City Address" label="State of the City Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="17311" end="17336" title="Sonoma County, California" label="Sonoma County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="17338" end="17354" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q490065" start="17356" end="17380" title="Gwinnett County, Georgia" label="Gwinnett County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="17382" end="17392" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="17400" end="17422" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q862711" start="17424" end="17435" title="Parma, Ohio" label="Parma, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="17456" end="17463" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="17477" end="17496" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="17546" end="17563" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="17565" end="17584" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="17586" end="17597" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51698" start="17606" end="17620" title="McAllen, Texas" label="McAllen, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="17626" end="17635" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="17726" end="17746" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="17810" end="17830" title="university president" label="university president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269240" start="17897" end="17910" title="academic term" label="academic term"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="18302" end="18321" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="18330" end="18354" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840948" start="18551" end="18563" title="State of the European Union" label="been adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18571" end="18585" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="18608" end="18623" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18733" end="18738" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q539149" start="18744" end="18764" title="Congress of Deputies" label="Congress of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="18861" end="18875" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q66714844" start="18956" end="18976" title="Parliamentary group (Spain)" label="parliamentary groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508563" start="19162" end="19186" title="Leader of the Opposition (Spain)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="19277" end="19291" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070218" start="19292" end="19305" title="Pedro Sánchez" label="Pedro Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="19341" end="19358" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="19396" end="19408" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="19426" end="19441" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="19563" end="19598" title="foreign policy of the United States" label="foreign policy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="19722" end="19740" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="19742" end="19757" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="19763" end="19776" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q646350" start="19784" end="19797" title="Four Freedoms" label="Four Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="19830" end="19851" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="20023" end="20040" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="20057" end="20075" title="freedom of worship" label="freedom of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q643165" start="20077" end="20094" title="Right to an adequate standard of living" label="freedom from want"/>
<link wikidata="Q642819" start="20100" end="20117" title="freedom from fear" label="freedom from fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477061" start="20197" end="20218" title="Second Bill of Rights" label="Second Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="20327" end="20341" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075797" start="20399" end="20419" title="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness" label="pursuit of happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q19104412" start="20768" end="20783" title="1964 State of the Union Address" label="January 8, 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118976" start="20867" end="20881" title="War on Poverty" label="War on Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="21016" end="21038" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333397" start="21051" end="21075" title="Economic Opportunity Act" label="Economic Opportunity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079208" start="21099" end="21129" title="Office of Economic Opportunity" label="Office of Economic Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576793" start="21258" end="21274" title="1975 State of the Union Address" label="January 15, 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="21276" end="21290" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald R. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600511" start="21843" end="21869" title="2002 State of the Union Address" label="State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="21901" end="21905" title="George W. Bush" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="21917" end="21928" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21930" end="21934" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="21940" end="21944" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q340700" start="22077" end="22089" title="axis of evil" label="axis of evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="22196" end="22209" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q125030426" start="22241" end="22277" title="List of State of the Union addresses" label="List of State of the Union addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624556" start="22280" end="22332" title="List of joint sessions of the United States Congress" label="List of joint sessions of the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="22335" end="22362" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979513" start="22365" end="22417" title="Weekly address of the president of the United States" label="Weekly address of the president of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37085" wikidata="Q179550" url="?curid=37085" title="Software bug">
<text>A software bug is a design defect (bug) in computer software. A computer program with many or serious bugs may be described as &quot;buggy&quot;. 

The effects of a software bug range from minor (such as a misspelled word in the user interface) to severe (such as frequent crashing).

In 2002, a study commissioned by the US Department of Commerce&#x27;s National Institute of Standards and Technology concluded that &quot;software bugs, or errors, are so prevalent and so detrimental that they cost the US economy an estimated $59 billion annually, or about 0.6 percent of the gross domestic product&quot;.

Since the 1950s, some computer systems have been designed to detect or auto-correct various software errors during operations.

== History ==
== Terminology ==

&quot;Mistake metamorphism&quot; (from Greek &quot;meta&quot; = &quot;change&quot;, &quot;morph&quot; = &quot;form&quot;) refers to the evolution of a defect in the final stage of software deployment. Transformation of a &quot;mistake&quot; committed by an analyst in the early stages of the software development lifecycle, which leads to a &quot;defect&quot; in the final stage of the cycle has been called &quot;mistake metamorphism&quot;.

Different stages of a mistake in the development cycle may be described as mistake,
anomaly,
fault,
failure,
error,
exception,
crash,
glitch,
bug,
defect,
incident,
or side effect. 

==Examples==
Software bugs have been linked to disasters.
* Software bugs in the Therac-25 radiation therapy machine were directly responsible for patient deaths in the 1980s.
* In 1996, the European Space Agency&#x27;s US$1 billion prototype Ariane 5 rocket was destroyed less than a minute after launch due to a bug in the on-board guidance computer program. 
* In 1994, an RAF Chinook helicopter crashed, killing 29; was initially blamed on pilot error, but was later thought to have been caused by a software bug in the engine-control computer. 
* Buggy software caused the early 21st century British Post Office scandal.

== Controversy ==

Sometimes the use of &quot;bug&quot; to describe the behavior of software is contentious due to perception. Some suggest that the term should be abandoned; contending that &quot;bug&quot; implies that the defect arose on its own and push to use &quot;defect&quot; instead since it more clearly indicates they are caused by a human.

Some contend that &quot;bug&quot; may be used to coverup an intentional design decision. In 2011, after receiving scrutiny from US Senator Al Franken for recording and storing users&#x27; locations in unencrypted files,
Apple called the behavior a bug. However, Justin Brookman of the Center for Democracy and Technology directly challenged that portrayal, stating &quot;I&#x27;m glad that they are fixing what they call bugs, but I take exception with their strong denial that they track users.&quot;

== Prevention ==

Preventing bugs as early as possible in the software development process is a target of investment and innovation.

=== Language support ===

Newer programming languages tend to be designed to prevent common bugs based on vulnerabilities of existing languages. Lessons learned from older languages such as BASIC and C are used to inform the design of later languages such as C# and Rust.

A compiled language allows for detecting some typos (such as a misspelled identifier) before runtime which is earlier in the software development process than for an interpreted language.

Languages may include features such as a static type system, restricted namespaces and modular programming. For example, for a typed, compiled language (like C):

 float num = &quot;3&quot;;

is syntactically correct, but fails type checking since the right side, a string, cannot be assigned to a float variable. Compilation fails forcing this defect to be fixed before development progress can resume. With an interpreted language, a failure would not occur until later at runtime.

Some languages exclude features that easily lead to bugs, at the expense of slower performance the principle being that it is usually better to write simpler, slower correct code than complicated, buggy code. For example, the Java does not support pointer arithmetic which is generally fast, but is considered dangerous; relatively likely to cause a major bug. 

Some languages include features that add runtime overhead in order to prevent some bugs. For example, many languages include runtime bounds checking and a way to handle out-of-bounds conditions instead of crashing.

=== Techniques ===

Programming techniques such as programming style and defensive programming are intended to prevent typos.

For example, a bug may be caused by a relatively minor, typographical error (typo) in the code. For example, this code executes function only if is true.

 if (condition) foo();

But this code always executes :

 if (condition); foo();

A convention that tends to prevent this particular issue is to require braces for a block even if it has just one line.

 if (condition) {
 foo();

Enforcement of conventions may be manual (i.e. via code review) or via automated tools.

=== Specification ===

Some contend that writing a program specification which states the behavior of a program, can prevent bugs. 

Some contend that formal specifications are impractical for anything but the shortest programs, because of problems of combinatorial explosion and indeterminacy.

=== Software testing ===

One goal of software testing is to find bugs. 

Measurements during testing can provide an estimate of the number of likely bugs remaining. This becomes more reliable the longer a product is tested and developed.

=== Agile practices ===

Agile software development may involve frequent software releases with relatively small changes. Defects are revealed by user feedback.

With test-driven development (TDD), unit tests are written while writing the production code, and the production code is not considered complete until all tests complete successfully.

=== Static analysis ===

Tools for static code analysis help developers by inspecting the program text beyond the compiler&#x27;s capabilities to spot potential problems. Although in general the problem of finding all programming errors given a specification is not solvable (see halting problem), these tools exploit the fact that human programmers tend to make certain kinds of simple mistakes often when writing software.

=== Instrumentation ===

Tools to monitor the performance of the software as it is running, either specifically to find problems such as bottlenecks or to give assurance as to correct working, may be embedded in the code explicitly (perhaps as simple as a statement saying codice_1), or provided as tools. It is often a surprise to find where most of the time is taken by a piece of code, and this removal of assumptions might cause the code to be rewritten.

=== Open source ===

Open source development allows anyone to examine source code. A school of thought popularized by Eric S. Raymond as Linus&#x27;s law says that popular open-source software has more chance of having few or no bugs than other software, because &quot;given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow&quot;. This assertion has been disputed, however: computer security specialist Elias Levy wrote that &quot;it is easy to hide vulnerabilities in complex, little understood and undocumented source code,&quot; because, &quot;even if people are reviewing the code, that doesn&#x27;t mean they&#x27;re qualified to do so.&quot; An example of an open-source software bug was the 2008 OpenSSL vulnerability in Debian.

== Debugging ==
&quot;Debugging&quot; can be a significant part of the software development lifecycle. Maurice Wilkes, an early computing pioneer, described his realization in the late 1940s that
“a good part of the remainder of my life was going to be spent in finding errors in my own programs”.

A program known as a debugger can help a programmer find faulty code by examining the inner workings of a program such as executing code line-by-line and viewing variable values. 

As an alternative to using a debugger, code may be instrumented with logic to output debug information to trace program execution and view values. Output is typically to console, window, log file or a hardware output (i.e. LED).

Some contend that locating a bug is something of an art. 

It is not uncommon for a bug in one section of a program to cause failures in a different section, thus making it difficult to track, in an apparently unrelated part of the system. For example, an error in a graphics rendering routine causing a file I/O routine to fail.

Sometimes, the most difficult part of debugging is finding the cause of the bug. Once found, correcting the problem is sometimes easy if not trivial. 

Sometimes, a bug is not an isolated flaw, but represents an error of thinking or planning on the part of the programmers. Often, such a &quot;logic error&quot; requires a section of the program to be overhauled or rewritten. 

Some contend that as a part of code review, stepping through the code and imagining or transcribing the execution process may often find errors without ever reproducing the bug as such.

Typically, the first step in locating a bug is to reproduce it reliably. If unable to reproduce the issue, a programmer cannot find the cause of the bug and therefore cannot fix it.

Some bugs are revealed by inputs that may be difficult for the programmer to re-create. One cause of the Therac-25 radiation machine deaths was a bug (specifically, a race condition) that occurred only when the machine operator very rapidly entered a treatment plan; it took days of practice to become able to do this, so the bug did not manifest in testing or when the manufacturer attempted to duplicate it. Other bugs may stop occurring whenever the setup is augmented to help find the bug, such as running the program with a debugger; these are called &quot;heisenbugs&quot; (humorously named after the Heisenberg uncertainty principle).

Since the 1990s, particularly following the Ariane 5 Flight 501 disaster, interest in automated aids to debugging rose, such as static code analysis by abstract interpretation.

Often, bugs come about during coding, but faulty design documentation may cause a bug. 
In some cases, changes to the code may eliminate the problem even though the code then no longer matches the documentation. 

In an embedded system, the software is often modified to work around a hardware bug since it&#x27;s cheaper than modifying the hardware.

== Management ==
Bugs are managed via activities like documenting, categorizing, assigning, reproducing, correcting and releasing the corrected code. 

Tools are often used to track bugs and other issues with software. Typically, different tools
are used by the software development team to track their workload than by customer service to track user feedback. 

A tracked item is often called &quot;bug&quot;, &quot;defect&quot;, &quot;ticket&quot;, &quot;issue&quot;, &quot;feature&quot;, or for agile software development, &quot;story&quot; or &quot;epic&quot;. Items are often categorized by aspects such as severity, priority and version number.

In a process sometimes called triage, choices are made for each bug about whether and when to fix it based on information such as the bug&#x27;s severity and priority and external factors such as development schedules. Triage generally does not include investigation into cause. Triage may occur regularly. Triage generally consists of reviewing new bugs since the previous triage and maybe all open bugs. Attendees may include project manager, development manager, test manager, build manager, and technical experts.

=== Severity ===

&quot;Severity&quot; is a measure of impact the bug has. This impact may be data loss, financial, loss of goodwill and wasted effort. Severity levels are not standardized, but differ by context such as industry and tracking tool. For example, a crash in a video game has a different impact than a crash in a bank server. Severity levels might be &quot;crash or hang&quot;, &quot;no workaround&quot; (user cannot accomplish a task), &quot;has workaround&quot; (user can still accomplish the task), &quot;visual defect&quot; (a misspelling for example), or &quot;documentation error&quot;. Another example set of severities: &quot;critical&quot;, &quot;high&quot;, &quot;low&quot;, &quot;blocker&quot;, &quot;trivial&quot;. The severity of a bug may be a separate category to its priority for fixing, or the two may be quantified and managed separately.

A bug severe enough to delay the release of the product is called a &quot;show stopper&quot;.

=== Priority ===

&quot;Priority&quot; describes the importance of resolving the bug in relation to other bugs. Priorities might be numerical, such as 1 through 5, or named, such as &quot;critical&quot;, &quot;high&quot;, &quot;low&quot;, and &quot;deferred&quot;. The values might be similar or identical to severity ratings, even though priority is a different aspect. 

Priority may be a combination of the bug&#x27;s severity with the level of effort to fix. A bug with low severity but easy to fix may get a higher priority than a bug with moderate severity that requires significantly more effort to fix. 

=== Patch ===

Bugs of sufficiently high priority may warrant a special release which is sometimes called a &quot;patch&quot;. 

=== Maintenance release ===

A software release that emphasizes bug fixes may be called a &quot;maintenance&quot; release to differentiate it from a release that emphasizes new features or other changes.

=== Known issue ===
It is common practice to release software with known, low-priority bugs or other issues. Possible reasons include but are not limited to:

* A deadline must be met and resources are insufficient to fix all bugs by the deadline

* The bug is already fixed in an upcoming release, and it is not of high priority

* The changes required to fix the bug are too costly or affect too many other components, requiring a major testing activity

* It may be suspected, or known, that some users are relying on the existing buggy behavior; a proposed fix may introduce a 

* The problem is in an area that will be obsolete with an upcoming release; fixing it is unnecessary

* &quot;It&#x27;s not a bug, it&#x27;s a feature&quot; A misunderstanding exists between expected and actual behavior or undocumented feature

=== Implications ===
The amount and type of damage a software bug may cause affects decision-making, processes and policy regarding software quality. In applications such as human spaceflight, aviation, nuclear power, health care, public transport or automotive safety, since software flaws have the potential to cause human injury or even death, such software will have far more scrutiny and quality control than, for example, an online shopping website. In applications such as banking, where software flaws have the potential to cause serious financial damage to a bank or its customers, quality control is also more important than, say, a photo editing application.

Other than the damage caused by bugs, some of their cost is due to the effort invested in fixing them. In 1978, Lientz et al. showed that the median of projects invest 17 percent of the development effort in bug fixing. In 2020, research on GitHub repositories showed the median is 20%.

=== Cost ===

In 1994, NASA&#x27;s Goddard Space Flight Center managed to reduce their average number of errors from 4.5 per 1000 lines of code (SLOC) down to 1 per 1000 SLOC.

Another study in 1990 reported that exceptionally good software development processes can achieve deployment failure rates as low as 0.1 per 1000 SLOC. This figure is iterated in literature such as &quot;Code Complete&quot; by Steve McConnell, and the &quot;NASA study on Flight Software Complexity&quot;.
Some projects even attained zero defects: the firmware in the IBM Wheelwriter typewriter which consists of 63,000 SLOC, and the Space Shuttle software with 500,000 SLOC.

=== Benchmark ===

To facilitate reproducible research on testing and debugging, researchers use curated benchmarks of bugs:
* the Siemens benchmark
* ManyBugs is a benchmark of 185 C bugs in nine open-source programs.
* Defects4J is a benchmark of 341 Java bugs from 5 open-source projects. It contains the corresponding patches, which cover a variety of patch type.

== Types ==

Some notable types of bugs:

=== Design error ===

A bug can be caused by insufficient or incorrect design based on the specification. For example, given that the specification is to alphabetize a list of words, a design bug might occur if the design does not account for symbols; resulting in incorrect alphabetization of words with symbols.

=== Arithmetic ===

Numerical operations can result in unexpected output, slow processing, or crashing.
Such a bug can be from a lack of awareness of the qualities of the data storage such as a loss of precision due to rounding, numerically unstable algorithms, arithmetic overflow and underflow, or from lack of awareness of how calculations are handled by different software coding languages such as division by zero which in some languages may throw an exception, and in others may return a special value such as NaN or infinity.

=== Control flow ===
A control flow bug, a.k.a. logic error, is characterized by code that does not fail with an error, but does not have the expected behavior, such as infinite looping, infinite recursion, incorrect comparison in a conditional such as using the wrong comparison operator, and the off-by-one error.

=== Interfacing ===
* Incorrect API usage.
* Incorrect protocol implementation.
* Incorrect hardware handling.
* Incorrect assumptions of a particular platform.
* Incompatible systems. A new API or communications protocol may seem to work when two systems use different versions, but errors may occur when a function or feature implemented in one version is changed or missing in another. In production systems which must run continually, shutting down the entire system for a major update may not be possible, such as in the telecommunication industry or the internet. In this case, smaller segments of a large system are upgraded individually, to minimize disruption to a large network. However, some sections could be overlooked and not upgraded, and cause compatibility errors which may be difficult to find and repair.
* Incorrect code annotations.

=== Concurrency ===
* Deadlock a task cannot continue until a second finishes, but at the same time, the second cannot continue until the first finishes.
* Race condition multiple simultaneous tasks compete for resources.
* Errors in critical sections, mutual exclusions and other features of concurrent processing. Time-of-check-to-time-of-use (TOCTOU) is a form of unprotected critical section.

=== Resourcing ===

* Null pointer dereference.
* Using an uninitialized variable.
* Using an otherwise valid instruction on the wrong data type (see packed decimal/binary-coded decimal).
* Access violations.
* Resource leaks, where a finite system resource (such as memory or file handles) become exhausted by repeated allocation without release.
* Buffer overflow, in which a program tries to store data past the end of allocated storage. This may or may not lead to an access violation or storage violation. These are frequently security bugs.
* Excessive recursion which—though logically valid—causes stack overflow.
* Use-after-free error, where a pointer is used after the system has freed the memory it references.
* Double free error.

=== Syntax ===

* Use of the wrong token, such as performing assignment instead of equality test. For example, in some languages x=5 will set the value of x to 5 while x==5 will check whether x is currently 5 or some other number. Interpreted languages allow such code to fail. Compiled languages can catch such errors before testing begins.

=== Teamwork ===
* Unpropagated updates; e.g. programmer changes &quot;myAdd&quot; but forgets to change &quot;mySubtract&quot;, which uses the same algorithm. These errors are mitigated by the Don&#x27;t Repeat Yourself philosophy.
* Comments out of date or incorrect: many programmers assume the comments accurately describe the code.
* Differences between documentation and product.

== In politics ==
=== &quot;Bugs in the System&quot; report ===
The Open Technology Institute, run by the group, New America, released a report &quot;Bugs in the System&quot; in August 2016 stating that U.S. policymakers should make reforms to help researchers identify and address software bugs. The report &quot;highlights the need for reform in the field of software vulnerability discovery and disclosure.&quot; One of the report&#x27;s authors said that Congress has not done enough to address cyber software vulnerability, even though Congress has passed a number of bills to combat the larger issue of cyber security.

Government researchers, companies, and cyber security experts are the people who typically discover software flaws. The report calls for reforming computer crime and copyright laws.
== In popular culture ==
* In video gaming, the term &quot;glitch&quot; is sometimes used to refer to a software bug. An example is the glitch and unofficial Pokémon species MissingNo.
* In both the 1968 novel &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; and the corresponding film of the same name, the spaceship&#x27;s onboard computer, HAL 9000, attempts to kill all its crew members. In the follow-up 1982 novel, &quot;2010: Odyssey Two&quot;, and the accompanying 1984 film, &quot;2010: The Year We Make Contact&quot;, it is revealed that this action was caused by the computer having been programmed with two conflicting objectives: to fully disclose all its information, and to keep the true purpose of the flight secret from the crew; this conflict caused HAL to become paranoid and eventually homicidal.
* In the English version of the Nena 1983 song &quot;99 Luftballons&quot; (99 Red Balloons) as a result of &quot;bugs in the software&quot;, a release of a group of 99 red balloons are mistaken for an enemy nuclear missile launch, requiring an equivalent launch response and resulting in catastrophe.
* In the 1999 American comedy &quot;Office Space&quot;, three employees attempt (unsuccessfully) to exploit their company&#x27;s preoccupation with the Y2K computer bug using a computer virus that sends rounded-off fractions of a penny to their bank account—a long-known technique described as salami slicing.
* The 2004 novel &quot;The Bug&quot;, by Ellen Ullman, is about a programmer&#x27;s attempt to find an elusive bug in a database application.
* The 2008 Canadian film &quot;Control Alt Delete&quot; is about a computer programmer at the end of 1999 struggling to fix bugs at his company related to the year 2000 problem.

== See also ==

* Anti-pattern
* Automatic bug fixing
* Bug bounty program
* Glitch removal
* Hardware bug
* ISO/IEC 9126, which classifies a bug as either a &quot;defect&quot; or a &quot;nonconformity&quot;
* List of software bugs
* Orthogonal Defect Classification
* Racetrack problem
* RISKS Digest
* Single-event upset
* Software defect indicator
* Software regression
* Software rot
* VUCA

== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;Common Weakness Enumeration&quot; – an expert webpage focus on bugs, at NIST.gov
* BUG type of Jim Gray – another Bug type
* &quot;The First Computer Bug!&quot; – an email from 1981 about Adm. Hopper&#x27;s bug
* &quot;Toward Understanding Compiler Bugs in GCC and LLVM&quot;. A 2016 study of bugs in compilers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="2" end="14" title="Software bug" label="software bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042942" start="35" end="38" title="Bug (engineering)" label="bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="43" end="60" title="computer software" label="computer software"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="64" end="80" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="229" end="243" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q333501" start="273" end="281" title="crash (computing)" label="crashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="325" end="347" title="Department of Commerce" label="Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="355" end="401" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755993" start="1477" end="1512" title="Therac-25" label="Therac-25 radiation therapy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="1587" end="1608" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950605" start="1639" end="1668" title="Ariane flight V88" label="Ariane 5 rocket was destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589707" start="1772" end="1802" title="1994 Scotland RAF Chinook crash" label="RAF Chinook helicopter crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q599977" start="1920" end="1943" title="FADEC" label="engine-control computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107287943" start="1993" end="2020" title="British Post Office scandal" label="British Post Office scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229735" start="2424" end="2431" title="coverup" label="coverup"/>
<link wikidata="Q319084" start="2514" end="2524" title="Al Franken" label="Al Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059580" start="2660" end="2695" title="Center for Democracy and Technology" label="Center for Democracy and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="2940" end="2968" title="software development process" label="software development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="3044" end="3064" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="3202" end="3207" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="3212" end="3213" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="3271" end="3273" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="3278" end="3282" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="3287" end="3295" title="compiled" label="compiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="3378" end="3385" title="Runtime (program lifecycle phase)" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="3410" end="3438" title="software development process" label="software development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="3451" end="3462" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="3522" end="3533" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q873636" start="3546" end="3555" title="namespace" label="namespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="3561" end="3580" title="modular programming" label="modular programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="3632" end="3633" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="4185" end="4189" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="4207" end="4214" title="pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099515" start="4455" end="4470" title="bounds checking" label="bounds checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q962139" start="4589" end="4606" title="programming style" label="programming style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182643" start="4611" end="4632" title="defensive programming" label="defensive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342704" start="5101" end="5112" title="code review" label="code review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437424" start="5190" end="5211" title="program specification" label="program specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668364" start="5391" end="5414" title="combinatorial explosion" label="combinatorial explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490301" start="5419" end="5432" title="Nondeterministic algorithm" label="indeterminacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="5473" end="5489" title="software testing" label="software testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="5700" end="5726" title="Agile software development" label="Agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q950250" start="5842" end="5865" title="test-driven development" label="test-driven development"/>
<link wikidata="Q907375" start="5873" end="5882" title="unit test" label="unit test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="6057" end="6077" title="static code analysis" label="static code analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622849" start="6302" end="6317" title="halting problem" label="halting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q845757" start="6585" end="6596" title="Bottleneck (engineering)" label="bottlenecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="6929" end="6940" title="Open source" label="Open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q188954" start="7026" end="7041" title="Eric S. Raymond" label="Eric S. Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q189286" start="7045" end="7061" title="Linus&amp;#x27;s law" label="Linus&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="7080" end="7100" title="open-source software" label="open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360539" start="7300" end="7310" title="Elias Levy" label="Elias Levy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7595" end="7631" title="Debian#2008 OpenSSL vulnerability" label="2008 OpenSSL vulnerability in Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="7705" end="7735" title="software development lifecycle" label="software development lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62857" start="7737" end="7751" title="Maurice Wilkes" label="Maurice Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="7954" end="7962" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="8284" end="8291" title="System console" label="console"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="8293" end="8299" title="Window (computing)" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q949532" start="8301" end="8309" title="log file" label="log file"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="8315" end="8323" title="computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="8337" end="8340" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="8620" end="8629" title="Rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="8653" end="8656" title="I/O" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441803" start="8969" end="8980" title="logic error" label="logic error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342704" start="9085" end="9096" title="code review" label="code review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755993" start="9529" end="9538" title="Therac-25" label="Therac-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="9591" end="9605" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q54270" start="9986" end="9995" title="heisenbug" label="heisenbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="10031" end="10063" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950605" start="10111" end="10130" title="Ariane 5 Flight 501" label="Ariane 5 Flight 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="10195" end="10215" title="static code analysis" label="static code analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333341" start="10219" end="10242" title="abstract interpretation" label="abstract interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="10465" end="10480" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q457174" start="10516" end="10527" title="workaround" label="work around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="10749" end="10754" title="Programming tool" label="Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q956086" start="10888" end="10908" title="bug tracking system" label="track their workload"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060653" start="10917" end="10933" title="customer service" label="customer service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480561" start="10937" end="10956" title="issue tracking system" label="track user feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="11095" end="11121" title="agile software development" label="agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="11232" end="11246" title="version number" label="version number"/>
<link wikidata="Q780067" start="11279" end="11285" title="triage" label="triage"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="13461" end="13466" title="Patch (computing)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316107" start="14487" end="14507" title="undocumented feature" label="undocumented feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="14683" end="14700" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="14702" end="14710" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="14712" end="14725" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="14727" end="14738" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="14740" end="14756" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090494" start="14760" end="14777" title="automotive safety" label="automotive safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="15421" end="15427" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="15503" end="15530" title="Goddard Space Flight Center" label="Goddard Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q942695" start="15613" end="15617" title="Source lines of code" label="SLOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140024" start="15849" end="15862" title="Code Complete" label="Code Complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q93021" start="15872" end="15887" title="Steve McConnell" label="Steve McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="15997" end="16005" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q122316369" start="16013" end="16028" title="IBM Wheelwriter" label="IBM Wheelwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="16079" end="16092" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="17042" end="17059" title="arithmetic precision" label="loss of precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q663208" start="17067" end="17075" title="rounding" label="rounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="17077" end="17097" title="numerically unstable" label="numerically unstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423448" start="17110" end="17129" title="arithmetic overflow" label="arithmetic overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q669129" start="17134" end="17143" title="underflow" label="underflow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17250" end="17266" title="Division by zero#Computer arithmetic" label="division by zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q858684" start="17364" end="17367" title="NaN" label="NaN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17371" end="17379" title="Infinity#Computing" label="infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="17405" end="17417" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q862372" start="17551" end="17564" title="infinite loop" label="infinite loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="17578" end="17587" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="17615" end="17626" title="Conditional (computer programming)" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142873" start="17651" end="17670" title="comparison operator" label="comparison operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439356" start="17680" end="17696" title="off-by-one error" label="off-by-one error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554305" start="17862" end="17874" title="Software incompatibility" label="Incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="17890" end="17893" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="17897" end="17920" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q623276" start="18576" end="18584" title="Deadlock (computer science)" label="Deadlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="18710" end="18724" title="Race condition" label="Race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046373" start="18788" end="18804" title="critical section" label="critical section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047554" start="18807" end="18823" title="mutual exclusion" label="mutual exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18847" end="18868" title="Concurrent programming#Coordinating access to resources" label="concurrent processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675168" start="18870" end="18898" title="Time-of-check-to-time-of-use" label="Time-of-check-to-time-of-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848926" start="18974" end="18986" title="Null pointer" label="Null pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912653" start="19011" end="19033" title="uninitialized variable" label="uninitialized variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="19087" end="19096" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="19102" end="19116" title="packed decimal" label="packed decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="19117" end="19137" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062340" start="19142" end="19158" title="Access violation" label="Access violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="19219" end="19225" title="memory leak" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647463" start="19229" end="19241" title="handle leak" label="file handles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="19302" end="19317" title="Buffer overflow" label="Buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619931" start="19444" end="19461" title="storage violation" label="storage violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445023" start="19484" end="19496" title="security bug" label="security bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218767" start="19557" end="19571" title="stack overflow" label="stack overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="19605" end="19612" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19731" end="19736" title="Lexical analysis#Token" label="token"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19779" end="19792" title="==#Equality" label="equality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242407" start="20233" end="20259" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Repeat Yourself" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Repeat Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005306" start="20539" end="20550" title="New America (organization)" label="New America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="20885" end="20893" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21293" end="21299" title="glitch#Video game glitches" label="glitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q236209" start="21381" end="21407" title="List of Pokémon" label="unofficial Pokémon species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070682" start="21408" end="21418" title="MissingNo." label="MissingNo."/>
<link wikidata="" start="21450" end="21471" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (novel)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21500" end="21521" title="2001: A Space Odyssey" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q833933" start="21562" end="21570" title="HAL 9000" label="HAL 9000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21646" end="21663" title="2010: Odyssey Two" label="2010: Odyssey Two"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21709" end="21739" title="2010: The Year We Make Contact" label="2010: The Year We Make Contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q277342" start="22089" end="22103" title="99 Luftballons" label="99 Luftballons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044523" start="22373" end="22385" title="Office Space" label="Office Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070911" start="22631" end="22645" title="salami slicing" label="salami slicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365042" start="22688" end="22700" title="Ellen Ullman" label="Ellen Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165822" start="22820" end="22838" title="Control Alt Delete (film)" label="Control Alt Delete"/>
<link wikidata="Q76438" start="22986" end="22998" title="Anti-pattern" label="Anti-pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113083" start="23001" end="23021" title="Automatic bug fixing" label="Automatic bug fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848759" start="23024" end="23042" title="Bug bounty program" label="Bug bounty program"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325263" start="23045" end="23059" title="Glitch removal" label="Glitch removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088746" start="23062" end="23074" title="Hardware bug" label="Hardware bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479753" start="23077" end="23089" title="ISO/IEC 9126" label="ISO/IEC 9126"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864229" start="23178" end="23199" title="List of software bugs" label="List of software bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751270" start="23202" end="23234" title="Orthogonal Defect Classification" label="Orthogonal Defect Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279034" start="23237" end="23254" title="Racetrack problem" label="Racetrack problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276830" start="23257" end="23269" title="RISKS Digest" label="RISKS Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476733" start="23272" end="23290" title="Single-event upset" label="Single-event upset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554276" start="23293" end="23318" title="Software defect indicator" label="Software defect indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q24346" start="23321" end="23340" title="Software regression" label="Software regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996135" start="23343" end="23355" title="Software rot" label="Software rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290703" start="23358" end="23362" title="VUCA" label="VUCA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37086" wikidata="Q273069" url="?curid=37086" title="Battle of Lechfeld">
<text>The Battle of Lechfeld also known as the Second Battle of Lechfeld was a series of military engagements over the course of three days from 10–12 August 955 in which the Kingdom of Germany, led by King Otto I the Great, annihilated the Hungarian army led by &quot;Harka &quot;Bulcsú and the chieftains Lél and Súr. With the German victory, further invasions by the Magyars into Latin Europe were ended.

The Hungarians invaded the Duchy of Bavaria in late June or early July 955 with 8,000–10,000 horse archers, infantry, and siege engines, intending to draw the main German army, under Otto I, into battle in the open field and destroy it. The Hungarians laid siege to Augsburg on the river Lech. Otto I advanced to relieve the city with an army of 8,000 heavy cavalry, divided into eight legions.

As Otto I approached Augsburg on 10 August, a Hungarian surprise attack destroyed the Duchy of Bohemia rearguard legion. The Hungarian force stopped to plunder the German camp and Conrad, Duke of Lorraine led a counter-attack with heavy cavalry, dispersing the Hungarians. Otto I then brought his army into battle against the main Hungarian army that barred his way to Augsburg. The German heavy cavalry defeated the lightly armed and armored Hungarians in close combat, but the latter retreated in good order. Otto I did not pursue, returning to Augsburg for the night and sending out messengers to order all local German forces to hold the river crossings in Eastern Bavaria and so prevent the Hungarians from returning to their homeland. On 11 and 12 August, the Hungarian defeat was transformed into disaster, as heavy rainfall and flooding slowed the retreating Hungarians and allowed German troops to hunt them down and kill them all. The Hungarian leaders were captured, taken to Augsburg, and hanged.

The German victory preserved the Kingdom of Germany and permanently ended nomad incursions into Western Europe. Otto I was proclaimed emperor and father of the fatherland by his army after the victory, and went on to be crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 962 largely on the basis of his strengthened position after the Battle of Lechfeld.

==Historical sources==
The most important source is a monograph commissioned by Ulrich of Augsburg, which describes the series of actions from the German point of view. Another source is the chronicler Widukind of Corvey, who provides some important details.

==Background==

In 947, Berthold, Duke of Bavaria, a competent military leader, died and was succeeded by Henry I, brother of King Otto I. Aventinus stated that the Hungarians invaded Bavaria for this reason, but they weren&#x27;t able to penetrate deep into East Francia. In the following years, the Germans started to threaten Transdanubia, with border clashes erupting along the Enns River. According to Hrotsvitha, Henry brought back much booty and prisoners from the Avars due to these. In 952, Otto put Italy under the protection of the Bavarian army, and westward invasions by the Magyars stopped temporarily. However, 953 saw rebellion in Francia under the leadership of the king&#x27;s son Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, and son-in-law Conrad, Duke of Lorraine, mainly because of the occupation of Italy. In 954, these men called in the Hungarians, who then plundered the Rhineland and devastated France. The warriors returned from this successful adventure safely through Burgundy and Northern Italy.

The year 955 started badly for King Otto. Despite his best efforts, the archbishop of Salzburg joined the enemy. Harold was blinded and exiled to Tyrol, while his wealth was taken by Henry&#x27;s vassals, but this upset many more Bavarian counts, who took up arms against the king. In spite of the growing of the resistance, Otto gained a shining victory at Mühldorf, proceeding to siege Regensburg. Much of the city had already burned down, however its defenders long endured bombardment by Otto&#x27;s siege engines before surrendering due to hunger, as no relief arrived. The internal situation hardly improved after Otto&#x27;s defeat of the rebellion, as the nephews of Prince Hermann of Saxony frequently raided the duchy, allying with Polabian principalities. In early July Otto received Hungarian legates, who claimed to come in peace, but who the Germans suspected were actually assessing the outcome of the rebellion. After a few days, he let them go with some small gifts.

Soon, couriers from Otto I&#x27;s brother Henry I, Duke of Bavaria, arrived to inform Otto I in Magdeburg of a Hungarian invasion. According to Prince-Bishop Ulrich, &quot;they devastated the land of Noricum from the Danube to the Black Forest, which goes to the mountainous regions&quot;. According to Widukind, &quot;he (Otto) started the march against the enemy like he wouldn&#x27;t get tired in the previous war, only taking some of the Saxons by him, as the Slavic war threatened them&quot;. Saxony was distant from Augsburg and its environs, and considerable time would have elapsed waiting for Saxons&#x27; arrival. Ulm was chosen as the place to gather the anti-Hungarian forces. The battle took place six weeks after the first report of an invasion, and historian Hans Delbrück asserts that they could not have possibly made the march in time.
The King ordered his troops to concentrate on the Danube, in the vicinity of Neuburg and Ingolstadt. He did this to march on the Hungarian line of communications and catch them in their rear while they were raiding northeast of Augsburg. It was also a central point of concentration for all the contingents that were assembling. Strategically, therefore, this was the best location for Otto I to concentrate his forces before making the final descent upon the Hungarians.

There were other troops that had an influence on the course of the battle. On previous occasions, in 932 and 954 for example, there had been Hungarian incursions that had invaded the German lands to the south of the Danube, and then retreated back to their native country via Lotharingia, to the West Frankish Kingdom and finally, through Italy. That is to say, a wide sweeping U-turn that initially started westward, then progressed to the south, and then finally to the east back to their homeland; and thus escaping retribution in German territory. The King was aware of the escape of these Hungarians on the above-mentioned occasions, and was determined to trap them. He therefore ordered his brother, Archbishop Bruno, to keep the Lotharingian forces in Lotharingia. With a powerful force of knights pressing them from the west, and an equally strong force of knights chasing them from the east, the Hungarians would be unable to escape.

Located south of Augsburg, the Lechfeld is the flood plain that lies along the river Lech. The battle appears as the second Battle of Augsburg in Hungarian historiography. The first Battle of Lechfeld happened in the same area forty-five years earlier.

==Prelude==

Gerhard writes that the Hungarian forces advanced across the Lech to the river Iller and ravaged the lands in between. They then withdrew from the Iller and placed Augsburg, a border city of Swabia, under siege. Augsburg had been heavily damaged during a rebellion against Otto I in 954. The city was defended by Bishop Ulrich. He ordered his contingent of soldiers to not fight the Hungarians in the open and reinforce the main south gate of the fortress instead. He motivated them with the 23rd Psalm (&quot;Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death&quot;). While this defense was going on, the King was raising an army to march south. Simon of Kéza mentions that the Hungarians harassed Augsburg with attacks all day and night. That means before the real siege they wished to take the city by rushes.

After admitting that this tactic doesn&#x27;t work, a major action took place on 8 August at the eastern gate, which the Magyars tried to storm in large numbers, suspecting that it has weak defense because of its difficult accessibility. Ulrich led his professional &quot;milites&quot; soldiers out into the field to engage the enemy in close combat. Ulrich writes of himself that he was unarmed, wearing only a stola while mounted on a warhorse, and all the arrows and stones bypassed him. According to him, the Hungarians could enter the gates anytime, however they lost their commander during the attack, and withdraw to their camp taking the body. At first the defenders thought that the Hungarians were victorious and resuming the siege, only to realize that they were going back to the other side of the Lech.

During the night, the defenders took positions in all towers and the Hungarians completely surrounded the city with siege engines and infantry, who were driven forward by the whips of the Hungarian leaders. Next day, when the fights barely started they were informed by the traitor Berchtold of Risinesburg that Otto I deployed his troops near. The siege was suspended, and the Hungarian leaders held a war council. As the Hungarians departed, Count Dietpald of Dillingen used the opportunity to lead soldiers to Otto I&#x27;s camp during the night.

==Opposing forces==
According to Widukind, Otto I had at his disposal eight &quot;legiones&quot; (divisions) that included three from Bavaria, two from Swabia, one from Franconia under Duke Conrad and one well-trained legion from Bohemia, under a prince of an unknown name, son of Boleslaus I. The eighth division, commanded by Otto I, and slightly larger than the others, included Saxons, Thuringians, and the King&#x27;s personal guard, the &quot;legio regia&quot;. The King&#x27;s contingent consisted of hand-picked troops. A late Roman legion had 1,000 men, so Otto I&#x27;s army may have numbered 7,000–9,000 troops. Augsburg was defended by professional &quot;milites&quot; (soldiers).

The Hungarians, also known as the Magyars, had a very different structure and fighting style than the Ottonian military. The Magyars preferred fighting at a distance with mounted archers over fighting in close combat with melee weapons, furthermore, the Magyars wore much lighter armor than Otto I&#x27;s men. While there is some debate as to the number of mounted archers included in the Magyar forces, historians believe there was anywhere between 8,000–10,000 mounted archers. While this fighting style was effective, especially during raids against small villages and small military forces, historians have pointed out some weaknesses. One such weakness is the difficulty that came with raising horses that were suited for battle. Not only do horses require a large area to graze, but training them to be comfortable in battle takes a significant amount of time. This weakness was the biggest factor that limited the number of mounted archers available for the Hungarians. Another weakness is the fact that the bows used by the Magyars proved ineffective during inclement weather like rain. Without the ability to play to their strength, the Magyars would be forced to rely on melee combat, which was another weakness for them.

==Battle==

On 9 August, the German scouts reported that the Hungarian army was in the vicinity. Otto I deployed his army for battle the next day. It&#x27;s likely that Otto and Ulrich had communicated in the previous days, and that&#x27;s why the king knew that the city needed a relief force quickly. He departed from Ulm at least by day 7. The order of march of the German army was as follows: the three Bavarian contingents, the Frankish contingent under Duke Konrad, the royal unit (the center), the two contingents of Swabians and the Bohemian contingent guarding the supply train in the rear. The Bavarians were placed at the head of column, according to Delbrück, because they were marching through Bavarian territory and they therefore knew the territory best. All of these were mounted. They could make take the maximum distance of 25 kilometers per day. The German army marched through woodland that protected them from the Hungarian arrowstorm but also made it more difficult to see the Hungarian movements.

According to the chronicler Widukind of Corvey, Otto I &quot;pitched his camp in the territory of the city of Augsburg and joined there the forces of Henry I, Duke of Bavaria, who was himself lying mortally ill nearby, and by Duke Conrad with a large following of Franconian knights. Conrad&#x27;s unexpected arrival encouraged the warriors so much that they wished to attack the enemy immediately.&quot;
The arrival of Conrad, the exiled Duke of Lotharingia (Lorraine), and Otto I&#x27;s son-in-law, was particularly heartening because he had recently thrown in his lot with the Magyars, but now returned to fight under Otto I; in the ensuing battle he lost his life. A legion of Swabians was commanded by Burchard III, Duke of Swabia, who had married Otto I&#x27;s niece Hedwig. Also among those fighting under Otto I was Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia. Otto I himself led the &quot;legio regia&quot;, stronger than any of the others in both numbers and quality.

The main Hungarian army blocked Otto I&#x27;s way to Augsburg. A contingent of Hungarian horse-archers crossed the river west of Augsburg and immediately attacked the Bohemian legion from the flank. The Bohemians were routed and the two Swabian legions were badly damaged. The Hungarians stopped to plunder the German baggage train and Duke Conrad the Red used the opportunity to attack the vulnerable Hungarians and shatter them. Conrad returned to Otto I with captured Hungarian banners. Conrad&#x27;s victory prevented the German army from being encircled.

Otto I rallied his men with a speech in which he claimed the Germans had better weapons than the Hungarians. Otto I then led the German army into battle with the main Hungarian force, defeating them. How the main Ottonian military defeated the Hungarians, however, is somewhat unclear. This is because Widukind&#x27;s account of the battle is remarkably short and lacking in detail, which is surprising considering the significance of the battle. This has left some historians to speculate how the battle played out based on the strategies outlined in Vegetius&#x27;s &quot;Epitome of Military Science&quot;, which heavily influenced Ottonian strategy. According to these historians, while the infantry approached the center of the Magyar formation, Conrad&#x27;s cavalry, posted on the left wing and protected on its flank from nearby cliffs, would stay out of range of the Hungarian archers but would also attempt to draw them more to their right. Meanwhile the royal legion, under Otto I&#x27;s personal leadership, engaged the enemy from the right. Although the King&#x27;s forces suffered losses from the archers, this gave the royal legion the opportunity to directly assault the Magyars in close combat, which was not the Magyar&#x27;s area of strength. Conrad&#x27;s forces would then wheel in from Otto I&#x27;s left wing, putting the Hungarians in danger of being enveloped. Seeing the day going against them, the Hungarians retreated in ordered formations across the Lech to the east. Otto I&#x27;s army pursued, killing every captured Hungarian. The Germans took the Hungarian camp, liberating prisoners and reclaiming booty.

However, Otto I did not chase the Magyars much longer that day and for several reasons. This proved to be a wise decision. Although the Hungarians suffered heavy losses, so did the king&#x27;s forces. Three legions, in the rear of the relief column, had been decimated. Furthermore, because of their heavy equipment, Otto I&#x27;s men were no doubt more affected by the stifling heat than their lightly armored opponents. Simply put, the King and his men were in no position to pursue and destroy the Magyars that day, leaving the initial battle a draw. The Magyars were also known to pull off feigned retreats, when they would lure their opponents into more advantageous positions, like open fields, then they would turn and defeat them. A notable example occurred in 910 against East Frankish forces. This time the King instead opted to spend the night after the battle in Augsburg. On 11 August he specifically issued the order that all river crossings were to be held. This was done so that as many of the Hungarians as possible and specifically their leaders, could be captured and killed. This strategy proved successful, as Duke Henry of Bavaria captured a number of their leaders and killed them. Some Hungarians tried to flee across an unknown river but were swept away by the current. Some sought refuge in nearby villages. The destruction of the Hungarian army continued on 12 August, when heavy rainfall and flooding allowing the German troops, operating from nearby fortifications, to kill almost all the fleeing Hungarian soldiers. The majority of these fortifications had been built and fortified during the reign of Otto I&#x27;s father, Henry I of Saxony, as part of his defense-in-depth strategy against enemy invaders. If these had not been in place, it is very likely that the Hungarians could have completed an orderly retreat once the floodwaters receded and the Battle of Lechfeld would have remained a draw.

The captured Magyars were either executed, or sent back to their ruling prince, Taksony, missing their ears and noses. The Hungarian leaders Lél, Bulcsú and Súr, who were not Árpáds, were executed after the battle. Duke Conrad was also killed, after he loosened his mail armour in the summer heat and one arrow struck his throat.

==Aftermath==

Upon destruction of the Hungarian forces, the German army proclaimed Otto I father of the fatherland and emperor. In 962, on the strength of this, Otto I went to Rome and had himself crowned Holy Roman Emperor by Pope John XII. Historian Pierre Riché writes that Otto I was regarded by many thereafter as a &quot;new Charlemagne&quot;, which also led to him being called &quot;Otto the Great.&quot;

The Hungarian leaders Bulcsú, Lehel and Súr were taken to Regensburg and hanged with many other Hungarians. 

The German annihilation of the Hungarian army definitively ended the attacks of Magyar nomads against Latin Europe. One of Otto&#x27;s allies, the bishop of Cremona, claimed that the victory at Lechfeld left the Hungarians so cowed that they would not &quot;dare to mutter.&quot; The Hungarian historian Gyula Kristó calls it a &quot;catastrophic defeat&quot;. Following the tactical disaster, the Hungarians reached the end of almost a century as Europe&#x27;s dominant military. Moreover, after 955, the Hungarians completely ceased all campaigns westwards. In addition, Otto I did not launch any further military campaigns against them; their leader Fajsz was dethroned following their defeat and succeeded as Grand Prince of the Hungarians by Taksony.

===Analysis===
This battle has been viewed as a symbolic victory for the knightly cavalry, who would define European warfare in the High Middle Ages, over the nomadic light cavalry that characterized warfare during the Early Middle Ages in Central and Eastern Europe.

Paul K. Davis writes, the &quot;Magyar defeat ended more than 90 years of their pillaging western Europe and convinced survivors to settle down, creating the basis for the state of Hungary.&quot;

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Sources ===
*
* Partial previews are at the and the .
*
*
*
*
*
* Reprinted: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273069" start="4" end="22" title="Battle of Lechfeld" label="Battle of Lechfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q273069" start="41" end="66" title="Battle of Lechfeld" label="Second Battle of Lechfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="169" end="187" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="201" end="217" title="Otto I the Great" label="Otto I the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q286957" start="263" end="268" title="Horka (title)" label="Harka"/>
<link wikidata="Q851793" start="275" end="281" title="Bulcsú (chieftain)" label="Bulcsú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044288" start="301" end="304" title="Lehel" label="Lél"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315530" start="309" end="312" title="Súr (chieftain)" label="Súr"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="364" end="371" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="377" end="389" title="Western Christianity" label="Latin Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="430" end="446" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074665" start="496" end="508" title="horse archer" label="horse archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="511" end="519" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="525" end="537" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155841" start="691" end="695" title="Lech (river)" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q523562" start="755" end="768" title="heavy cavalry" label="heavy cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="820" end="828" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="885" end="901" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Duchy of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455559" start="979" end="1003" title="Conrad, Duke of Lorraine" label="Conrad, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1036" end="1043" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="1842" end="1860" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="2037" end="2055" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q714866" start="2224" end="2242" title="Ulrich of Augsburg" label="Ulrich of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q312386" start="2346" end="2364" title="Widukind of Corvey" label="Widukind of Corvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q221328" start="2428" end="2453" title="Berthold, Duke of Bavaria" label="Berthold, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q367571" start="2510" end="2517" title="Henry I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="2530" end="2541" title="Otto the Great" label="King Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61140" start="2543" end="2552" title="Johannes Aventinus" label="Aventinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="2588" end="2595" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="2663" end="2675" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q840562" start="2733" end="2745" title="Transdanubia" label="Transdanubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217524" start="2786" end="2796" title="Enns (river)" label="Enns River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170248" start="2811" end="2821" title="Hrotsvitha" label="Hrotsvitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="2913" end="2918" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504535" start="3103" end="3126" title="Liudolf, Duke of Swabia" label="Liudolf, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455559" start="3143" end="3167" title="Conrad, Duke of Lorraine" label="Conrad, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="3279" end="3288" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="3380" end="3388" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="3393" end="3407" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="3482" end="3492" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="3496" end="3504" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="3556" end="3561" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q502615" start="3768" end="3776" title="Mühldorf" label="Mühldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="3798" end="3808" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="4152" end="4175" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q367571" start="4437" end="4461" title="Henry I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="4491" end="4500" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="4595" end="4602" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="4626" end="4638" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q312386" start="4698" end="4706" title="Widukind of Corvey" label="Widukind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="5019" end="5022" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q76575" start="5169" end="5182" title="Hans Delbrück" label="Hans Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q125652" start="5326" end="5333" title="Neuburg an der Donau" label="Neuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="5338" end="5348" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="5998" end="6009" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="6018" end="6039" title="West Frankish Kingdom" label="West Frankish Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6061" end="6066" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56228" start="6428" end="6444" title="Bruno the Great" label="Archbishop Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q155841" start="6751" end="6755" title="Lech (river)" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6812" end="6821" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="6822" end="6836" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515491" start="6842" end="6866" title="Battle of Lechfeld (910)" label="first Battle of Lechfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q159467" start="7012" end="7017" title="Iller" label="Iller"/>
<link wikidata="Q714866" start="7246" end="7259" title="Ulrich of Augsburg" label="Bishop Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q383102" start="7425" end="7435" title="Psalm 23" label="23rd Psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070134" start="7590" end="7603" title="Simon of Kéza" label="Simon of Kéza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="8169" end="8174" title="stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8856" end="8880" title="Berchtold of Risinesburg" label="Berchtold of Risinesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="9259" end="9266" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="9277" end="9283" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="9294" end="9303" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="9355" end="9362" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360112" start="9406" end="9417" title="Boleslaus I of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160892" start="9515" end="9526" title="Thuringians" label="Thuringians"/>
<link wikidata="Q312386" start="12101" end="12119" title="Widukind of Corvey" label="Widukind of Corvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q367571" start="12223" end="12247" title="Henry I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q455559" start="12299" end="12310" title="Conrad, Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="12520" end="12531" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62999" start="12780" end="12808" title="Burchard III, Duke of Swabia" label="Burchard III, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360112" start="12897" end="12925" title="Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="13204" end="13212" title="Czechs" label="Bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="16925" end="16941" title="defense-in-depth" label="defense-in-depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q347935" start="17250" end="17257" title="Taksony of Hungary" label="Taksony"/>
<link wikidata="Q51153" start="17345" end="17351" title="Árpáds" label="Árpáds"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="17678" end="17682" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="17707" end="17725" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172933" start="17729" end="17742" title="Pope John XII" label="Pope John XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q851793" start="17938" end="17944" title="Bulcsú (chieftain)" label="Bulcsú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044288" start="17946" end="17951" title="Lehel" label="Lehel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121105" start="18330" end="18342" title="Gyula Kristó" label="Gyula Kristó"/>
<link wikidata="Q725483" start="18679" end="18684" title="Fajsz" label="Fajsz"/>
<link wikidata="Q906646" start="18739" end="18769" title="Grand Prince of the Hungarians" label="Grand Prince of the Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q347935" start="18773" end="18780" title="Taksony of Hungary" label="Taksony"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="18856" end="18862" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q523562" start="18865" end="18872" title="heavy cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="18915" end="18931" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="19002" end="19019" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="19023" end="19030" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="19035" end="19049" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27828" start="19052" end="19065" title="Paul K. Davis (historian)" label="Paul K. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="19233" end="19240" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37087" wikidata="Q93021" url="?curid=37087" title="Steve McConnell">
<text>Steven C. McConnell is an author of software engineering textbooks such as &quot;Code Complete&quot;, &quot;Rapid Development&quot;, and &quot;Software Estimation&quot;. He is cited as an expert in software engineering and project management.

== Career ==
McConnell graduated with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in philosophy, minoring in computer science, at Whitman College in Walla Walla, Washington, and a master&#x27;s degree in software engineering from Seattle University. He then pursued a career in the desktop software industry, working at Microsoft, Boeing, the Russell Investment Group and several other Seattle area firms. At Microsoft, McConnell worked on TrueType as part of Windows 3.1. At Boeing, he worked on a Strategic Defense Initiative project.

McConnell published his first book, &quot;Code Complete&quot;, in 1993.

From 1996 to 1998, he was the editor of the &quot;Best Practices&quot; column in the IEEE Software magazine. From 1998 to 2002, he served as the editor-in-chief of the magazine.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; has quoted McConnell stating that there are &quot;15 to 50 defects per 1,000 lines of code in delivered software&quot; on average.

==References==

*TV Interview, University of Washington TV
*Web Interview, on .NET Rocks!

== External links ==
*Steve McConnell&#x27;s website
*Construx Software, Steve McConnell&#x27;s company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93021" start="0" end="19" title="Steve McConnell" label="Steven C. McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="36" end="56" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140024" start="81" end="94" title="Code Complete" label="Code Complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996607" start="355" end="370" title="Whitman College" label="Whitman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q222338" start="374" end="397" title="Walla Walla, Washington" label="Walla Walla, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="429" end="449" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q615873" start="455" end="473" title="Seattle University" label="Seattle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="545" end="554" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="556" end="562" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q743733" start="568" end="592" title="Russell Investment Group" label="Russell Investment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="665" end="673" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="685" end="696" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="724" end="752" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140024" start="805" end="818" title="Code Complete" label="Code Complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q845647" start="921" end="934" title="IEEE Software" label="IEEE Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="981" end="996" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1256" end="1267" title=".NET Rocks!" label=".NET Rocks!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37091" wikidata="Q2259392" url="?curid=37091" title="Jess (programming language)">
<text>Jess is a rule engine for the Java computing platform, written in the Java programming language. It was developed by Ernest Friedman-Hill of Sandia National Laboratories. It is a superset of the CLIPS language. It was first written in late 1995. The language provides rule-based programming for the automation of an expert system, and is often termed as an &quot;expert system shell&quot;. In recent years, intelligent agent systems have also developed, which depend on a similar ability.

Rather than a procedural paradigm, where one program has a loop that is activated only one time, the declarative paradigm used by Jess applies a set of rules to a set of facts continuously by a process named &quot;pattern matching&quot;. Rules can modify the set of facts, or can execute any Java code. It uses the Rete algorithm to execute rules.

==License==
The licensing for Jess is freeware for education and government use, and is proprietary software, needing a license, for commercial use. In contrast, CLIPS, which is the basis and starting code for Jess, is free and open-source software.

==Code examples==
Code examples:

; is a comment

(bind ?x 100)

; x = 100

(deffunction max (?a ?b)
 (if (&gt; ?a ?b) then ?a else ?b))

(deffacts myroom
 (furniture chair)
 (furniture table)
 (furniture bed)

(deftemplate car
 (slot color)
 (slot mileage)
 (slot value)

(assert (car (color red) (mileage 10000) (value 400)))

Sample code:

(clear)
(deftemplate blood-donor (slot name) (slot type))
(deffacts blood-bank ; put names &amp; their types into working memory
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Alice&quot;)(type &quot;A&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Agatha&quot;)(type &quot;A&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Bob&quot;)(type &quot;B&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Barbara&quot;)(type &quot;B&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Jess&quot;)(type &quot;AB&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Karen&quot;)(type &quot;AB&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Onan&quot;)(type &quot;O&quot;))
 (blood-donor (name &quot;Osbert&quot;)(type &quot;O&quot;))
(defrule can-give-to-same-type-but-not-self ; handles A &gt; A, B &gt; B, O &gt; O, AB &gt; AB, but not N1 &gt; N1
 (blood-donor (name ?name)(type ?type))
 (blood-donor (name ?name2)(type ?type2 &amp;:(eq ?type ?type2) &amp;: (neq ?name ?name2) ))
 (printout t ?name &quot; can give blood to &quot; ?name2 crlf)
(defrule O-gives-to-others-but-not-itself ; O to O cover in above rule
 (blood-donor (name ?name)(type ?type &amp;:(eq ?type &quot;O&quot;)))
 (blood-donor (name ?name2)(type ?type2 &amp;: (neq ?type ?type2) &amp;: (neq ?name ?name2) ))
 (printout t ?name &quot; can give blood to &quot; ?name2 crlf)
(defrule A-or-B-gives-to-AB ; case O gives to AB and AB gives to AB already dealt with
 (blood-donor (name ?name)(type ?type &amp;:(or (eq ?type &quot;A&quot;) (eq ?type &quot;B&quot; ))))
 (blood-donor (name ?name2)(type ?type2 &amp;: (eq ?type2 &quot;AB&quot;) &amp;: (neq ?name ?name2) ))
 (printout t ?name &quot; can give blood to &quot; ?name2 crlf)
;(watch all)
(reset)
(run)
==See also==
* Semantic reasoner
* Decision Model and Notation 

===Related systems===
* CLIPS: public-domain software tool to build expert systems
* ILOG rules: business rule management system
* JBoss Drools: business rule management system (BRMS)
* Prolog: general purpose logic programming language
* OpenL Tablets: business centric rules and BRMS
* DTRules: decision table based, open-source rule engine for Java

==References==
===Further sources===

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2259392" start="0" end="4" title="Jess (programming language)" label="Jess"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773478" start="10" end="21" title="rule engine" label="rule engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713118" start="30" end="34" title="Java (software platform)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="35" end="53" title="computing platform" label="computing platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="70" end="74" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="75" end="95" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393089" start="117" end="137" title="Ernest Friedman-Hill" label="Ernest Friedman-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="141" end="169" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="179" end="187" title="superset" label="superset"/>
<link wikidata="Q165372" start="195" end="200" title="CLIPS" label="CLIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417149" start="268" end="290" title="rule-based programming" label="rule-based programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q184609" start="316" end="329" title="expert system" label="expert system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142726" start="407" end="424" title="intelligent agent" label="intelligent agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="504" end="523" title="Imperative programming" label="procedural paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="549" end="553" title="Loop (computing)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="591" end="611" title="Declarative programming" label="declarative paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503724" start="704" end="720" title="pattern matching" label="pattern matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002217" start="805" end="819" title="Rete algorithm" label="Rete algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q207621" start="855" end="864" title="Software license" label="licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="877" end="885" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="927" end="947" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary software"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="1058" end="1087" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="1547" end="1561" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929429" start="3055" end="3072" title="Semantic reasoner" label="Semantic reasoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962978" start="3075" end="3102" title="Decision Model and Notation" label="Decision Model and Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165372" start="3129" end="3134" title="CLIPS" label="CLIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037852" start="3136" end="3158" title="public-domain software" label="public-domain software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011386" start="3190" end="3194" title="ILOG" label="ILOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q634004" start="3242" end="3248" title="Drools" label="Drools"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="3291" end="3297" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095814" start="3344" end="3357" title="OpenL Tablets" label="OpenL Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q747762" start="3402" end="3416" title="decision table" label="decision table"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37096" wikidata="Q733507" url="?curid=37096" title="Floating-point unit">
<text>A floating-point unit (FPU), numeric processing unit (NPU), colloquially math coprocessor, is a part of a computer system specially designed to carry out operations on floating-point numbers. Typical operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and square root. Some FPUs can also perform various transcendental functions such as exponential or trigonometric calculations, but the accuracy can be low, so some systems prefer to compute these functions in software.

In general-purpose computer architectures, one or more FPUs may be integrated as execution units within the central processing unit; however, many embedded processors do not have hardware support for floating-point operations (while they increasingly have them as standard).

When a CPU is executing a program that calls for a floating-point operation, there are three ways to carry it out:
* A floating-point unit emulator (a floating-point library in software)
* Add-on FPU hardware
* Integrated FPU (in hardware)

== History ==

In 1954, the IBM 704 had floating-point arithmetic as a standard feature, one of its major improvements over its predecessor the IBM 701. This was carried forward to its successors the 709, 7090, and 7094.

In 1963, Digital announced the PDP-6, which had floating point as a standard feature.

In 1963, the GE-235 featured an &quot;Auxiliary Arithmetic Unit&quot; for floating point and double-precision calculations.

Historically, some systems implemented floating point with a coprocessor rather than as an integrated unit (but now in addition to the CPU, e.g. GPUsthat are coprocessors not always built into the CPUhave FPUs as a rule, while first generations of GPUs did not). This could be a single integrated circuit, an entire circuit board or a cabinet. Where floating-point calculation hardware has not been provided, floating-point calculations are done in software, which takes more processor time, but avoids the cost of the extra hardware. For a particular computer architecture, the floating-point unit instructions may be emulated by a library of software functions; this may permit the same object code to run on systems with or without floating-point hardware. Emulation can be implemented on any of several levels: in the CPU as microcode, as an operating system function, or in user-space code. When only integer functionality is available, the CORDIC methods are most commonly used for transcendental function evaluation.

In most modern computer architectures, there is some division of floating-point operations from integer operations. This division varies significantly by architecture; some have dedicated floating-point registers, while some, like Intel x86, go as far as independent clocking schemes.

CORDIC routines have been implemented in Intel x87 coprocessors (8087, 80287, 80387) up to the 80486 microprocessor series, as well as in the Motorola 68881 and 68882 for some kinds of floating-point instructions, mainly as a way to reduce the gate counts (and complexity) of the FPU subsystem.

Floating-point operations are often pipelined. In earlier superscalar architectures without general out-of-order execution, floating-point operations were sometimes pipelined separately from integer operations.

The modular architecture of Bulldozer microarchitecture uses a special FPU named FlexFPU, which uses simultaneous multithreading. Each physical integer core, two per module, is single-threaded, in contrast with Intel&#x27;s Hyperthreading, where two virtual simultaneous threads share the resources of a single physical core.

== Floating-point library ==

Some floating-point hardware only supports the simplest operations: addition, subtraction, and multiplication. But even the most complex floating-point hardware has a finite number of operations it can supportfor example, no FPUs directly support arbitrary-precision arithmetic.

When a CPU is executing a program that calls for a floating-point operation that is not directly supported by the hardware, the CPU uses a series of simpler floating-point operations. In systems without any floating-point hardware, the CPU emulates it using a series of simpler fixed-point arithmetic operations that run on the integer arithmetic logic unit.

The software that lists the necessary series of operations to emulate floating-point operations is often packaged in a floating-point library.

== Integrated FPUs ==
In some cases, FPUs may be specialized, and divided between simpler floating-point operations (mainly addition and multiplication) and more complicated operations, like division. In some cases, only the simple operations may be implemented in hardware or microcode, while the more complex operations are implemented as software.

In some current architectures, the FPU functionality is combined with SIMD units to perform SIMD computation; an example of this is the augmentation of the x87 instructions set with SSE instruction set in the x86-64 architecture used in newer Intel and AMD processors.

== Add-on FPUs ==

Several models of the PDP-11, such as the PDP-11/45, PDP-11/34a, PDP-11/44, and PDP-11/70, supported an add-on floating-point unit to support floating-point instructions. The PDP-11/60, MicroPDP-11/23 and several VAX models could execute floating-point instructions without an add-on FPU (the MicroPDP-11/23 required an add-on microcode option), and offered add-on accelerators to further speed the execution of those instructions.

In the 1980s, it was common in IBM PC/compatible microcomputers for the FPU to be entirely separate from the CPU, and typically sold as an optional add-on. It would only be purchased if needed to speed up or enable math-intensive programs.

The IBM PC, XT, and most compatibles based on the 8088 or 8086 had a socket for the optional 8087 coprocessor. The AT and 80286-based systems were generally socketed for the 80287, and 80386/80386SX-based machinesfor the 80387 and 80387SX respectively, although early ones were socketed for the 80287, since the 80387 did not exist yet. Other companies manufactured co-processors for the Intel x86 series. These included Cyrix and Weitek. Acorn Computers opted for the WE32206 to offer single, double and extended precision to its ARM powered Archimedes range, introducing a gate array to interface the ARM2 processor with the WE32206 to support the additional ARM floating-point instructions. Acorn later offered the FPA10 coprocessor, developed by ARM, for various machines fitted with the ARM3 processor.

Coprocessors were available for the Motorola 68000 family, the 68881 and 68882. These were common in Motorola 68020/68030-based workstations, like the Sun-3 series. They were also commonly added to higher-end models of Apple Macintosh and Commodore Amiga series, but unlike IBM PC-compatible systems, sockets for adding the coprocessor were not as common in lower-end systems.

There are also add-on FPU coprocessor units for microcontroller units (MCUs/μCs)/single-board computer (SBCs), which serve to provide floating-point arithmetic capability. These add-on FPUs are host-processor-independent, possess their own programming requirements (operations, instruction sets, etc.) and are often provided with their own integrated development environments (IDEs).

== See also ==
* Arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
* Address generation unit (AGU)
* Load–store unit
* CORDIC routines are used in many FPUs to implement functions but not greatly increase gate count
* Execution unit
* IEEE 754 floating-point standard
* IBM hexadecimal floating point
* Graphics processing unit
* Multiply–accumulate operation

== References ==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="2" end="21" title="Floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="23" end="26" title="Floating-point unit" label="FPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="29" end="52" title="Floating-point unit" label="numeric processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="54" end="57" title="Floating-point unit" label="NPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="73" end="89" title="Floating-point unit" label="math coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="106" end="114" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="168" end="182" title="Floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="215" end="223" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="225" end="236" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="238" end="252" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="254" end="262" title="division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="268" end="279" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="316" end="339" title="transcendental function" label="transcendental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="349" end="360" title="Exponential function" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="364" end="377" title="trigonometric" label="trigonometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="504" end="525" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="566" end="580" title="execution unit" label="execution unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="593" end="616" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="632" end="650" title="embedded processor" label="embedded processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="1030" end="1037" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653104" start="1146" end="1153" title="IBM 701" label="IBM 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755264" start="1255" end="1260" title="PDP-6" label="PDP-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039130" start="1324" end="1330" title="GE-200 series" label="GE-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="1475" end="1489" title="Floating-point arithmetic" label="floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="1497" end="1508" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="1581" end="1585" title="graphics processing unit" label="GPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1722" end="1740" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="1752" end="1765" title="Printed circuit board" label="circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="2055" end="2063" title="Emulator" label="emulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157965" start="2125" end="2136" title="object code" label="object code"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="2265" end="2274" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2282" end="2298" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="2315" end="2325" title="user-space" label="user-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q116076" start="2382" end="2388" title="CORDIC" label="CORDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="2424" end="2447" title="transcendental function" label="transcendental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="2557" end="2564" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="2692" end="2701" title="x86" label="Intel x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="2728" end="2736" title="computer clock" label="clocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="2788" end="2797" title="x87" label="Intel x87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632017" start="2812" end="2816" title="Intel 8087" label="8087"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="2842" end="2847" title="Intel 80486" label="80486"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153410" start="2889" end="2903" title="Motorola 68881" label="Motorola 68881"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="2991" end="2995" title="Logic gate" label="gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="3079" end="3088" title="instruction pipelining" label="pipelined"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045706" start="3101" end="3112" title="superscalar" label="superscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153762" start="3143" end="3165" title="out-of-order execution" label="out-of-order execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q294924" start="3283" end="3310" title="Bulldozer (microarchitecture)" label="Bulldozer microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q82178" start="3356" end="3383" title="simultaneous multithreading" label="simultaneous multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="3479" end="3493" title="Hyperthreading" label="Hyperthreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q527381" start="3859" end="3889" title="arbitrary-precision arithmetic" label="arbitrary-precision arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="4132" end="4139" title="Emulator" label="emulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q649900" start="4170" end="4192" title="fixed-point arithmetic" label="fixed-point arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="4228" end="4249" title="arithmetic logic unit" label="arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="4386" end="4393" title="library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="4673" end="4682" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="4818" end="4822" title="Single instruction, multiple data" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="4904" end="4907" title="x87" label="x87"/>
<link wikidata="Q741291" start="4930" end="4933" title="Streaming SIMD Extensions" label="SSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="4957" end="4963" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="5059" end="5065" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="5250" end="5253" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="5501" end="5507" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="5519" end="5533" title="microcomputers" label="microcomputers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="5579" end="5582" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q34349" start="5723" end="5725" title="IBM Personal Computer XT" label="XT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="5826" end="5828" title="IBM Personal Computer/AT" label="AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="5833" end="5838" title="Intel 80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5885" end="5890" title="x87#80287" label="80287"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="5896" end="5909" title="Intel 80386" label="80386/80386SX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5932" end="5937" title="x87#80387" label="80387"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043421" start="5942" end="5949" title="Intel 80387SX" label="80387SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q747489" start="6132" end="6137" title="Cyrix" label="Cyrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937841" start="6142" end="6148" title="Weitek" label="Weitek"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="6150" end="6165" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307173" start="6197" end="6203" title="Single-precision floating-point format" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="6205" end="6211" title="Double-precision floating-point format" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421900" start="6216" end="6234" title="extended precision" label="extended precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="6242" end="6245" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="6254" end="6264" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q937498" start="6556" end="6577" title="Motorola 68000 series" label="Motorola 68000 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153410" start="6583" end="6598" title="Motorola 68881" label="68881 and 68882"/>
<link wikidata="Q916240" start="6621" end="6635" title="Motorola 68020" label="Motorola 68020"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="6636" end="6641" title="Motorola 68030" label="68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="6648" end="6659" title="workstation" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050358" start="6671" end="6676" title="Sun-3" label="Sun-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="6745" end="6754" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="6769" end="6774" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="6946" end="6961" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="6979" end="7000" title="single-board computer" label="single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="7047" end="7057" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="7164" end="7174" title="Mathematical operation" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="7176" end="7191" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="7238" end="7272" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="7300" end="7321" title="Arithmetic logic unit" label="Arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19851307" start="7330" end="7353" title="Address generation unit" label="Address generation unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663276" start="7362" end="7377" title="Load–store unit" label="Load–store unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q116076" start="7380" end="7386" title="CORDIC" label="CORDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="7479" end="7493" title="Execution unit" label="Execution unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q828287" start="7496" end="7504" title="IEEE 754" label="IEEE 754"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968834" start="7531" end="7561" title="IBM hexadecimal floating point" label="IBM hexadecimal floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="7564" end="7588" title="Graphics processing unit" label="Graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327576" start="7591" end="7620" title="Multiply–accumulate operation" label="Multiply–accumulate operation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37101" wikidata="Q155271" url="?curid=37101" title="Think tank">
<text>A think tank, or public policy institute, is a research institute that performs research and advocacy concerning topics such as social policy, political strategy, economics, military, technology, and culture. Most think tanks are non-governmental organizations, but some are semi-autonomous agencies within a government, and some are associated with particular political parties, businesses, or the military. Think tanks are often funded by individual donations, with many also accepting government grants.

Think tanks publish articles and studies, and sometimes draft legislation on particular matters of policy or society. This information is then used by governments, businesses, media organizations, social movements or other interest groups. Think tanks range from those associated with highly academic or scholarly activities to those that are overtly ideological and pushing for particular policies, with a wide range among them in terms of the quality of their research. Later generations of think tanks have tended to be more ideologically oriented.

Modern think tanks began as a phenomenon in the United Kingdom in the 19th and early 20th centuries, with most of the rest being established in other English-speaking countries. Prior to 1945, they tended to focus on the economic issues associated with industrialization and urbanization. During the Cold War, many more American and other Western think tanks were established, which often guided government Cold War policy. Since 1991, more think tanks have been established in non-Western parts of the world. More than half of all think tanks that exist today were established after 1980. As of 2023, there are more than 11,000 think tanks around the world.

== History ==
According to historian Jacob Soll, while the term &quot;think tank&quot; is modern, with its origin evidence shows that, 

Soll cites as an early example the , created in Paris around 1620 by the brothers Pierre and Jacques Dupuy and also known after 1635 as the . The Club de l&#x27;Entresol, active in Paris between 1723 and 1731, was another prominent example of an early independent think tank focusing on public policy and current affairs, especially economics and foreign affairs.

=== 19th century ===
Several major current think tanks were founded in the 19th century. The Royal United Services Institute was founded in 1831 in London, and the Fabian Society in 1884.

=== 20th century ===
The oldest United States–based think tank, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, was founded in Washington, D.C., in 1910 by philanthropist Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie charged trustees to use the fund to The Brookings Institution was founded shortly thereafter in 1916 by Robert S. Brookings and was conceived as a bipartisan 

In the early 1920s, fascist and other far-right think tanks appeared in the Netherlands.

After 1945, the number of policy institutes increased, with many small new ones forming to express various issues and policy agendas. Until the 1940s, most think tanks were known only by the name of the institution. During the Second World War, think tanks were often referred to as &quot;brain boxes&quot;.

Before the 1950s, the phrase &quot;think tank&quot; did not refer to organizations. From its first appearances in the 1890s up to the 1950s, the phrase was most commonly used in American English to colloquially refer to the braincase or especially in a pejorative context to the human brain itself when commenting on an individual&#x27;s failings (in the sense that something was wrong with that person&#x27;s &quot;think tank&quot;). Around 1958, the first organization to be regularly described in published writings as &quot;the Think Tank&quot; (note the title case and the use of the definite article) was the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. However, the Center does not count itself as and is not perceived to be a think tank in the contemporary sense. During the 1960s, the phrase &quot;think tank&quot; was attached more broadly to meetings of experts, electronic computers, and independent military planning organizations. The prototype and most prominent example of the third category was the RAND Corporation, which was founded in 1946 as an offshoot of Douglas Aircraft and became an independent corporation in 1948. In the 1970s, the phrase became more specifically defined in terms of RAND and others. During the 1980s and 1990s, the phrase evolved again to arrive at its broader contemporary meaning of an independent public policy research institute.

For most of the 20th century, such institutes were found primarily in the United States, along with much smaller numbers in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Western Europe. Although think tanks had also existed in Japan for some time, they generally lacked independence, having close associations with government ministries or corporations. There has been a veritable proliferation of &quot;think tanks&quot; around the world that began during the 1980s as a result of globalization, the end of the Cold War, and the emergence of transnational problems. Two-thirds of all the think tanks that exist today were established after 1970 and more than half were established since 1980.

The effect of globalisation on the proliferation of think tanks is most evident in regions such as Africa, Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and parts of Southeast Asia, where there was a concerted effort by other countries to assist in the creation of independent public policy research organizations. A survey performed by the Foreign Policy Research Institute&#x27;s Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program underscores the significance of this effort and documents the fact that most of the think tanks in these regions have been established since 1992.

=== 21st century ===
, there were more than 11,000 of these institutions worldwide. Many of the more established think tanks, created during the Cold War, are focused on international affairs, security studies, and foreign policy.

== Types ==
Think tanks vary by ideological perspectives, sources of funding, topical emphasis and prospective consumers. Funding may also represent who or what the institution wants to influence; in the United States, for example, 

McGann distinguishes think tanks based on independence, source of funding and affiliation, grouping think tanks into autonomous and independent, quasi-independent, government affiliated, quasi-governmental, university affiliated, political-party affiliated or corporate.

A new trend, resulting from globalization, is collaboration between policy institutes in different countries. For instance, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace operates offices in Washington, D.C., Beijing, Beirut, Brussels and formerly in Moscow, where it was closed in April 2022.

The Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program (TTCSP) at the University of Pennsylvania, led by James McGann, annually rates policy institutes worldwide in a number of categories and presents its findings in the Global Go-To Think Tanks rating index. However, this method of the study and assessment of policy institutes has been criticized by researchers such as Enrique Mendizabal and Goran Buldioski, Director of the Think Tank Fund, assisted by the Open Society Institute.

== Activities ==
Think tanks may attempt to broadly inform the public by holding conferences to discuss issues which they may broadcast; encouraging scholars to give public lectures, testifying before committees of governmental bodies; publishing and widely distributing books, magazines, newsletters or journals; creating mailing lists to distribute new publications; and engaging in social media.

Think tanks may privately influence policy by having their members accept bureaucratic positions, having members serve on political advisory boards, inviting policy-makers to events, allowing individuals to work at the think tank; employing former policy-makers; or preparing studies for policy makers.

== Governmental theory ==
The role of think tanks has been conceptualized through the lens of social theory. Plehwe argues that think tanks function as &quot;knowledge actors&quot; within a network of relationships with other knowledge actors. Such relationships including citing academics in publications or employing them on advisory boards, as well as relationships with media, political groups and corporate funders. They argue that these links allow for the construction of a &quot;discourse coalition&quot; with a common aim, citing the example of deregulation of trucking, airlines, and telecommunications in the 1970s. Plejwe argues that this deregulation represented a discourse coalition between the Ford Motor Company, FedEx, neo-liberal economists, the Brookings Institution and the American Enterprise Institute.

Elite theory considers how an &quot;elite&quot; influence the actions of think tanks and potentially bypass the political process, analysing the social background and values of those who work in think tanks. Pautz criticizes this viewpoint because there is in practice a variety of viewpoints in think tanks and argues it dismisses the influence that ideas can have.

== Advocacy ==
In some cases, corporate interests, military interests and political groups have found it useful to create policy institutes, advocacy organizations, and think tanks. For example, The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition was formed in the mid-1990s to dispute research finding an association between second-hand smoke and cancer. Military contractors may spend a portion of their tender on funding pro-war think tanks. According to an internal memorandum from Philip Morris Companies referring to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 

According to the progressive media watchdog Fairness &amp; Accuracy in Reporting, both left-wing and right-wing policy institutes are often quoted and rarely identified as such. The result is that think tank &quot;experts&quot; are sometimes depicted as neutral sources without any ideological predispositions when, in fact, they represent a particular perspective. In the United States, think tank publications on education are subjected to expert review by the National Education Policy Center&#x27;s &quot;Think Twice&quot; think tank review project.

A 2014 &quot;New York Times&quot; report asserted that foreign governments buy influence at many United States think tanks. According to the article: 

== Global think tanks ==
=== African think tanks ===
==== Ghana ====
Ghana&#x27;s first president, Kwame Nkrumah, set up various state-supported think tanks in the 1960s. By the 1990s, a variety of policy research centers sprang up in Africa set up by academics who sought to influence public policy in Ghana.

One such think tank was The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana, which was founded in 1989 when the country was ruled by the Provisional National Defence Council. The IEA undertakes and publishes research on a range of economic and governance issues confronting Ghana and Sub-Saharan Africa. It has also been involved in bringing political parties together to engage in dialogue. In particular it has organised Presidential debates every election year since the Ghanaian presidential election, 1996.

Notable think tanks in Ghana include:
* IMANI Centre for Policy and Education
* The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana (IEA)

==== Morocco ====
* AMAQUEN, founded in 2003, is a think tank in the field of education through its publications (rapports), international scientific journal &quot;The Journal of&quot; &quot;Quality in Education,&quot; and international events (CIMQUSEF).

==== Somalia ====

* Heritage Institute for Policy Studies
* Puntland Development Research Center

==== South Africa ====

* Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa
* Free Market Foundation
* FW de Klerk Foundation
* Helen Suzman Foundation
* Institute for Democratic Alternatives in South Africa (IDASA)
* Institute for Justice and Reconciliation
* Institute for Security Studies
* South African Institute of International Affairs (SAIIA)
* South African Institute of Race Relations

=== Asian think tanks ===
==== Afghanistan ====
Afghanistan has a number of think tanks that are in the form of governmental, non-governmental, and corporate organizations.
* Afghanistan Analysts Network
* Centre for Conflict and Peace Studies

==== Bangladesh ====
Bangladesh has a number of think tanks that are in the form of governmental, non-governmental, and corporate organizations.
* Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies (BIDS)
* Bangladesh Institute of Law and International Affairs (BILIA)
* Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies (BIPSS)
* Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD)
* International Growth Centre (IGC)
* Making Our Economy Right (MOER)
* Bangladesh Institute of Labour Studies (BILS)

==== China ====
In China a number of think tanks are sponsored by governmental agencies such as Development Research Center of the State Council, but still retain sufficient non-official status to be able to propose and debate ideas more freely. In January 2012, the first non-official think tank in mainland China, South Non-Governmental Think-Tank, was established in the Guangdong province. In 2009 the China Center for International Economic Exchanges was founded.

===== Hong Kong =====
In Hong Kong, early think tanks established in the late 1980s and early 1990s focused on political development, including the first direct Legislative Council members election in 1991 and the political framework of &quot;One Country, Two Systems&quot;, manifested in the Sino-British Joint Declaration. After the transfer of sovereignty to China in 1997, more think tanks were established by various groups of intellectuals and professionals. They have various missions and objectives including promoting civic education; undertaking research on economic, social and political policies; and promoting &quot;public understanding of and participation in the political, economic, and social development of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region&quot;.

Think tanks in Hong Kong include:
* Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre
* Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong
* Central Policy Unit
* Civic Exchange
* The Global Institute for Tomorrow
* HKGolden50
* Hong Kong Christian Industrial Committee
* Hong Kong Democratic Foundation
* Hong Kong People&#x27;s Council on Housing Policy
* The Lion Rock Institute
* New Century Forum
* Our Hong Kong Foundation
* One Country Two Systems Research Institute
* Path of Democracy
* Policy Innovation and Co-ordination Unit
* Professional Commons

==== India ====
India has the world&#x27;s second-largest number of think tanks. Most are based in New Delhi, and a few are government-sponsored. There are few think tanks that promote environmentally responsible and climate resilient ideas like Centre for Science and Environment, Centre for Policy Research and World Resources Institute. There are other prominent think tanks like Observer Research Foundation, Tillotoma Foundation and Centre for Civil Society.

In Mumbai, Strategic Foresight Group is a global think tank that works on issues such as water diplomacy, peace and conflict and foresight (futures studies). Think tanks with a development focus include those like the National Centre for Cold-chain Development (&#x27;NCCD&#x27;), which serve to bring an inclusive policy change by supporting the Planning Commission and related government bodies with industry-specific inputs – in this case, set up at the behest of the government to direct cold chain development. Some think tanks have a fixed set of focus areas and they work towards finding out policy solutions to social problems in the respective areas.

Initiatives such as National e-Governance Plan (to automate administrative processes) and National Knowledge Network (NKN) (for data and resource sharing amongst education and research institutions), if implemented properly, should help improve the quality of work done by think tanks.

Some notable think tanks in India include:
* Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR)
* Centre for Civil Society (CCS)
* Centre for Development Studies (CDS)
* Centre for Dialogue and Reconciliation (CDR)
* Centre for Land Warfare Studies (CLAWS)
* Centre for Policy Research (CPR)
* Centre for Public Policy Research (CPPR)
* Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR)
* Council On Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW)
* Edward &amp; Cynthia Institute of Public Health (ECIPH)
* Forum of Free Enterprise (FFE)
* Foundation for Democratic Reforms (FDR)
* Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA)
* Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA)
* Institute for Social and Economic Change (ISEC)
* Nabakrushna Choudhury Centre for Development Studies (NCDS)
* National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER)
* National Institute of Advanced Studies (NIAS)
* Observer Research Foundation (ORF)
* The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)
* Vivekananda International Foundation (VIF)
* Wildlife Institute of India (WII)
==== Indonesia ====

* Centre for Strategic and International Studies
* Setara Institute

==== Iraq ====
Over 50 think tanks have emerged in Iraq, particularly in the Kurdistan Region. Iraq&#x27;s leading think tank is the Middle East Research Institute (MERI), based in Erbil. MERI is an independent non-governmental policy research organization, established in 2014 and publishes in English, Kurdish, and Arabic. It was listed in the global ranking by the United States&#x27;s Lauder Institute of the University of Pennsylvania as 46th in the Middle East.

==== Israel ====
There are many think tank teams in Israel, including:

* Shaharit – Creating Common Cause
* Jerusalem Institute for Market Studies (JIMS)
* Reut Institute
* Israel Council on Foreign Relations
* The Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs
* Adva Center
* Israel Democracy Institute
* Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research
* Myers-JDC-Brookdale Institute
* Floersheimer Studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* International Institute for Counter-Terrorism – IDC Herziliya
* Israel Center for Third Sector Research, Ben Gurion University of the Negev
* IPCRI – Israel/Palestine Center for Research and Information
* The Milken Institute
* Moshe Dayan Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies, Tel Aviv University
* The Begin-Sadat Center – Bar Ilan University
* The Center for the Study of Philanthropy in Israel at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* Israel Institute for Advanced Studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* The Jewish Arab Center (JAC), University of Haifa
* The Jewish People Policy Institute (JPPI)
* The Shalem Center
* Institute for National Security Studies, affiliated with Tel Aviv University.
==== South Korea ====
In South Korea, think tanks are prolific and influential and are a government go-to. Think tanks are prolific in the Korean landscape. Many policy research organisations in Korea focus on economoy and most research is done in public think tanks. There is a strong emphasis on the knowledge-based economy and, according to one respondent, think tank research is generally considered high quality.
* Korea Development Institute
* National Assembly Budget Office
* The Asan Institute for Policy Studies
* Samsung Economic Research Institute
* Center for Free Enterprise
* Korea International Trade Association
* The Yeouido Institute
* The Economic Information and Education Center
* Jeju Peace Institute
* Korea Institute for International Economic Policy
* Korea Institute of Public Administration
* Sejong Institute

==== Japan ====
Japan has over 100 think tanks, most of which cover not only policy research but also economy, technology and so on. Some are government related, but most of the think tanks are sponsored by the private sector.
* Asian Development Bank Institute
* Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry
* Genron NPO
* Global Industrial and Social Progress Research Institute
* Institute for International Monetary Affairs
* Institute of Developing Economies
* The International Academic Forum
* Japan Center for International Exchange
* Japan Institute for National Fundamentals
* Japan Institute of International Affairs
* Mitsubishi Research Institute
* National Institute for Research Advancement
* Rousoukai
* Shōwa Kenkyūkai
* Tokyo Foundation

==== Kazakhstan ====
Institute of World Economics and Politics (IWEP) at the Foundation of the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan was created in 2003. IWEP activities aimed at research problems of the world economy, international relations, geopolitics, security, integration and Eurasia, as well as the study of the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan and its contribution to the establishment and strengthening of Kazakhstan as an independent state, the development of international cooperation and the promotion of peace and stability.

The Kazakhstan Institute for Strategic Studies under the President of the RK (KazISS) was established by the Decree of the President of RK on 16 June 1993. Since its foundation the main mission of the Kazakhstan Institute for Strategic Studies under the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, as a national think tank, is to maintain analytical and research support for the President of Kazakhstan.

==== Malaysia ====
Most Malaysian think tanks are related either to the government or a political party. Historically they focused on defense, politics and policy. However, in recent years, think tanks that focus on international trade, economics, and social sciences have also been founded.

Notable think tanks in Malaysia include:

* Academy of Sciences Malaysia (ASM)
* Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs (IDEAS)
* Institute for Pioneering of Education and Economic Excellence (INSPIRE)
* Maritime Institute of Malaysia (MIMA)
* Jauhar Academy of Social Sciences (JASS)
* Jeffrey Cheah Institute on Southeast Asia (JCI)
* Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology (MIGHT)
* Islamic Renaissance Front (IRF)
* IDE Research Centre / Institut Darul Ehsan (IDE)
==== Pakistan ====

Pakistan&#x27;s think tanks mainly revolve around social policy, internal politics, foreign security issues, and regional geo-politics. Most of these are centered on the capital, Islamabad. One such think tank is the Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI), which focuses on policy advocacy and research particularly in the area of environment and social development.

Another policy research institute based in Islamabad is the Institute of Social and Policy Sciences (I-SAPS) which works in the fields of education, health, disaster risk reduction, governance, conflict and stabilization. Since 2007 – 2008, I-SAPS has been analyzing public expenditure of federal and provincial governments.

==== Philippines ====
Think tanks in the Philippines could be generally categorized in terms of their linkages with the national government. Several were set up by the Philippine government for the specific purpose of providing research input into the policy-making process.

==== Russia ====

* Valdai Discussion Club
* Izborsky Club

==== Sri Lanka ====
Sri Lanka has a number of think tanks that are in the form of governmental, non-governmental and corporate organizations.
* The Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies is a policy-studies institute that is often referred to as a think tank.
* LIRNEasia is a think tank working across the Asia-Pacific on regulatory and policy issues. Their main focus is the ICT sector, although they do work in other sectors, such as agriculture and health, which can benefit from ICT.
* Verité Research is an interdisciplinary think tank in Colombo.

==== Singapore ====
There are several think tanks in Singapore that advise the government on various policies and as well as private ones for corporations within the region. Many of them are hosted within the local public educational institutions.

Among them are the Singapore Institute of International Affairs (SIIA), Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), and the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies.

==== Taiwan ====
In 2017 Taiwan had 58 think tanks. As in most countries there is a mix of government- and privately-funded think tanks.

Taiwanese think tanks in alphabetical order:
* Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research
* Institute for National Defense and Security Research
* Prospect Foundation
* Taiwan Asia Exchange Foundation
* Taiwan Competitiveness Forum
* Taiwan Foundation for Democracy
* Taiwan Institute of Economic Research

==== Thailand ====

* Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council
* Thailand Development Research Institute
* iLaw

==== United Arab Emirates ====
The UAE has been a center for political oriented think tanks which concentrate on both regional and global policy. Notable think tank have emerged in the global debate on terrorism, education &amp; economical policies in the MENA region. Think tanks include:
* Al Mesbar Studies and Research Centre
* Dubai Economic Council
* Gulf Research Center
* Orient Research Centre

==== Uzbekistan ====
* CED – Center for Economic Development (Центр Содействия Экономическому Развитию) is a think tank whose major tasks are: analytic support in economic reforming and development in Uzbekistan; improving knowledge and skills of the subjects of economic development; assistance in productive dialogue between the government, civil society and private sectors on the economic development matters.
Key projects: Preparation of the National human development report for Uzbekistan, Sociological &quot;portrait&quot; of the Uzbek businessman, Preparation of an analytical report on export procedures optimization in Uzbekistan,
various industry and marketing researches in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan.

=== European think tanks ===
==== Belgium ====
Brussels hosts most of the European Institutions, hence a large number of international think tanks are based there. Notable think tanks are Bruegel, the Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), Centre for the New Europe (CNE), the European Centre of International Political Economy (ECIPE), the European Policy Centre (EPC), the Friends of Europe, the Global Governance Institute (GGI), Liberales, and Sport and Citizenship, among others.

==== Bulgaria ====
Bulgaria has a number of think tanks providing expertise and shaping policies, including Institute of Modern Politics.

==== Czech Republic ====
* The European Values Think-Tank
* The Prague Security Studies Institute (PSSI)

==== Denmark ====
* CEPOS is a classic libertarian/free-market conservative think tank in Denmark.

==== Finland ====
Finland has several small think tanks that provide expertise in very specific fields. Notable think tanks include:

* Åland Islands Peace Institute
* Demos Helsinki
* European Centre of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats (Hybrid CoE)
* Crisis Management Initiative (CMI)
* Research Institute of the Finnish Economy (Etla)
* Finnish Institute of International Affairs
In addition to specific independent think tanks, the largest political parties have their own think tank organizations. This is mainly due to support granted by state for such activity. Examples of such think tanks are the and Suomen Perusta. The corporate world has focused their efforts to central representative organization Confederation of Finnish Industries, which acts as think tank in addition to negotiating salaries with workers unions. Furthermore, there is the Finnish Business and Policy Forum (&quot;Elinkeinoelämän valtuuskunta&quot;, EVA). Agricultural and regional interests, associated with The Central Union of Agricultural Producers and Forest Owners (&quot;Maa- ja metsätaloustuottajain Keskusliitto&quot;, MTK) and the Centre Party, are researched by Pellervo Economic Research (&quot;Pellervon taloustutkimus&quot;, PTT). The Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions (&quot;Suomen Ammattiliittojen Keskusjärjestö&quot;, SAK) and the Social Democratic Party are associated with the Labour Institute for Economic Research (&quot;Palkansaajien tutkimuslaitos&quot;, PT). Each of these organizations often release forecasts concerning the national economy.

==== France ====
The French Institute of International Relations (IFRI) was founded in 1979 and is the third oldest think tank of western Europe, after Chatham House (UK, 1920) and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (Sweden, 1960). The primary goals of IFRI are to develop applied research in the field of public policy related to international issues, and foster interactive and constructive dialogue between researchers, professionals, and opinion leaders. France also hosts the European Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS), a Paris-based agency of the European Union and think tank researching security issues of relevance for the EU. There are also a number of pro-business think tanks, notably the Paris-based Fondation Concorde. The foundation focuses on increasing the competitiveness of French SME&#x27;s and aims to revive entrepreneurship in France.

On the left, the main think tanks in France are the Fondation Jean-Jaurès, which is organizationally linked to the French Socialist Party, and Terra Nova. Terra Nova is an independent left-leaning think tank, although it is nevertheless considered to be close to the Socialists. It works on producing reports and analyses of current public policy issues from a progressive point of view, and contributing to the intellectual renewal of social democracy.

The only French Think Tank mentioned in the &quot;think tanks to watch&quot; list of the 2014 Global Go To Think Tank Index Report is a French think tank created by Gaspard Koenig in 2013, independent from all political parties, which aims at promoting freedoms in France, in terms of fundamental rights, economics and societal issues. GenerationLibre is described as being able to connect to the right on pro business freedom and regulations issues but also to the left on issues such as basic income, gay marriage and the legalization of marijuana.

==== Germany ====
In Germany all of the major parties are loosely associated with research foundations that play some role in shaping policy, but generally from the more disinterested role of providing research to support policymakers than explicitly proposing policy. These include the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung (Christian Democratic Union-aligned), the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung (Social Democratic Party-aligned), the Hanns-Seidel-Stiftung (Christian Social Union-aligned), the (aligned with the Greens), Friedrich Naumann Foundation (Free Democratic Party-aligned) and the Rosa Luxemburg Foundation (aligned with Die Linke).

The German Institute for International and Security Affairs is a foreign policy think tank. Atlantic Community is an independent, non-partisan and non-profit organization set up as a joint project of Atlantische Initiative e.V. and Atlantic Initiative United States. The Institute for Media and Communication Policy deals with media-related issues. Transparency International is a think tank on the role of corporate and political corruption in international development.

==== Greece ====

In Greece there are many think tanks, also called research organisations or institutes.

==== Ireland ====

* The Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) is an independent research institute in Dublin, Ireland. Its research focuses on Ireland&#x27;s economic and social development to inform policy-making and societal understanding.
* The Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA) focuses on European and International affairs.
* The Iona Institute is a conservative, Catholic think tank.
* TASC (Think tank for Action on Social Change) is an Irish left-wing think tank.
* Transhuman Corporation is a research think tank that focuses on cyber and technology development.

==== Italy ====
* Bruno Leoni Institute
* Future Italy
* ISPI – Italian Institute for International Political Studies
* Istituto Affari Internazionali
* Trinità dei Monti
* Euro-Gulf Information Centre (EGIC)

==== Latvia ====
While think tanks are not widespread in Latvia, as opposed to single-issue advocacy organizations, there are several noticeable institutions in the Latvian think tank landscape:
* The oldest think tank in Latvia is the Latvian Institute of International Affairs. LIIA is a non governmental and non partisan foundation, established in 1992, and their research and advocacy mainly focuses on Latvian foreign policy; Transatlantic relations; European Union policies, including its neighborhood policy and Eastern Partnership; and multilateral and bilateral relations with Russia.
* Centre for Public policy PROVIDUS is a non governmental and non partisan association, established in 2002. Providus focuses their work (both research and advocacy) on topics especially relevant in transition and post-transition environments and Latvia in particular: good governance; criminal justice policy; tolerance and inclusive public policy and European policy.

Several think tanks are established and operate under the auspices of Universities, such as:
* Centre for European and transition studies is a think tank working under the auspices of the University of Latvia, the largest public university in the country. CETS was established in 2000.
* or Defense research centre in 1992 under the auspices of the National Academy of Defense.

==== Lithuania ====
Vilnius Institute for Policy Analysis (VIPA) is an independent non-governmental, non-profit, non-partisan policy think tank in Lithuania whose mission is to stand for the principles of open society, liberal democracy, rule of law and human rights. VIPA acts via advocacy for strong and safe European Union, analyzing and advocating for anti-authoritarian, transparent, and open governance ideas in Central and Eastern Europe, is an opinion leader offering an alternative opinion to the public versus populism, radicalism, and authoritarian trends, reinforcing active citizens&#x27; participation in decision making, analyzing fake news, disinformation, and offering media literacy initiatives, putting forward solutions to improve the accountability, transparency, and openness of Lithuania&#x27;s public sector, building a network of open society values oriented experts, civil activists and NGO&#x27;s.

==== Netherlands ====
All major political parties in the Netherlands have state-sponsored research foundations that play a role in shaping policy. The Dutch government also has its own think tank: the Scientific Council for Government Policy. The Netherlands furthermore hosts the Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael, or Clingendael Institute, an independent think tank and diplomatic academy which studies various aspects of international relations.

==== Poland ====
There is a large pool of think tanks in Poland on a wide variety of subjects. The oldest state-sponsored think tank is The Western Institute in Poznań (Polish: &quot;Instytut Zachodni&quot;). The second oldest is the Polish Institute of International Affairs (PISM) established in 1947. Another notable state-sponsored think tank is the Centre for Eastern Studies (OSW), which specializes in the countries neighboring Poland and in the Baltic Sea region, the Balkans, Turkey, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Among the private think tanks notable organizations include the Institute for Structural Research (IBS) on economic policy, The Casimir Pulaski Foundation on foreign policy, the Institute of Public Affairs (ISP) on social policy, and the Sobieski Institute.

==== Portugal ====
Founded in 1970, the SEDES is one of the oldest Portuguese civic associations and think tanks. Contraditório think tank was founded in 2008. Contraditório is a non-profit, independent and non-partisan think tank.

==== Romania ====
The Romanian Academic Society (SAR), founded in 1996, is a Romanian think tank for policy research.

==== Russia ====

* Valdai Discussion Club
* Izborsky Club

==== Serbia ====
The Foundation for the Advancement of Economics (FREN) was founded in 2005 by the Belgrade University&#x27;s Faculty of Economics.

==== Slovakia ====
Think tanks originating in Slovakia:

* GLOBSEC – Global think tank committed to enhancing security, prosperity and sustainability in Europe and throughout the world.
* Central European Labour Studies Institute or &quot;CELSI&quot; (&quot;Stredoeurópsky inštitút pre výskum práce&quot; in Slovak) – Central-european think tank which specializes in broadly defined labor issues, labour markets, and labor policy.
* Forum Minority Research Institute (&quot;Fórum Kisebbségkutató Intézet&quot; or &quot;Fórum Intézet&quot; in Hungarian and &quot;Fórum inštitút pre výskum menšín&quot; or &quot;Fórum inštitút&quot; in Slovak) – Think tank focusing on ethnic minorities living in Slovakia, especially Hungarians.

International think tanks with presence in Slovakia:
* Institute of Public Affairs (&quot;Inštitút pre verejné otázky&quot; or &quot;IVO&quot; in Slovak) – Australian-based think tank focusing on public policy issues.
* Open Society Foundations or &quot;OSF&quot; – US-based think tank with an aim of advancing justice, education, public health and independent media.
* Martens Centre (via the Anton Tunega Foundation) – Belgium-based think tank and political foundation of the European People&#x27;s Party (EPP) which embodies a pan-European mindset and promotes Christian-democratic and liberal-conservative political values.

==== Spain ====
The Elcano Royal Institute was created in 2001 following the example of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House) in the UK, although it is closely linked to (and receives funding from) the government in power.

More independent but clearly to the left of the political spectrum are the Centro de Investigaciones de Relaciones Internacionales y Desarrollo (CIDOB) founded in 1973; and the Fundación para las Relaciones Internacionales y el Diálogo Exterior (FRIDE) established in 1999 by Diego Hidalgo and main driving force behind projects such as the Club de Madrid, a group of democratic former heads of state and government, the Foreign Policy Spanish Edition and DARA.

Former Prime Minister José Maria Aznar presides over the Fundación para el Analisis y los Estudios Sociales (FAES), a policy institute that is associated with the conservative Popular Party (PP). Also linked to the PP is the Grupo de Estudios Estratégicos (GEES), which is known for its defense- and security-related research and analysis. For its part, the Fundación Alternativas is independent but close to left-wing ideas. The Socialist Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE) created Fundación Ideas in 2009 and dissolved it in January 2014. Also in 2009, the centrist Union, Progress and Democracy (UPyD) created Fundación Progreso y Democracia (FPyD).

==== Sweden ====
Timbro is a free market think tank and book publisher based in Stockholm.

==== Switzerland ====
Think tanks based within Switzerland include:
* Avenir Suisse, founded in 1999 by fifteen of the largest Swiss companies. It is supported by over 130 companies to date.
* DCAF, the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, founded in 2000 to research security sector governance and reform.
* Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute (GDI), conceived by Migros-founder Gottlieb Duttweiler in 1946.
* Horasis, which hosts the annual Horasis Global Meeting
* Liberal Institute, founded in 1979.

==== Ukraine ====
There are more than 100 registered think tanks in Ukraine, including:

* Centre of Policy and Legal Reform (CPLR), a non-governmental think tank founded in 1996.
* Center for Policy Studies in Ukraine, a non-governmental think tank founded in 1994.
* International Centre for Policy Studies, a non-governmental think tank founded in 1994.
* Razumkov Centre, a non-governmental think tank founded in 1994. It carries out research of public policy in the following spheres: domestic policy; state administration; economic policy; energy; land relations; foreign policy; social policy; international and regional security; national security and defense.
* Transatlantic Dialogue Center, a non-governmental think tank founded in 2021.

==== United Kingdom ====

In Britain, think tanks play a similar role to the United States, attempting to shape policy, and indeed there is some cooperation between British and American think tanks. For example, the London-based think tank Chatham House and the Council on Foreign Relations were both conceived at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 and have remained sister organisations.

The Bow Group, founded in 1951, is the oldest centre-right think tank and many of its members have gone on to serve as Members of Parliament or Members of the European Parliament. Past chairmen have included Conservative Party leader Michael Howard, Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s longest-serving Cabinet Minister Geoffrey Howe, Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont and former British Telecom chairman Christopher Bland.

Since 2000, a number of influential centre-right think tanks have emerged including Policy Exchange, Centre for Social Justice and most recently Onward.

=== Oceanian think tanks ===
==== Australia ====
Most Australian think tanks are based at universities – for example, the Melbourne Institute – or are government-funded – for example, the Productivity Commission or the CSIRO.

Private sources fund about 20 to 30 &quot;independent&quot; Australian think tanks. The best-known of these think tanks play a much more limited role in Australian public and business policy-making than do their equivalents in the United States. However, in the past decade the number of think tanks has increased substantially. Prominent Australian conservative think tanks include the Centre for Independent Studies, the Sydney Institute and the Institute of Public Affairs. Prominent leftist Australian think tanks include the McKell Institute, Per Capita, the Australia Institute, the Lowy Institute and the Centre for Policy Development. In recent years regionally-based independent and non-partisan think tanks have emerged.

Some think tanks, such as the Illawarra&#x27;s i-eat-drink-think, engage in discussion, research and advocacy within a broader civics framework. Commercial think tanks like the Gartner Group, Access Economics, the Helmsman Institute, and others provide additional insight which complements not-for-profit organisations such as CEDA, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, and the Australian Institute of Company Directors to provide more targeted policy in defence, program governance, corporate governance and similar.

Think tanks in Australia include:

* Air Power Australia
* Asia Education Foundation
* Asialink
* The Australia Institute
* Australian Fabian Society
* Australian Institute of International Affairs
* Australian Institute of Policy &amp; Science
* Australian Strategic Policy Institute
* The Brisbane Institute
* Centre for Independent Studies
* Centre for Policy Development
* Chifley Research Centre
* Committee for Economic Development of Australia
* Consumer Policy Research Centre (CPRC)
* Crowther Centre for Learning and Innovation
* Development Policy Centre
* Doctors Reform Society of Australia
* Evatt Foundation
* Grattan Institute
* H. R. Nicholls Society
* Infrastructure Partnerships Australia
* Institute for Economics and Peace
* Institute of Public Affairs
* International Energy Centre
* International WaterCentre
* Issues Deliberation Australia/America
* Laboratory for Visionary Architecture
* Lowy Institute for International Policy
* The Green Institute
* The McKell Institute
* The Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research
* Menzies Research Centre
* National Civic Council
* New South Wales Institute for Educational Research
* Per Capita
* Samuel Griffith Society
* Strategic and Defence Studies Centre
* Sydney Institute
* Transport and Logistics Centre
* United States Studies Centre
* Western Australia Policy Forum
==== New Zealand ====
Think tanks based in New Zealand include:

* Centre for Strategic Studies New Zealand
* Child Poverty Action Group (Aotearoa New Zealand)
* Helen Clark Foundation
* Maxim Institute
* McGuinness Institute
* Motu Economic and Public Policy Research
* New Zealand Centre for Global Studies 
* New Zealand Initiative
* New Zealand Institute of Economic Research
=== North American think tanks ===
==== Canada ====
Canada has many notable think tanks (listed in alphabetical order). Each has specific areas of interest with some overlaps.
* Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada
* Atlantic Institute for Market Studies
* Broadbent Institute
* C.D. Howe Institute
* Caledon Institute of Social Policy
* Canada West Foundation
* Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives
* Canadian Global Affairs Institute
* Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
* Canadian International Council
* Canadian Policy Research Networks (disbanded)
* Canadian Tax Foundation
* Cardus
* Centre for International Governance Innovation
* Conference Board of Canada
* Council of Canadians
* Fraser Institute
* Frontier Centre for Public Policy
* Institute for Research on Public Policy
* Institute on Governance
* International Institute for Sustainable Development
* International Policy Forum
* Macdonald–Laurier Institute
* Montreal Economic Institute
* Mowat Centre for Policy Innovation
* National Citizens Coalition
* North-South Institute
* Parkland Institute
* Pembina Institute
* Public Policy Forum

==== Mexico ====
* CIDAC – The Center of Research for Development (Centro de Investigación para el Desarrollo, Asociación Civil) is a not-for-profit think tank that undertakes research and proposes viable policy options for Mexico&#x27;s economic and democratic development. The organization seeks to promote open, pluralistic debate pursuing: the Rule of Law &amp; Democracy, market economics, social development, and strengthening Mexico-United States relations.
* CIDE – The Center of Research and Economics Teaching (Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas) is a think tank institute focussing on &quot;public policies&quot;, &quot;public choice&quot;, &quot;democracy&quot;, and &quot;economy&quot;.
* COMEXI – The Mexican Council of International Affairs (Consejo Mexicano de Asuntos Internacionales).

==== United States ====

As the classification is most often used today, the oldest American think tank is the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, founded in 1910. The Institute for Government Research, which later merged with two organizations to form the Brookings Institution, was formed in 1916. Other early twentieth century organizations now classified as think tanks include the Hoover Institution (1919), The Twentieth Century Fund (1919, and now known as the Century Foundation), the National Bureau of Economic Research (1920), the Council on Foreign Relations (1921), and the Social Science Research Council (1923). The Great Depression and its aftermath spawned several economic policy organizations, such as the National Planning Association (1934), the Tax Foundation (1937), and the Committee for Economic Development (1943).

In collaboration with the Douglas Aircraft Company, the Air Force set up the RAND Corporation in 1946 to develop weapons technology and strategic defense analysis.

The Hudson Institute is a conservative American think tank founded in 1961 by futurist, military strategist, and systems theorist Herman Kahn and his colleagues at the RAND Corporation. Recent members include Mike Pompeo, the former secretary of state under Donald Trump who joined in 2021.

More recently, progressive and liberal think tanks have been established, most notably the Center for American Progress and the Center for Research on Educational Access and Leadership (CREAL). The organization has close ties to former United States President Barack Obama and other prominent Democrats.

Think tanks have been important allies for United States presidents since the Reagan administration, writing and suggesting policies to implement, and providing staff for the administration. For recent conservative presidents, think tanks such as the Heritage Foundation, the Hoover Institution, and the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) were closely associated with the Reagan administration. The H.W. Bush administration worked closely with AEI, and the W. Bush administration worked closely with AEI and the Hoover Institution. The Trump administration works closely with the Heritage Foundation. For recent liberal presidents, the Progressive Policy Institute and its parent the Democratic Leadership Council were closely associated with Clinton, and the Center for American Progress was closely associated with the Obama and Biden administrations.

Think tanks help shape both foreign and domestic policy. They receive funding from private donors, and members of private organizations. By 2013, the largest 21 think tanks in the US spent more than US$1billion per year. Think tanks may feel more free to propose and debate controversial ideas than people within government. The progressive media watchdog Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) has identified the top 25 think tanks by media citations, noting that from 2006 to 2007 the number of citations declined 17%. The FAIR report reveals the ideological breakdown of the citations: 37% conservative, 47% centrist, and 16% liberal. Their data show that the most-cited think tank was the Brookings Institution, followed by the Council on Foreign Relations, the American Enterprise Institute, The Heritage Foundation, and the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

In 2016, in response to scrutiny about think tanks appearing to have a &quot;conflict of interest&quot; or lack transparency, executive vice president, Martin S. Indyk of Brookings Institution – the &quot;most prestigious think tank in the world&quot; admitted that they had &quot;decided to prohibit corporations or corporate-backed foundations from making anonymous contributions.&quot; In August 2016, &quot;The New York Times&quot; published a series on think tanks that blur the line. One of the cases the journalists cited was Brookings, where scholars paid by a seemingly independent think tank &quot;push donors&#x27; agendas amplifying a culture of corporate influence in Washington.&quot; For example, in exchange for hundreds of thousands of dollars the Brookings Institution provided Lennar – one of the United States&#x27; largest home builders – with a significant advantage in pursuing a US$8billion revitalization project in Hunters Point, San Francisco. In 2014, Lennar&#x27;s then-regional vice president in charge of the San Francisco revitalization, Kofi Bonner was named as a Brookings senior fellow – a position as &#x27;trusted adviser&#x27; that carries some distinction. Bruce Katz, a Brookings vice president, also offered to help Lennar &quot;engage with national media to develop stories that highlight Lennar&#x27;s innovative approach.&quot;

===== U.S. government think tanks =====
Government think tanks are also important in the United States, particularly in the security and defense field. These include the Center for Technology and National Security Policy at the National Defense University, the Center for Naval Warfare Studies at the Naval War College, and the Strategic Studies Institute at the U.S. Army War College.

The government funds, wholly or in part, activities at approximately 30 Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs). FFRDCs, are unique independent nonprofit entities sponsored and funded by the United States government to meet specific long-term technical needs that cannot be met by any other single organization. FFRDCs typically assist government agencies with scientific research and analysis, systems development, and systems acquisition. They bring together the expertise and outlook of government, industry, and academia to solve complex technical problems. These FFRDCs include the RAND Corporation, the MITRE Corporation, the Institute for Defense Analyses, the Aerospace Corporation, the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and other organizations supporting various departments within the United States Government.

Similar to the above quasi-governmental organizations are Federal Advisory Committees. These groups, sometimes referred to as commissions, are a form of think tank dedicated to advising the US Presidents or the Executive branch of government. They typically focus on a specific issue and as such, might be considered similar to special interest groups. However, unlike special interest groups these committees have come under some oversight regulation and are required to make formal records available to the public. As of 2002, about 1,000 of these advisory committees were described in the FACA searchable database.

=== South American think tanks ===
Research done by Enrique Mendizabal shows that South American think tanks play various roles depending on their origins, historical development and relations to other policy actors. In this study, Orazio Bellettini from Grupo FARO suggests that they:

* Seek political support for policies.
* Legitimize policies. This has been clearer in Ecuador, Bolivia and Peru. New governments in Ecuador and Peru have approached policy institutes for support for already defined policies. In Bolivia, the government of Evo Morales has been working with Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and other research institutes to do the same. However, in Chile, many think tanks during the 1990s seemed to endorse and maintain the legitimacy of policies implemented during the previous decade by the military dictatorship headed by Pinochet.
* Act as Spaces for debate. In this case think tanks serve as sounding boards for new policies. In Chile, during the Pinochet dictatorship, many left wing intellectuals and researchers found &#x27;asylum&#x27; in think tanks. In Ecuador, think tanks are seen as spaces where politicians can test the soundness of their policies and government plans.
* Provide financial channels for political parties or other interest groups. In Ecuador and Bolivia, German foundations have been able to provide funds to think tanks that work with certain political parties. This method has provided support to the system as a whole rather than individual CSOs.
* Supply expert staff of policy-makers. In Peru after the end of the Fujimori regime, and in Chile after the fall of Pinochet, think tank staff left to form part of the new governments. In the United States, the role of major think tanks is precisely that: host scholars for a few months or years and then lose them to government employ.

How a policy institute addresses these largely depends on how they work, their ideology vs. evidence credentials, and the context in which they operate including funding opportunities, the degree and type of competition they have and their staff.

This functional method addresses the inherit challenge of defining a think tank. As Simon James said in 1998, &quot;Discussion of think tanks...has a tendency to get bogged down in the vexed question of defining what we mean by &#x27;think tank&#x27;—an exercise that often degenerates into futile semantics.&quot; It is better (as in the Network Functions Approach) to describe what the organisation should do. Then the shape of the organisation should follow to allow this to happen. The following framework (based on Stephen Yeo&#x27;s description of think tanks&#x27; mode of work) is described in Enrique Mendizabal&#x27;s blog &quot;onthinktanks&quot;:

First, policy institutes may work in or base their funding on one or more of:

* Independent research: this would be work done with core or flexible funding that allows the researchers the liberty to choose their research questions and method. It may be long term and could emphasize &#x27;big ideas&#x27; without direct policy relevance. However, it could emphasize a major policy problem that requires a thorough research and action investment.
* Consultancy: this would be work done by commission with specific clients and addressing one or two major questions. Consultancies often respond to an existing agenda.
* Influencing/advocacy: this would be work done by communications, capacity development, networking, campaigns, lobbying, etc. It is likely to be based on research based evidence emerging from independent research or consultancies.

Second, policy institutes may base their work or arguments on:

* Ideology, values or interests
* Applied, empirical or synthesis research
* Theoretical or academic research

According to the National Institute for Research Advancement, a Japanese policy institute, think tanks are &quot;one of the main policy actors in democratic societies ..., assuring a pluralistic, open and accountable process of policy analysis, research, decision-making and evaluation&quot;. A study in early 2009 found a total of 5,465 think tanks worldwide. Of that number, 1,777 were based in the United States and approximately 350 in Washington, DC, alone.

==== Argentina ====
As of 2009, Argentina is home to 122 think tanks, many specializing in public policy and economics issues. Argentina ranks fifth in the number of these institutions worldwide.

==== Brazil ====
Working on public policies, Brazil hosts, for example, Instituto Liberdade, a University-based Center at Tecnopuc inside the Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, located in the South Region of the country, in the city of Porto Alegre. Instituto Liberdade is among the Top 40 think tanks in Latin America and the Caribbean, according to the 2009 Global Go To Think Tanks Index a report from the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program (TTCSP).

Fundação Getulio Vargas (Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV)) is a Brazilian higher education institution. Its original goal was to train people for the country&#x27;s public- and private-sector management. Today it hosts faculties (Law, Business, Economics, Social Sciences and Mathematics), libraries, and also research centers in Rio, São Paulo and Brasilia. It is considered by &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine to be a top-five &quot;policymaker think tank&quot; worldwide.

The Igarapé Institute is a Brazilian think tank focusing on public, climate, and digital security.

=== Transcontinental countries (Asia-Europe) ===
==== Armenia ====
According to a 2020 report, there are 32 think tanks or similar institutions in Armenia.

The government closed the Noravank Foundation, a government-affiliated think tank, in 2018 after almost two decades of operation. However, other think tanks continue to operate, include the Caucasus Institute, the Caucasus Research Resource Center-Armenia (CRRC-Armenia) (which publishes the &quot;Caucasus Barometer&quot; annual public opinion survey of the South Caucasus, the &quot;Enlight&quot; Public Research Center, and the AMBERD research center at the Armenian State University of Economics.

==== Azerbaijan ====
According to research done by the University of Pennsylvania, there are a total of 12 think tanks in Azerbaijan.

The Center for Economic and Social Development, or CESD; in Azeri, Azerbaijan, İqtisadi və Sosial İnkişaf Mərkəzi (İSİM) is an Azeri think tank, non-profit organization, NGO based in Baku, Azerbaijan. The center was established in 2005. CESD focuses on policy advocacy and reform, and is involved with policy research and capacity building.

The Economic Research Center (ERC) is a policy-research oriented non-profit think tank established in 1999 with a mission to facilitate sustainable economic development and good governance in the new public management system of Azerbaijan. It seeks to do this by building favorable interactions between the public, private and civil society and working with different networks both in local (EITI NGO Coalition, National Budget Group, Public Coalition Against Poverty, etc.) and international levels (PWYP, IBP, ENTO, ALDA, PASOS, WTO NGO Network etc.).

The Center for Strategic Studies under the President of Azerbaijan is a governmental, non-profit think tank founded in 2007. It focuses on domestic and foreign policy.

==== Russia ====
According to the Foreign Policy Research Institute, Russia has 112 think tanks, while Russian think tanks claimed four of the top ten spots in 2011&#x27;s &quot;Top Thirty Think Tanks in Central and Eastern Europe&quot;.

Notable Russian think tanks include:
* Analytical Center for the Government of the Russian Federation
* Carnegie Moscow Center
* Institute for US and Canadian Studies
* Institute of World Economy and International Relations
* Moscow State Institute of International Relations

==== Turkey ====
Turkish think tanks are relatively new, having emerged in the 1960&#x27;s. There are at least 20 think tanks in the country, both independent and supported by government. Many of them are sister organizations of political parties, universities or companies some are independent and others are supported by government. Most Turkish think tanks provide research and ideas, yet they play less important roles in policy making than American think tanks. Turksam, Tasam and the &quot;Journal of Turkish Weekly&quot; are the leading information sources.

The oldest and most influential think tank in Turkey is ESAM (The Center for Economic and Social Research; ) which was established in 1969 and has headquarters in Ankara. There are also branch offices of ESAM in Istanbul, Bursa, Konya and elsewhere. ESAM has strong international relationships, especially with Muslim countries and societies. Ideologically it performs policies, produces ideas and manages projects in parallel to Milli Görüş and also influences political parties and international strategies. The founder and leader of Milli Görüş, Necmettin Erbakan, was very concerned with the activities and brainstorming events of ESAM. In The Republic of Turkey, two presidents, four prime ministers, various ministers, many members of the parliament, and numerous mayors and bureaucrats have been members of ESAM. Currently the General Chairman of ESAM is Recai Kutan (former minister for two different ministries, former main opposition party leader, and founder and General Chairman of the Saadet Party).

The Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation (TESEV) is another leading think tank. Established in 1994, TESEV is an independent non-governmental think tank, analyzing social, political and economic policy issues facing Turkey. TESEV has raised issues about Islam and democracy, combating corruption, state reform, and transparency and accountability. TESEV serve as a bridge between academic research and policy-making. Its core program areas are democratization, good governance, and foreign policy.

Other notable Turkish think tanks are the International Strategic Research Organisation (USAK), the Foundation for Political, Economic and Social Research (SETA), and the Wise Men Center for Strategic Studies (BİLGESAM).

== Public opinion ==
A poll by the British firm Cast From Clay found that only 20 percent of Americans trusted think tanks in 2018.

== See also ==
* Collective intelligence
* Futurists
* Internet think tanks
* List of think tanks
* List of think tanks in the United States
* Lobbying
* Mass collaboration
* Mass communication
* Overton window
* School of thought
* Strategic studies
* TED (conference)

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Abelson, Donald E. &quot;Do Think Tanks Matter? Assessing the Impact of Public Policy Institutes.&quot; Montreal: McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, 2002.
* Arin, Kubilay Yado: &quot;Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy&quot;. Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013.
* Boucher, Stephen, et al., &quot;Europe and its think tanks; a promise to be fulfilled. An analysis of think tanks specialised in European policy issues in the enlarged European Union&quot;, Studies and Research No 35, October, Paris, Notre Europe, 2004 PDF
* Cockett, Richard, &quot;Thinking the unthinkable: think tanks and the economic counter revolution; 1931–1983&quot;, London: Fontana, 1995.
* Dickson, Paul. &quot;Think Tanks&quot;. New York: Ballantine Books, 1972. 397 pages.
* Goodman, John C. &quot;What is a Think Tank?&quot; National Center for Policy Analysis, 2005.
* Fan, Maureen. &quot;Capital Brain Trust Puts Stamp on the World&quot;, &quot;Washington Post&quot; (16 May 2005): B01.
* Patrick Dixon. &quot;Futurewise – Six Faces of Global Change&quot; – issues covered by Think Tanks and methodology for reviewing trends, impact on policy 2003): Profile Books
* Kelstrup, Jesper Dahl (2016): The Politics of Think Tanks in Europe. Abingdon &amp; New York: Routledge.
* Lakoff, George. &quot;Moral Politics: What Conservatives Know That Liberals Don&#x27;t.&quot; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
* Ladi, Stella. &quot;Globalisation, Policy Transfer And Policy Research Institutes&quot;, Edward Elgar, 2005.
* McGann, James (2006) &quot;Comparative Think Tanks, Politics And Public Policy&quot;, Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing
* Mendizabal, Enrique and Kristen Sample (2009) &quot;Dime a quien escuchas... Think Tanks y Partidos Politicos en America Latina&quot;, ODI/IDEA: Lima
* Medvetz, Thomas (2012) &quot;Think Tanks in America &quot;, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
* Phelps, Richard P. (2015). &quot;The Gauntlet: Think Tanks and Federal Research Centers Misrepresent and Suppress Other Education Research &quot; New Educational Foundations, 4.
* Ranquet, Robert. &quot;Think Tanks and the National Security Strategy Formulation Process: A Comparison of Current American and French Patterns&quot;, 1997. PDF
* Smith, James. A. &quot;The Idea Brokers: Think Tanks and the Rise of the New Policy Elite, New York: The Free Press&quot;, 1991.
* Snider, J.H. &quot;Strengthen Think Tank Accountability&quot;, &quot;Politico&quot; (3 February 2009). 
* Stone, Diane. Knowledge actors and transnational governance: The private-public policy nexus in the global agora. Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
* Stone, Diane. &quot;Capturing the Political Imagination: Think Tanks and the Policy Process&quot;, London: Frank Cass, 1996
* Stone, Diane, and Andrew Denham, eds. &quot;Think Tank Traditions: Policy Research and the Politics of Ideas.&quot; Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2004.
* Struyk, Raymond J. &quot;Managing Think Tanks: Practical Guidance for Maturing Organizations&quot;, Budapest, Local Government and Public Service Reform Initiative Washington DC., Urban Institute 2002
* UNDP – United Nations Development Program. &quot;Thinking the Unthinkable&quot;, Bratislava, UNDP Regional Bureau for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, 2003</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="2" end="12" title="Think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="17" end="40" title="Think tank" label="public policy institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="47" end="65" title="research institute" label="research institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="80" end="88" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509280" start="93" end="101" title="advocacy" label="advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828395" start="128" end="141" title="social policy" label="social policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="143" end="161" title="political strategy" label="political strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="163" end="172" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="174" end="182" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="184" end="194" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="200" end="207" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="230" end="260" title="non-governmental organizations" label="non-governmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="570" end="581" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="705" end="720" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1109" end="1123" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1361" end="1369" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1400" end="1407" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119294" start="1758" end="1768" title="Jacob Soll" label="Jacob Soll"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1906" end="1911" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384878" start="1940" end="1946" title="Pierre Dupuy (scholar)" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103202" start="2004" end="2027" title="Club de l&amp;#x27;Entresol" label="Club de l&amp;#x27;Entresol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464767" start="2316" end="2347" title="Royal United Services Institute" label="Royal United Services Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2371" end="2377" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="2387" end="2401" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2444" end="2457" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="2480" end="2522" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2539" end="2555" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="2583" end="2598" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="2649" end="2670" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q521310" start="2713" end="2732" title="Robert S. Brookings" label="Robert S. Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="2789" end="2796" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="2807" end="2816" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2841" end="2856" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="3346" end="3362" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148039" start="3392" end="3401" title="Neurocranium" label="braincase"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="3447" end="3458" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q99572267" start="3727" end="3737" title="title case" label="title case"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="3757" end="3773" title="Article (grammar)" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059479" start="3783" end="3835" title="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences" label="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="4051" end="4071" title="Digital electronic computer" label="electronic computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="4193" end="4209" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q651778" start="4255" end="4271" title="Douglas Aircraft" label="Douglas Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4771" end="4776" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5056" end="5064" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="5253" end="5266" title="Globalization" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784536" start="5605" end="5644" title="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program" label="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5938" end="5946" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="6659" end="6701" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6722" end="6738" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="6740" end="6747" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="6749" end="6755" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6757" end="6765" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="6782" end="6788" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784536" start="6830" end="6869" title="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program" label="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="6885" end="6911" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139310" start="6920" end="6932" title="James McGann" label="James McGann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7036" end="7060" title="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program#Global Go To Think Tank Index" label="Global Go-To Think Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q786194" start="7277" end="7299" title="Open Society Foundations" label="Open Society Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q714827" start="7625" end="7637" title="mailing list" label="mailing list"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="8716" end="8734" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="8736" end="8741" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="8743" end="8754" title="Neoliberalism" label="neo-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="8771" end="8792" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="8801" end="8830" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728701" start="8833" end="8845" title="Elite theory" label="Elite theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686374" start="9396" end="9438" title="The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition" label="The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q259516" start="9518" end="9535" title="second-hand smoke" label="second-hand smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="9540" end="9546" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="9678" end="9701" title="Philip Morris Companies" label="Philip Morris Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="9719" end="9764" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393365" start="9818" end="9854" title="Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting" label="Fairness &amp;amp; Accuracy in Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972387" start="10237" end="10269" title="National Education Policy Center" label="National Education Policy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10342" end="10356" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="10580" end="10593" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733670" start="10816" end="10856" title="The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana" label="The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q931968" start="10918" end="10954" title="Provisional National Defence Council" label="Provisional National Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="11055" end="11060" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="11065" end="11083" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641358" start="11255" end="11291" title="Ghanaian presidential election, 1996" label="Ghanaian presidential election, 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208002" start="11334" end="11371" title="IMANI Centre for Policy and Education" label="IMANI Centre for Policy and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733670" start="11374" end="11414" title="The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana" label="The Institute of Economic Affairs, Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023265" start="11700" end="11737" title="Heritage Institute for Policy Studies" label="Heritage Institute for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260598" start="11740" end="11776" title="Puntland Development Research Center" label="Puntland Development Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325813" start="11804" end="11859" title="Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa" label="Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673887" start="11862" end="11884" title="Free Market Foundation" label="Free Market Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427370" start="11887" end="11909" title="FW de Klerk Foundation" label="FW de Klerk Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703241" start="11912" end="11935" title="Helen Suzman Foundation" label="Helen Suzman Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223182" start="11938" end="11991" title="Institute for Democratic Alternatives in South Africa" label="Institute for Democratic Alternatives in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056614" start="12002" end="12042" title="Institute for Justice and Reconciliation" label="Institute for Justice and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126017" start="12045" end="12075" title="Institute for Security Studies" label="Institute for Security Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565710" start="12078" end="12126" title="South African Institute of International Affairs" label="South African Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304307" start="12137" end="12178" title="South African Institute of Race Relations" label="South African Institute of Race Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824351" start="12355" end="12383" title="Afghanistan Analysts Network" label="Afghanistan Analysts Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062387" start="12386" end="12423" title="Centre for Conflict and Peace Studies" label="Centre for Conflict and Peace Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855314" start="12572" end="12615" title="Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies" label="Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855312" start="12625" end="12678" title="Bangladesh Institute of Law and International Affairs" label="Bangladesh Institute of Law and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855316" start="12689" end="12739" title="Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies" label="Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062536" start="12750" end="12776" title="Centre for Policy Dialogue" label="Centre for Policy Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050796" start="12785" end="12812" title="International Growth Centre" label="International Growth Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739628" start="12821" end="12845" title="Making Our Economy Right" label="Making Our Economy Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880550" start="12855" end="12893" title="Bangladesh Institute of Labour Studies" label="Bangladesh Institute of Labour Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925951" start="12998" end="13046" title="Development Research Center of the State Council" label="Development Research Center of the State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708293" start="13308" end="13357" title="China Center for International Economic Exchanges" label="China Center for International Economic Exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="13615" end="13639" title="One Country, Two Systems" label="One Country, Two Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q671479" start="13665" end="13695" title="Sino-British Joint Declaration" label="Sino-British Joint Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="14111" end="14140" title="Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873494" start="14185" end="14220" title="Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre" label="Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001834" start="14223" end="14273" title="Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong" label="Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51182385" start="14276" end="14295" title="Central Policy Unit" label="Central Policy Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124303" start="14298" end="14312" title="Civic Exchange" label="Civic Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923707" start="14315" end="14348" title="The Global Institute for Tomorrow" label="The Global Institute for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629979" start="14351" end="14361" title="HKGolden50" label="HKGolden50"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894382" start="14364" end="14404" title="Hong Kong Christian Industrial Committee" label="Hong Kong Christian Industrial Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923329" start="14407" end="14438" title="Hong Kong Democratic Foundation" label="Hong Kong Democratic Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894905" start="14441" end="14490" title="Hong Kong People&amp;#x27;s Council on Housing Policy" label="Hong Kong People&amp;#x27;s Council on Housing Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747494" start="14493" end="14516" title="The Lion Rock Institute" label="The Lion Rock Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006486" start="14519" end="14536" title="New Century Forum" label="New Century Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18560052" start="14539" end="14563" title="Our Hong Kong Foundation" label="Our Hong Kong Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863872" start="14566" end="14608" title="One Country Two Systems Research Institute" label="One Country Two Systems Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q20803767" start="14611" end="14628" title="Path of Democracy" label="Path of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51182385" start="14631" end="14671" title="Policy Innovation and Co-ordination Unit" label="Policy Innovation and Co-ordination Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689969" start="14674" end="14694" title="Professional Commons" label="Professional Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893345" start="14754" end="14775" title="List of think tanks in India" label="number of think tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062570" start="14942" end="14976" title="Centre for Science and Environment" label="Centre for Science and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062535" start="14978" end="15004" title="Centre for Policy Research" label="Centre for Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q976978" start="15009" end="15034" title="World Resources Institute" label="World Resources Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860333" start="15079" end="15107" title="Observer Research Foundation" label="Observer Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062381" start="15134" end="15158" title="Centre for Civil Society" label="Centre for Civil Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621793" start="15172" end="15197" title="Strategic Foresight Group" label="Strategic Foresight Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973487" start="15250" end="15265" title="water diplomacy" label="water diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820293" start="15267" end="15285" title="peace and conflict" label="peace and conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570048" start="15290" end="15317" title="foresight (futures studies)" label="foresight (futures studies)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971401" start="15379" end="15421" title="National Centre for Cold-chain Development" label="National Centre for Cold-chain Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979583" start="15842" end="15868" title="National e-Governance Plan" label="National e-Governance Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14179085" start="15912" end="15938" title="National Knowledge Network" label="National Knowledge Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809438" start="16154" end="16188" title="Association for Democratic Reforms" label="Association for Democratic Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062381" start="16197" end="16221" title="Centre for Civil Society" label="Centre for Civil Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062404" start="16230" end="16260" title="Centre for Development Studies" label="Centre for Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751270" start="16269" end="16307" title="Centre for Dialogue and Reconciliation" label="Centre for Dialogue and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007257" start="16316" end="16347" title="Centre for Land Warfare Studies" label="Centre for Land Warfare Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062535" start="16358" end="16384" title="Centre for Policy Research" label="Centre for Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062542" start="16393" end="16426" title="Centre for Public Policy Research" label="Centre for Public Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061250" start="16436" end="16473" title="Central Institute for Cotton Research" label="Central Institute for Cotton Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906074" start="16483" end="16523" title="Council On Energy, Environment and Water" label="Council On Energy, Environment and Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q124448808" start="16533" end="16580" title="Edward &amp;amp; Cynthia Institute of Public Health" label="Edward &amp;amp; Cynthia Institute of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889670" start="16591" end="16615" title="Forum of Free Enterprise" label="Forum of Free Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124904" start="16624" end="16657" title="Foundation for Democratic Reforms" label="Foundation for Democratic Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q169191" start="16666" end="16697" title="Indian Council of World Affairs" label="Indian Council of World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190681" start="16707" end="16744" title="Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs" label="Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039639" start="16754" end="16794" title="Institute for Social and Economic Change" label="Institute for Social and Economic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448221" start="16804" end="16856" title="Nabakrushna Choudhury Centre for Development Studies" label="Nabakrushna Choudhury Centre for Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604466" start="16866" end="16911" title="National Council of Applied Economic Research" label="National Council of Applied Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973599" start="16922" end="16960" title="National Institute of Advanced Studies" label="National Institute of Advanced Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860333" start="16970" end="16998" title="Observer Research Foundation" label="Observer Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732201" start="17007" end="17041" title="The Energy and Resources Institute" label="The Energy and Resources Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937623" start="17051" end="17087" title="Vivekananda International Foundation" label="Vivekananda International Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784290" start="17096" end="17123" title="Wildlife Institute of India" label="Wildlife Institute of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062590" start="17153" end="17199" title="Centre for Strategic and International Studies" label="Centre for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456352" start="17202" end="17218" title="Setara Institute" label="Setara Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="17633" end="17659" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21723930" start="17763" end="17795" title="Shaharit (NPO)" label="Shaharit – Creating Common Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185149" start="17798" end="17836" title="Jerusalem Institute for Market Studies" label="Jerusalem Institute for Market Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317620" start="17846" end="17860" title="Reut Institute" label="Reut Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086855" start="17863" end="17898" title="Israel Council on Foreign Relations" label="Israel Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904015" start="17901" end="17940" title="Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs" label="The Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686016" start="17943" end="17954" title="Adva Center" label="Adva Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406716" start="17957" end="17983" title="Israel Democracy Institute" label="Israel Democracy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409177" start="17986" end="18025" title="Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research" label="Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q30282200" start="18028" end="18057" title="Myers-JDC-Brookdale Institute" label="Myers-JDC-Brookdale Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18060" end="18080" title="Floersheimer Studies" label="Floersheimer Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="18088" end="18118" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q61126994" start="18121" end="18184" title="Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace" label="Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q731328" start="18223" end="18268" title="International Institute for Counter-Terrorism" label="International Institute for Counter-Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18275" end="18284" title="Herziliya" label="Herziliya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18287" end="18326" title="Israel Center for Third Sector Research" label="Israel Center for Third Sector Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q737332" start="18328" end="18349" title="Ben Gurion University" label="Ben Gurion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="18357" end="18362" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972991" start="18365" end="18425" title="IPCRI – Israel/Palestine Center for Research and Information" label="IPCRI – Israel/Palestine Center for Research and Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090319" start="18428" end="18448" title="The Milken Institute" label="The Milken Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916095" start="18451" end="18508" title="Moshe Dayan Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies" label="Moshe Dayan Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18532" end="18554" title="The Begin-Sadat Center" label="The Begin-Sadat Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124657" start="18557" end="18576" title="Bar Ilan University" label="Bar Ilan University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18579" end="18629" title="The Center for the Study of Philanthropy in Israel" label="The Center for the Study of Philanthropy in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="18637" end="18667" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742175" start="18670" end="18707" title="Israel Institute for Advanced Studies" label="Israel Institute for Advanced Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="18715" end="18745" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18748" end="18770" title="The Jewish Arab Center" label="The Jewish Arab Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q591115" start="18778" end="18797" title="University of Haifa" label="University of Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406721" start="18800" end="18834" title="The Jewish People Policy Institute" label="The Jewish People Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910517" start="18844" end="18861" title="The Shalem Center" label="The Shalem Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630508" start="18864" end="18903" title="Institute for National Security Studies (Israel)" label="Institute for National Security Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="18967" end="18978" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626288" start="19362" end="19389" title="Korea Development Institute" label="Korea Development Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431880" start="19392" end="19423" title="National Assembly Budget Office" label="National Assembly Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16166361" start="19426" end="19463" title="The Asan Institute for Policy Studies" label="The Asan Institute for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410466" start="19466" end="19501" title="Samsung Economic Research Institute" label="Samsung Economic Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059648" start="19504" end="19530" title="Center for Free Enterprise" label="Center for Free Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431657" start="19533" end="19570" title="Korea International Trade Association" label="Korea International Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q85412437" start="19573" end="19594" title="The Yeouido Institute" label="The Yeouido Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731512" start="19597" end="19642" title="The Economic Information and Education Center" label="The Economic Information and Education Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972756" start="19645" end="19665" title="Jeju Peace Institute" label="Jeju Peace Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q495807" start="19668" end="19717" title="Korea Institute for International Economic Policy" label="Korea Institute for International Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431651" start="19720" end="19760" title="Korea Institute of Public Administration" label="Korea Institute of Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447098" start="19763" end="19779" title="Sejong Institute" label="Sejong Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19797" end="19802" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806617" start="20010" end="20042" title="Asian Development Bank Institute" label="Asian Development Bank Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944428" start="20045" end="20098" title="Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry" label="Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631016" start="20101" end="20111" title="Genron NPO" label="Genron NPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570407" start="20114" end="20170" title="Global Industrial and Social Progress Research Institute" label="Global Industrial and Social Progress Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039432" start="20173" end="20217" title="Institute for International Monetary Affairs" label="Institute for International Monetary Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040218" start="20220" end="20253" title="Institute of Developing Economies" label="Institute of Developing Economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742281" start="20256" end="20288" title="The International Academic Forum" label="The International Academic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156548" start="20291" end="20330" title="Japan Center for International Exchange" label="Japan Center for International Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156649" start="20333" end="20374" title="Japan Institute for National Fundamentals" label="Japan Institute for National Fundamentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507722" start="20377" end="20417" title="Japan Institute of International Affairs" label="Japan Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883138" start="20420" end="20449" title="Mitsubishi Research Institute" label="Mitsubishi Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973590" start="20452" end="20495" title="National Institute for Research Advancement" label="National Institute for Research Advancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237601" start="20498" end="20507" title="Rousoukai" label="Rousoukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687768" start="20510" end="20525" title="Shōwa Kenkyūkai" label="Shōwa Kenkyūkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813879" start="20528" end="20544" title="Tokyo Foundation" label="Tokyo Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="20897" end="20919" title="Republic of Kazakhstan" label="Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30264228" start="21846" end="21874" title="Academy of Sciences Malaysia" label="Academy of Sciences Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039280" start="21883" end="21927" title="Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs" label="Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154743" start="21938" end="21999" title="Institute for Pioneering of Education and Economic Excellence" label="Institute for Pioneering of Education and Economic Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22012" end="22042" title="Maritime Institute of Malaysia" label="Maritime Institute of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22052" end="22085" title="Jauhar Academy of Social Sciences" label="Jauhar Academy of Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646165" start="22095" end="22136" title="Jeffrey Cheah Institute on Southeast Asia" label="Jeffrey Cheah Institute on Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453976" start="22145" end="22200" title="Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology" label="Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22211" end="22236" title="Islamic Renaissance Front" label="Islamic Renaissance Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22245" end="22287" title="IDE Research Centre / Institut Darul Ehsan" label="IDE Research Centre / Institut Darul Ehsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="22493" end="22502" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172381" start="22751" end="22790" title="Institute of Social and Policy Sciences" label="Institute of Social and Policy Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="22873" end="22883" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141359" start="23313" end="23335" title="Valdai Discussion Club" label="Valdai Discussion Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198339" start="23338" end="23351" title="Izborsky Club" label="Izborsky Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479823" start="23501" end="23579" title="Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies" label="Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458795" start="23655" end="23664" title="LIRNEasia" label="LIRNEasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040598" start="23884" end="23899" title="Verité Research" label="Verité Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523017" start="24216" end="24260" title="Singapore Institute of International Affairs" label="Singapore Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040872" start="24269" end="24305" title="Institute of Southeast Asian Studies" label="Institute of Southeast Asian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387798" start="24323" end="24368" title="S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies" label="S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116266" start="24556" end="24599" title="Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research" label="Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316651" start="24602" end="24654" title="Institute for National Defense and Security Research" label="Institute for National Defense and Security Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q28410779" start="24657" end="24676" title="Prospect Foundation" label="Prospect Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277149" start="24679" end="24710" title="Taiwan Asia Exchange Foundation" label="Taiwan Asia Exchange Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676524" start="24713" end="24741" title="Taiwan Competitiveness Forum" label="Taiwan Competitiveness Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449821" start="24744" end="24775" title="Taiwan Foundation for Democracy" label="Taiwan Foundation for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676546" start="24778" end="24815" title="Taiwan Institute of Economic Research" label="Taiwan Institute of Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640015" start="24839" end="24901" title="Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council" label="Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633856" start="24904" end="24943" title="Thailand Development Research Institute" label="Thailand Development Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24946" end="24950" title="iLaw" label="iLaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704439" start="25244" end="25281" title="Al Mesbar Studies and Research Centre" label="Al Mesbar Studies and Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190529" start="25284" end="25306" title="Dubai Economic Council" label="Dubai Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120747" start="25309" end="25329" title="Gulf Research Center" label="Gulf Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190898" start="25332" end="25354" title="Orient Research Centre" label="Orient Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="26133" end="26141" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q544706" start="26274" end="26281" title="Bruegel (institution)" label="Bruegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q918289" start="26287" end="26321" title="Centre for European Policy Studies" label="Centre for European Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062627" start="26330" end="26355" title="Centre for the New Europe" label="Centre for the New Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836496" start="26367" end="26417" title="ECIPE" label="European Centre of International Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q769334" start="26431" end="26453" title="European Policy Centre" label="European Policy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982131" start="26488" end="26515" title="Global Governance Institute" label="Global Governance Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618013" start="26523" end="26532" title="Liberales" label="Liberales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579391" start="26538" end="26559" title="Sport and Citizenship" label="Sport and Citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12281770" start="26684" end="26712" title="Institute of Modern Politics" label="Institute of Modern Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20057332" start="26746" end="26772" title="European Values Think-Tank" label="European Values Think-Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237689" start="26779" end="26812" title="Prague Security Studies Institute" label="Prague Security Studies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010333" start="26841" end="26846" title="CEPOS" label="CEPOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477245" start="27057" end="27086" title="Åland Islands Peace Institute" label="Åland Islands Peace Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855973" start="27089" end="27103" title="Demos Helsinki" label="Demos Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q41094318" start="27106" end="27165" title="European Centre of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats" label="European Centre of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185954" start="27181" end="27209" title="Crisis Management Initiative" label="Crisis Management Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315105" start="27218" end="27259" title="Research Institute of the Finnish Economy" label="Research Institute of the Finnish Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115362" start="27269" end="27311" title="Finnish Institute of International Affairs" label="Finnish Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27539" end="27553" title="Suomen Perusta" label="Suomen Perusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159811" start="27640" end="27675" title="Confederation of Finnish Industries" label="Confederation of Finnish Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="28053" end="28065" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q578398" start="28161" end="28205" title="Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions" label="Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="28272" end="28295" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152296" start="28514" end="28557" title="Institut français des relations internationales" label="French Institute of International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q289256" start="28992" end="29037" title="European Union Institute for Security Studies" label="European Union Institute for Security Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="29049" end="29054" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q392918" start="29061" end="29089" title="agency of the European Union" label="agency of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="29154" end="29156" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075469" start="29433" end="29454" title="Fondation Jean-Jaurès" label="Fondation Jean-Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="29496" end="29518" title="French Socialist Party" label="French Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518528" start="29524" end="29534" title="Terra Nova (think tank)" label="Terra Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q324555" start="30675" end="30699" title="Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung" label="Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="30701" end="30727" title="Christian Democratic Union (Germany)" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q836469" start="30742" end="30766" title="Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung" label="Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="30768" end="30791" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415874" start="30806" end="30827" title="Hanns Seidel Foundation" label="Hanns-Seidel-Stiftung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="30829" end="30851" title="Christian Social Union of Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="30867" end="30890" title="Green Party (Germany)" label="aligned with the Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q338433" start="30893" end="30921" title="Friedrich Naumann Foundation" label="Friedrich Naumann Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="30923" end="30952" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party-aligned"/>
<link wikidata="Q552742" start="30962" end="30987" title="Rosa Luxemburg Foundation" label="Rosa Luxemburg Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="31002" end="31011" title="The Left (Germany)" label="Die Linke"/>
<link wikidata="Q542252" start="31019" end="31074" title="German Institute for International and Security Affairs" label="German Institute for International and Security Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816401" start="31107" end="31125" title="Atlantic Community" label="Atlantic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="31145" end="31157" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="31162" end="31172" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664919" start="31286" end="31330" title="Institute for Media and Communication Policy" label="Institute for Media and Communication Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="31364" end="31390" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333436" start="31620" end="31658" title="Economic and Social Research Institute" label="Economic and Social Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040454" start="31852" end="31899" title="Institute of International and European Affairs" label="Institute of International and European Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849655" start="31960" end="31974" title="Iona Institute" label="Iona Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687102" start="32017" end="32021" title="TASC (think tank)" label="TASC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803595" start="32216" end="32237" title="Bruno Leoni Institute" label="Bruno Leoni Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966507" start="32240" end="32252" title="Future Italy" label="Future Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039434" start="32255" end="32259" title="ISPI" label="ISPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674863" start="32318" end="32348" title="Istituto Affari Internazionali" label="Istituto Affari Internazionali"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080611" start="32351" end="32368" title="Trinità dei Monti (think tank)" label="Trinità dei Monti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32371" end="32406" title="Euro-Gulf Information Centre (EGIC)" label="Euro-Gulf Information Centre (EGIC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121769" start="32640" end="32686" title="the Latvian Institute of International Affairs" label="the Latvian Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="34570" end="34583" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467043" start="34879" end="34919" title="Scientific Council for Government Policy" label="Scientific Council for Government Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357617" start="34959" end="35019" title="Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael" label="Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="35129" end="35152" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665313" start="35291" end="35312" title="Western Institute" label="The Western Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11822496" start="35389" end="35430" title="Polish Institute of International Affairs" label="Polish Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062419" start="35509" end="35535" title="Centre for Eastern Studies" label="Centre for Eastern Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742184" start="35743" end="35776" title="Institute for Structural Research" label="Institute for Structural Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721547" start="35803" end="35833" title="The Casimir Pulaski Foundation" label="The Casimir Pulaski Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257671" start="35857" end="35884" title="Institute of Public Affairs, Poland" label="Institute of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550046" start="35917" end="35935" title="Instytut Sobieskiego" label="Sobieski Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389639" start="35978" end="35983" title="SEDES" label="SEDES"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165709" start="36052" end="36076" title="Contraditório think tank" label="Contraditório think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362527" start="36193" end="36218" title="Romanian Academic Society" label="Romanian Academic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141359" start="36310" end="36332" title="Valdai Discussion Club" label="Valdai Discussion Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198339" start="36335" end="36348" title="Izborsky Club" label="Izborsky Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864983" start="36449" end="36496" title="University of Belgrade Faculty of Economics" label="Belgrade University&amp;#x27;s Faculty of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401410" start="36558" end="36565" title="GLOBSEC" label="GLOBSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829124" start="36687" end="36728" title="Central European Labour Studies Institute" label="Central European Labour Studies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="36807" end="36813" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473064" start="36932" end="36965" title="Forum Minority Research Institute" label="Forum Minority Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="37041" end="37050" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="37133" end="37139" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040801" start="37283" end="37310" title="Institute of Public Affairs" label="Institute of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="37374" end="37380" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q786194" start="37448" end="37472" title="Open Society Foundations" label="Open Society Foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062434" start="37598" end="37612" title="Martens Centre" label="Martens Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q665721" start="37877" end="37899" title="Elcano Royal Institute" label="Elcano Royal Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204279" start="38560" end="38564" title="DARA (international organization)" label="DARA"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="38589" end="38605" title="José Maria Aznar" label="José Maria Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822507" start="38676" end="38680" title="FAES" label="FAES"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508901" start="38925" end="38947" title="Fundación Alternativas" label="Fundación Alternativas"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="39007" end="39040" title="Partido Socialista Obrero Español" label="Partido Socialista Obrero Español"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144342" start="39141" end="39170" title="Union, Progress and Democracy" label="Union, Progress and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100960" start="39244" end="39250" title="Timbro" label="Timbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="39256" end="39267" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="39307" end="39316" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q369347" start="39389" end="39402" title="Avenir Suisse" label="Avenir Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q583031" start="39512" end="39516" title="DCAF" label="DCAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q571595" start="39608" end="39645" title="security sector governance and reform" label="security sector governance and reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q685608" start="39649" end="39678" title="Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute" label="Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q680727" start="39699" end="39705" title="Migros" label="Migros"/>
<link wikidata="Q116111" start="39714" end="39733" title="Gottlieb Duttweiler" label="Gottlieb Duttweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902591" start="39745" end="39752" title="Horasis" label="Horasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902591" start="39777" end="39799" title="Horasis Global Meeting" label="Horasis Global Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378236" start="39802" end="39819" title="Liberales Institut" label="Liberal Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="39907" end="39914" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12168360" start="39930" end="39963" title="Centre of Policy and Legal Reform" label="Centre of Policy and Legal Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q12168361" start="40021" end="40057" title="Center for Policy Studies in Ukraine" label="Center for Policy Studies in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049116" start="40108" end="40147" title="International Centre for Policy Studies" label="International Centre for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493575" start="40198" end="40213" title="Razumkov Centre" label="Razumkov Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q114668096" start="40510" end="40539" title="Transatlantic Dialogue Center" label="Transatlantic Dialogue Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="40829" end="40842" title="Chatham House" label="Chatham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="40851" end="40879" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="40907" end="40935" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference, 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950638" start="40981" end="40990" title="Bow Group" label="Bow Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="41185" end="41203" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="41211" end="41225" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="41227" end="41244" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="41285" end="41298" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="41300" end="41327" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="41328" end="41341" title="Norman Lamont, Baron Lamont of Lerwick" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="41353" end="41368" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111958" start="41378" end="41395" title="Christopher Bland" label="Christopher Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431365" start="41482" end="41497" title="Policy Exchange" label="Policy Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062576" start="41499" end="41524" title="Centre for Social Justice" label="Centre for Social Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474369" start="41543" end="41549" title="Onward (think tank)" label="Onward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750929" start="41674" end="41693" title="The Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research" label="Melbourne Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056091" start="41740" end="41763" title="Productivity Commission" label="Productivity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="41771" end="41776" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062466" start="42162" end="42196" title="the Centre for Independent Studies" label="the Centre for Independent Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659979" start="42202" end="42218" title="Sydney Institute" label="Sydney Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040801" start="42227" end="42254" title="Institute of Public Affairs" label="Institute of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750770" start="42305" end="42325" title="the McKell Institute" label="the McKell Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11145901" start="42368" end="42382" title="Lowy Institute for International Policy" label="Lowy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q825302" start="42541" end="42550" title="Illawarra" label="Illawarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152928" start="42838" end="42842" title="Committee for Economic Development of Australia" label="CEDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151840" start="42848" end="42885" title="Australian Strategic Policy Institute" label="Australian Strategic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824301" start="42895" end="42936" title="Australian Institute of Company Directors" label="Australian Institute of Company Directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698153" start="43073" end="43092" title="Air Power Australia" label="Air Power Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806367" start="43095" end="43120" title="Asia Education Foundation" label="Asia Education Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962212" start="43123" end="43131" title="Asialink" label="Asialink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714915" start="43134" end="43157" title="The Australia Institute" label="The Australia Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824120" start="43160" end="43185" title="Australian Fabian Society" label="Australian Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824306" start="43188" end="43233" title="Australian Institute of International Affairs" label="Australian Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824315" start="43236" end="43280" title="Australian Institute of Policy &amp;amp; Science" label="Australian Institute of Policy &amp;amp; Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151840" start="43283" end="43320" title="Australian Strategic Policy Institute" label="Australian Strategic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720154" start="43323" end="43345" title="The Brisbane Institute" label="The Brisbane Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062466" start="43348" end="43378" title="Centre for Independent Studies" label="Centre for Independent Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062533" start="43381" end="43410" title="Centre for Policy Development" label="Centre for Policy Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097190" start="43413" end="43436" title="Chifley Research Centre" label="Chifley Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152928" start="43439" end="43486" title="Committee for Economic Development of Australia" label="Committee for Economic Development of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43489" end="43527" title="Consumer Policy Research Centre (CPRC)" label="Consumer Policy Research Centre (CPRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967651" start="43530" end="43573" title="Crowther Centre for Learning and Innovation" label="Crowther Centre for Learning and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003027" start="43576" end="43601" title="Development Policy Centre" label="Development Policy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287562" start="43604" end="43639" title="Doctors Reform Society of Australia" label="Doctors Reform Society of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416100" start="43642" end="43658" title="Evatt Foundation" label="Evatt Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597715" start="43661" end="43678" title="Grattan Institute" label="Grattan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628498" start="43681" end="43703" title="H. R. Nicholls Society" label="H. R. Nicholls Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031549" start="43706" end="43743" title="Infrastructure Partnerships Australia" label="Infrastructure Partnerships Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039302" start="43746" end="43779" title="Institute for Economics and Peace" label="Institute for Economics and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040801" start="43782" end="43809" title="Institute of Public Affairs" label="Institute of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050282" start="43812" end="43839" title="International Energy Centre" label="International Energy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054231" start="43842" end="43867" title="International WaterCentre" label="International WaterCentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088405" start="43870" end="43907" title="Issues Deliberation Australia/America" label="Issues Deliberation Australia/America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467295" start="43910" end="43947" title="Laboratory for Visionary Architecture" label="Laboratory for Visionary Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11145901" start="43950" end="43989" title="Lowy Institute for International Policy" label="Lowy Institute for International Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q98640111" start="43992" end="44011" title="The Green Institute" label="The Green Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750770" start="44014" end="44034" title="The McKell Institute" label="The McKell Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750929" start="44037" end="44100" title="The Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research" label="The Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817725" start="44103" end="44126" title="Menzies Research Centre" label="Menzies Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971508" start="44129" end="44151" title="National Civic Council" label="National Civic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011727" start="44154" end="44204" title="New South Wales Institute for Educational Research" label="New South Wales Institute for Educational Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411542" start="44220" end="44243" title="Samuel Griffith Society" label="Samuel Griffith Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453921" start="44246" end="44282" title="Strategic and Defence Studies Centre" label="Strategic and Defence Studies Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659979" start="44285" end="44301" title="Sydney Institute" label="Sydney Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834909" start="44304" end="44334" title="Transport and Logistics Centre" label="Transport and Logistics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892228" start="44337" end="44365" title="United States Studies Centre" label="United States Studies Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987490" start="44368" end="44398" title="Western Australia Policy Forum" label="Western Australia Policy Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062587" start="44466" end="44506" title="Centre for Strategic Studies New Zealand" label="Centre for Strategic Studies New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097771" start="44509" end="44558" title="Child Poverty Action Group (Aotearoa New Zealand)" label="Child Poverty Action Group (Aotearoa New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086752" start="44561" end="44583" title="Helen Clark Foundation" label="Helen Clark Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795586" start="44586" end="44601" title="Maxim Institute" label="Maxim Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801502" start="44604" end="44624" title="McGuinness Institute" label="McGuinness Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918716" start="44627" end="44667" title="Motu Economic and Public Policy Research" label="Motu Economic and Public Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44670" end="44708" title="New Zealand Centre for Global Studies " label="New Zealand Centre for Global Studies "/>
<link wikidata="Q7015438" start="44711" end="44733" title="New Zealand Initiative" label="New Zealand Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015449" start="44736" end="44778" title="New Zealand Institute of Economic Research" label="New Zealand Institute of Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806422" start="44957" end="44990" title="Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada" label="Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451353" start="44993" end="45030" title="Atlantic Institute for Market Studies" label="Atlantic Institute for Market Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972041" start="45033" end="45052" title="Broadbent Institute" label="Broadbent Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q536661" start="45055" end="45074" title="C. D. Howe Institute" label="C.D. Howe Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019344" start="45077" end="45111" title="Caledon Institute of Social Policy" label="Caledon Institute of Social Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955202" start="45114" end="45136" title="Canada West Foundation" label="Canada West Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029822" start="45139" end="45178" title="Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives" label="Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029940" start="45181" end="45214" title="Canadian Global Affairs Institute" label="Canadian Global Affairs Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030174" start="45217" end="45257" title="Canadian Institute for Advanced Research" label="Canadian Institute for Advanced Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030195" start="45260" end="45290" title="Canadian International Council" label="Canadian International Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030484" start="45293" end="45326" title="Canadian Policy Research Networks" label="Canadian Policy Research Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030609" start="45341" end="45364" title="Canadian Tax Foundation" label="Canadian Tax Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101245" start="45367" end="45373" title="Cardus" label="Cardus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062486" start="45376" end="45422" title="Centre for International Governance Innovation" label="Centre for International Governance Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q925280" start="45425" end="45451" title="Conference Board of Canada" label="Conference Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993810" start="45454" end="45474" title="Council of Canadians" label="Council of Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451353" start="45477" end="45493" title="Fraser Institute" label="Fraser Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250861" start="45496" end="45529" title="Frontier Centre for Public Policy" label="Frontier Centre for Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039601" start="45532" end="45571" title="Institute for Research on Public Policy" label="Institute for Research on Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041009" start="45574" end="45597" title="Institute on Governance" label="Institute on Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666648" start="45600" end="45651" title="International Institute for Sustainable Development" label="International Institute for Sustainable Development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45654" end="45680" title="International Policy Forum" label="International Policy Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722964" start="45683" end="45710" title="Macdonald–Laurier Institute" label="Macdonald–Laurier Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152793" start="45713" end="45740" title="Montreal Economic Institute" label="Montreal Economic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190167" start="45743" end="45777" title="Mowat Centre for Policy Innovation" label="Mowat Centre for Policy Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971502" start="45780" end="45807" title="National Citizens Coalition" label="National Citizens Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754330" start="45810" end="45831" title="North-South Institute" label="North-South Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190343" start="45834" end="45852" title="Parkland Institute" label="Parkland Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068471" start="45855" end="45872" title="Pembina Institute" label="Pembina Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116346" start="45875" end="45894" title="Public Policy Forum" label="Public Policy Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011613" start="45915" end="45920" title="CIDAC" label="CIDAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054347" start="46363" end="46367" title="Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas" label="CIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="46822" end="46864" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="46976" end="46997" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="47105" end="47123" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721962" start="47132" end="47158" title="Twentieth Century Fund" label="The Twentieth Century Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q475424" start="47212" end="47248" title="National Bureau of Economic Research" label="National Bureau of Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="47261" end="47289" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694727" start="47306" end="47337" title="Social Science Research Council" label="Social Science Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689379" start="47486" end="47500" title="Tax Foundation" label="Tax Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152927" start="47517" end="47551" title="Committee for Economic Development" label="Committee for Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="47638" end="47654" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915369" start="47730" end="47746" title="Hudson Institute" label="Hudson Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="48109" end="48137" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="48278" end="48290" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="48401" end="48422" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="48574" end="48593" title="Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="48599" end="48617" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="48627" end="48656" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248800" start="48960" end="48988" title="Progressive Policy Institute" label="Progressive Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="49008" end="49037" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="49084" end="49112" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="49378" end="49381" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="49875" end="49896" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="49914" end="49942" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="49948" end="49977" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="49979" end="50002" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="50012" end="50058" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="50472" end="50490" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981175" start="50857" end="50863" title="Lennar" label="Lennar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967074" start="51662" end="51689" title="National Defense University" label="National Defense University"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="51735" end="51752" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621816" start="51762" end="51789" title="Strategic Studies Institute" label="Strategic Studies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="51797" end="51818" title="U.S. Army War College" label="U.S. Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067877" start="51893" end="51942" title="Federally Funded Research and Development Centers" label="Federally Funded Research and Development Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="52427" end="52443" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627039" start="52449" end="52466" title="MITRE Corporation" label="MITRE Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665138" start="52472" end="52502" title="Institute for Defense Analyses" label="Institute for Defense Analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712741" start="52508" end="52529" title="Aerospace Corporation" label="Aerospace Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="52535" end="52557" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="MIT Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439996" start="52710" end="52737" title="Federal Advisory Committee Act" label="Federal Advisory Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612213" start="53526" end="53536" title="Grupo FARO" label="Grupo FARO"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="53645" end="53652" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="53654" end="53661" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="53666" end="53670" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q42410" start="53814" end="53825" title="Evo Morales" label="Evo Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="53878" end="53881" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="54083" end="54108" title="Military government of Chile (1973–1990)" label="the military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="54228" end="54233" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="54844" end="54852" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973590" start="57063" end="57106" title="National Institute for Research Advancement" label="National Institute for Research Advancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773447" start="57542" end="57551" title="Science and technology in Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="57601" end="57614" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="57619" end="57628" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541833" start="57779" end="57798" title="Instituto Liberdade" label="Instituto Liberdade"/>
<link wikidata="Q600634" start="57849" end="57902" title="Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul" label="Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="57963" end="57975" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508996" start="58220" end="58243" title="Fundação Getulio Vargas" label="Fundação Getulio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="58604" end="58618" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715913" start="58702" end="58719" title="Igarapé Institute" label="Igarapé Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050270" start="58981" end="59000" title="Noravank Foundation" label="Noravank Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054295" start="59145" end="59163" title="Caucasus Institute" label="Caucasus Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071893" start="59169" end="59210" title="Caucasus Research Resource Centers" label="Caucasus Research Resource Center-Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="59314" end="59328" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990472" start="59416" end="59454" title="Armenian State University of Economics" label="Armenian State University of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721888" start="59592" end="59638" title="The Center for Economic and Social Development" label="The Center for Economic and Social Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="59719" end="59724" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="59737" end="59760" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="59762" end="59765" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="59775" end="59779" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333406" start="59938" end="59962" title="Economic Research Center" label="Economic Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468312" start="60692" end="60725" title="Foreign Policy Research Institute" label="Foreign Policy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205826" start="61001" end="61023" title="Carnegie Moscow Center" label="Carnegie Moscow Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039742" start="61026" end="61063" title="Institute for US and Canadian Studies" label="Institute for US and Canadian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665033" start="61066" end="61120" title="Institute of World Economy and International Relations" label="Institute of World Economy and International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q322964" start="61123" end="61172" title="Moscow State Institute of International Relations" label="Moscow State Institute of International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093322" start="61191" end="61210" title="Turkish think tanks" label="Turkish think tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296026" start="61670" end="61695" title="Journal of Turkish Weekly" label="Journal of Turkish Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q522095" start="62170" end="62181" title="Milli Görüş" label="Milli Görüş"/>
<link wikidata="Q243550" start="62289" end="62306" title="Necmettin Erbakan" label="Necmettin Erbakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263102" start="62602" end="62613" title="Recai Kutan" label="Recai Kutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637009" start="62738" end="62750" title="Saadet Party" label="Saadet Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691696" start="62758" end="62804" title="Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation" label="Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053654" start="63305" end="63350" title="International Strategic Research Organisation" label="International Strategic Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988353" start="63363" end="63417" title="Foundation for Political, Economic and Social Research" label="Foundation for Political, Economic and Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63434" end="63471" title="Turkish think tanks#BİLGESAM" label="Wise Men Center for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="63635" end="63658" title="Collective intelligence" label="Collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q846430" start="63661" end="63670" title="Futurists" label="Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748728" start="63673" end="63693" title="Internet think tanks" label="Internet think tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467358" start="63696" end="63715" title="List of think tanks" label="List of think tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643316" start="63718" end="63758" title="List of think tanks in the United States" label="List of think tanks in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="63761" end="63769" title="Lobbying" label="Lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748728" start="63772" end="63790" title="Mass collaboration" label="Mass collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="63793" end="63811" title="Mass communication" label="Mass communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q542950" start="63814" end="63828" title="Overton window" label="Overton window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387659" start="63831" end="63848" title="School of thought" label="School of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353818" start="63851" end="63868" title="Strategic studies" label="Strategic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="63871" end="63887" title="TED (conference)" label="TED (conference)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056906" start="64910" end="64923" title="Patrick Dixon" label="Patrick Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056906" start="64931" end="64941" title="Futurewise (book)" label="Futurewise"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="65194" end="65208" title="George Lakoff" label="Lakoff, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909083" start="65216" end="65230" title="Moral Politics" label="Moral Politics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37104" wikidata="Q8348417" url="?curid=37104" title="Emissions trading">
<text>Emissions trading is a market-oriented approach to controlling pollution by providing economic incentives for reducing the emissions of pollutants. The concept is also known as cap and trade (CAT) or [[emissions trading scheme]] (ETS). One prominent example is carbon emission trading for and other greenhouse gases which is a tool for climate change mitigation. Other schemes include sulfur dioxide and other pollutants.

In an emissions trading scheme, a central authority or governmental body allocates or sells a limited number (a &quot;cap&quot;) of permits that allow a discharge of a specific quantity of a specific pollutant over a set time period. Polluters are required to hold permits in amount equal to their emissions. Polluters that want to increase their emissions must buy permits from others willing to sell them.

Emissions trading is a type of flexible environmental regulation that allows organizations and markets to decide how best to meet policy targets. This is in contrast to command-and-control environmental regulations such as best available technology (BAT) standards and government subsidies.

==Introduction==
Pollution is a prime example of a market externality. An externality is an effect of some activity on an entity (such as a person) that is not party to a market transaction related to that activity. Emissions trading is a market-based approach to address pollution. The overall goal of an emissions trading plan is to minimize the cost of meeting a set emissions target.
In an emissions trading system, the government sets an overall limit on emissions, and defines permits (also called allowances), or limited authorizations to emit, up to the level of the overall limit. The government may sell the permits, but in many existing schemes, it gives permits to participants (regulated polluters) equal to each participant&#x27;s baseline emissions. The baseline is determined by reference to the participant&#x27;s historical emissions. To demonstrate compliance, a participant must hold permits at least equal to the quantity of pollution it actually emitted during the time period. If every participant complies, the total pollution emitted will be at most equal to the sum of individual limits. Because permits can be bought and sold, a participant can choose either to use its permits exactly (by reducing its own emissions); or to emit less than its permits, and perhaps sell the excess permits; or to emit more than its permits, and buy permits from other participants. In effect, the buyer pays a charge for polluting, while the seller gains a reward for having reduced emissions.

Emissions Trading results in the incorporation of economic costs into the costs of production which incentivizes corporations to consider investment returns and capital expenditure decisions with a model that includes the price of carbon and greenhouse gases (GHG).

In many schemes, organizations which do not pollute (and therefore have no obligations) may also trade permits and financial derivatives of permits.
In some schemes, participants can bank allowances to use in future periods. In some schemes, a proportion of all traded permits must be retired periodically, causing a net reduction in emissions over time. Thus, environmental groups may buy and retire permits, driving up the price of the remaining permits according to the law of demand. In most schemes, permit owners can donate permits to a nonprofit entity and receive a tax deductions. Usually, the government lowers the overall limit over time, with an aim towards a national emissions reduction target.

There are active trading programs in several air pollutants. An earlier application was the US national market to reduce acid rain. The United States now has several regional markets in nitrogen oxides.

==History==
The efficiency of what later was to be called the &quot;cap-and-trade&quot; approach to air pollution abatement was first demonstrated in a series of micro-economic computer simulation studies between 1967 and 1970 for the National Air Pollution Control Administration (predecessor to the United States Environmental Protection Agency&#x27;s Office of Air and Radiation) by Ellison Burton and William Sanjour. These studies used mathematical models of several cities and their emission sources in order to compare the cost and effectiveness of various control strategies. Each abatement strategy was compared with the &quot;least-cost solution&quot; produced by a computer optimization program to identify the least-costly combination of source reductions in order to achieve a given abatement goal. In each case it was found that the least-cost solution was dramatically less costly than the same amount of pollution reduction produced by any conventional abatement strategy. Burton and later Sanjour along with Edward H. Pechan continued improving and advancing these computer models at the newly created U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The agency introduced the concept of computer modeling with least-cost abatement strategies (i.e., emissions trading) in its 1972 annual report to Congress on the cost of clean air. This led to the concept of &quot;cap and trade&quot; as a means of achieving the &quot;least-cost solution&quot; for a given level of abatement.

The development of emissions trading over the course of its history can be divided into four phases:

# Gestation: Theoretical articulation of the instrument (by Coase, Crocker, Dales, Montgomery etc.) and, independent of the former, tinkering with &quot;flexible regulation&quot; at the US Environmental Protection Agency.
# Proof of Principle: First developments towards trading of emission certificates based on the &quot;offset-mechanism&quot; taken up in Clean Air Act in 1977. A company could get allowance from the Act on a greater amount of emission when it paid another company to reduce the same pollutant.
# Prototype: Launching of a first &quot;cap-and-trade&quot; system as part of the US Acid Rain Program in Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act, officially announced as a paradigm shift in environmental policy, as prepared by &quot;Project 88&quot;, a network-building effort to bring together environmental and industrial interests in the US.
# Regime formation: branching out from the US clean air policy to global climate policy, and from there to the European Union, along with the expectation of an emerging global carbon market and the formation of the &quot;carbon industry&quot;.

In the United States, the acid rain related emission trading system was principally conceived by C. Boyden Gray, a G.H.W. Bush administration attorney. Gray worked with the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), who worked with the EPA to write the bill that became law as part of the Clean Air Act of 1990. The new emissions cap on NOx and gases took effect in 1995, and according to &quot;Smithsonian&quot; magazine, those acid rain emissions dropped 3 million tons that year.

==Economics ==

It is possible for a country to reduce emissions using a command-and-control approach, such as regulation, direct and indirect taxes. The cost of that approach differs between countries because the Marginal Abatement Cost Curve (MAC)—the cost of eliminating an additional unit of pollution—differs by country.

===Coase model===

Coase (1960) argued that social costs could be accounted for by negotiating property rights according to a particular objective. Coase&#x27;s model assumes perfectly operating markets and equal bargaining power among those arguing for property rights. 
In Coase&#x27;s model, efficiency, i.e., achieving a given reduction in emissions at lowest cost, is promoted by the market system. This can also be looked at from the perspective of having the greatest flexibility to reduce emissions. Flexibility is desirable because the marginal costs, that is to say, the incremental costs of reducing emissions, varies among countries. Emissions trading allows emission reductions to be first made in locations where the marginal costs of abatement are lowest (Bashmakov &quot;et al&quot;., 2001). Over time, efficiency can also be promoted by allowing &quot;banking&quot; of permits (Goldemberg &quot;et al&quot;., 1996, p. 30). This allows polluters to reduce emissions at a time when it is most efficient to do so.

===Equity===
One of the advantages of Coase&#x27;s model is that it suggests that fairness (equity) can be addressed in the distribution of property rights, and that regardless of how these property rights are assigned, the market will produce the most efficient outcome. In reality, according to the held view, markets are not perfect, and it is therefore possible that a trade-off will occur between equity and efficiency (Halsnæs &quot;et al&quot;., 2007).

===Trading===
In an emissions trading system, permits may be traded by emitters who are liable to hold a sufficient number of permits in system. Some analysts argue that allowing others to participate in trading, e.g., private brokerage firms, can allow for better management of risk in the system, e.g., to variations in permit prices (Bashmakov &quot;et al.&quot;, 2001). It may also improve the efficiency of system. According to Bashmakov &quot;et al&quot;. (2001), regulation of these other entities may be necessary, as is done in other financial markets, e.g., to prevent abuses of the system, such as insider trading.

===Incentives and allocation===
Emissions trading gives polluters an incentive to reduce their emissions. However, there are possible perverse incentives that can exist in emissions trading. Allocating permits on the basis of past emissions (&quot;grandfathering&quot;) can result in firms having an incentive to maintain emissions. For example, a firm that reduced its emissions would receive fewer permits in the future (IMF, 2008, pp. 25–26). There are costs that emitters do face, e.g., the costs of the fuel being used, but there are other costs that are not necessarily included in the price of a good or service. These other costs are called external costs (Halsnæs &quot;et al.&quot;, 2007). This problem can also be criticized on ethical grounds, since the polluter is being paid to reduce emissions (Goldemberg &quot;et al&quot;., 1996, p. 38). On the other hand, a permit system where permits are auctioned rather than given away, provides the government with revenues. These revenues might be used to improve the efficiency of overall climate policy, e.g., by funding energy efficiency programs (ACEEE 2019) or reductions in distortionary taxes (Fisher &quot;et al&quot;., 1996, p. 417).

In Coase&#x27;s model of social costs, either choice (grandfathering or auctioning) leads to efficiency. In reality, grandfathering subsidizes polluters, meaning that polluting industries may be kept in business longer than would otherwise occur. Grandfathering may also reduce the rate of technological improvement towards less polluting technologies (Fisher &quot;et al.&quot;, 1996, p. 417).

William Nordhaus argues that allocations cost the economy as they cause the under utilization an efficient form of taxation. Nordhaus argues that normal income, goods or service taxes distort efficient investment and consumption, so by using pollution taxes to generate revenue an emissions scheme can increase the efficiency of the economy.

Form of allocation

The economist Ross Garnaut states that permits allocated to existing emitters by &#x27;grandfathering&#x27; are not &#x27;free&#x27;. As the permits are scarce they have value and the benefit of that value is acquired in full by the emitter. The cost is imposed elsewhere in the economy, typically on consumers who cannot pass on the costs.

===Market and least-cost===

Some economists have urged the use of market-based instruments such as emissions trading to address environmental problems instead of prescriptive &quot;command-and-control&quot; regulation. Command and control regulation is criticized for being insensitive to geographical and technological differences, and therefore inefficient; however, this is not always so, as shown by the WWII rationing program in the U.S. in which local and regional boards made adjustments for these differences.

After an emissions limit has been set by a government political process, individual companies are free to choose how or whether to reduce their emissions. Failure to report emissions and surrender emission permits is often punishable by a further government regulatory mechanism, such as a fine that increases costs of production. Firms will choose the least-cost way to comply with the pollution regulation, which will lead to reductions where the least expensive solutions exist, while allowing emissions that are more expensive to reduce.

Under an emissions trading system, each regulated polluter has flexibility to use the most cost-effective combination of buying or selling emission permits, reducing its emissions by installing cleaner technology, or reducing its emissions by reducing production. The most cost-effective strategy depends on the polluter&#x27;s marginal abatement cost and the market price of permits. In theory, a polluter&#x27;s decisions should lead to an economically efficient allocation of reductions among polluters, and lower compliance costs for individual firms and for the economy overall, compared to command-and-control mechanisms.

===Measuring, reporting, verification and enforcement===

In some industrial processes, emissions can be physically measured by inserting sensors and flowmeters in chimneys and stacks, but many types of activity rely on theoretical calculations instead of measurement. Depending on local legislation, measurements may require additional checks and verification by government or third party auditors, prior or post submission to the local regulator.

Enforcement methods include fines and sanctions for polluters that have exceeded their allowances. Concerns include the cost of MRV and enforcement, and the risk that facilities may lie about actual emissions.

==== Pollution markets ====
An emission license directly confers a right to emit pollutants up to a certain rate.
In contrast, a pollution license for a given location confers the right to emit pollutants at a rate which will cause no more than a specified increase at the pollution-level. For concreteness, consider the following model.

* There are formula_1 agents each of which emits formula_2 pollutants.
* There are formula_3 locations each of which suffers pollution formula_4.
* The pollution is a linear combination of the emissions. The relation between formula_5 and formula_6 is given by a &quot;diffusion matrix&quot; formula_7, such that: formula_8.

As an example, consider three countries along a river (as in the fair river sharing setting).

* Pollution in the upstream country is determined only by the emission of the upstream country: formula_9.
* Pollution in the middle country is determined by its own emission and by the emission of country 1: formula_10.
* Pollution in the downstream country is the sum of all emissions: formula_11.

So the matrix formula_7 in this case is a triangular matrix of ones.

Each pollution-license for location formula_13 permits its holder to emit pollutants that will cause at most this level of pollution at location formula_13. Therefore, a polluter that affects water quality at a number of points has to hold a portfolio of licenses covering all relevant monitoring-points. In the above example, if country 2 wants to emit a unit of pollutant, it should purchase two permits: one for location 2 and one for location 3.

Montgomery shows that, while both markets lead to efficient license allocation, the market in pollution-licenses is more widely applicable than the market in emission-licenses.

===International emissions trading===
The nature of the pollutant plays a very important role when policy-makers decide which framework should be used to control pollution. CO2 acts globally, thus its impact on the environment is generally similar wherever in the globe it is released. So the location of the originator of the emissions does not matter from an environmental standpoint.

The policy framework is different for regional pollutants (e.g. SO2 and NOx, and also mercury) because the impact of these pollutants may differ by location. The same amount of a regional pollutant can exert a very high impact in some locations and a low impact in other locations, so it matters where the pollutant is released. This is known as the &quot;Hot Spot&quot; problem.

A Lagrange framework is commonly used to determine the least cost of achieving an objective, in this case the total reduction in emissions required in a year. In some cases, it is possible to use the Lagrange optimization framework to determine the required reductions for each country (based on their MAC) so that the total cost of reduction is minimized. In such a scenario, the Lagrange multiplier represents the market allowance price (P) of a pollutant, such as the current market price of emission permits in Europe and the US.

Countries face the permit market price that exists in the market that day, so they are able to make individual decisions that would minimize their costs while at the same time achieving regulatory compliance. This is also another version of the Equi-Marginal Principle, commonly used in economics to choose the most economically efficient decision.

=== Prices versus quantities, and the safety valve ===

There has been longstanding debate on the relative merits of &quot;price&quot; versus &quot;quantity&quot; instruments to achieve emission reductions.

An emission cap and permit trading system is a &quot;quantity&quot; instrument because it fixes the overall emission level (quantity) and allows the price to vary. Uncertainty in future supply and demand conditions (market volatility) coupled with a fixed number of pollution permits creates an uncertainty in the future price of pollution permits, and the industry must accordingly bear the cost of adapting to these volatile market conditions. The burden of a volatile market thus lies with the industry rather than the controlling agency, which is generally more efficient. However, under volatile market conditions, the ability of the controlling agency to alter the caps will translate into an ability to pick &quot;winners and losers&quot; and thus presents an opportunity for corruption.

In contrast, an emission tax is a &quot;price&quot; instrument because it fixes the price while the emission level is allowed to vary according to economic activity. A major drawback of an emission tax is that the environmental outcome (e.g. a limit on the amount of emissions) is not guaranteed. On one hand, a tax will remove capital from the industry, suppressing possibly useful economic activity, but conversely, the polluter will not need to hedge as much against future uncertainty since the amount of tax will track with profits. The burden of a volatile market will be borne by the controlling (taxing) agency rather than the industry itself, which is generally less efficient. An advantage is that, given a uniform tax rate and a volatile market, the taxing entity will not be in a position to pick &quot;winners and losers&quot; and the opportunity for corruption will be less.

Assuming no corruption and assuming that the controlling agency and the industry are equally efficient at adapting to volatile market conditions, the best choice depends on the sensitivity of the costs of emission reduction, compared to the sensitivity of the benefits (i.e., climate damage avoided by a reduction) when the level of emission control is varied.

A third option, known as a &quot;safety valve&quot;, is a hybrid of the price and quantity instruments. The system is essentially an emission cap and permit trading system but the maximum (or minimum) permit price is capped. Emitters have the choice of either obtaining permits in the marketplace or buying them from the government at a specified trigger price (which could be adjusted over time). The system is sometimes recommended as a way of overcoming the fundamental disadvantages of both systems by giving governments the flexibility to adjust the system as new information comes to light. It can be shown that by setting the trigger price high enough, or the number of permits low enough, the safety valve can be used to mimic either a pure quantity or pure price mechanism.

==Comparison with other methods of emission reduction==
Cap and trade is the textbook example of an &quot;emissions trading program&quot;. Other market-based approaches include baseline-and-credit, and pollution tax. They all put a price on pollution (for example, see carbon price), and so provide an economic incentive to reduce pollution beginning with the lowest-cost opportunities. By contrast, in a command-and-control approach, a central authority designates pollution levels each facility is allowed to emit. Cap and trade essentially functions as a tax where the tax rate is variable based on the relative cost of abatement per unit, and the tax base is variable based on the amount of abatement needed.

=== Baseline and credit ===
In a baseline and credit program, polluters can create permits, called credits or offsets, by reducing their emissions below a baseline level, which is often the historical emissions level from a designated past year. Such credits can be bought by polluters that have a regulatory limit.

===Pollution tax===

Emissions fees or environmental tax is a surcharge on the pollution created while producing goods and services. For example, a carbon tax is a tax on the carbon content of fossil fuels that aims to discourage their use and thereby reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The two approaches are overlapping sets of policy designs. Both can have a range of scopes, points of regulation, and price schedules. They can be fair or unfair, depending on how the revenue is used. Both have the effect of increasing the price of goods (such as fossil fuels) to consumers. A comprehensive, upstream, auctioned cap-and-trade system is very similar to a comprehensive, upstream carbon tax. Yet, many commentators sharply contrast the two approaches.

The main difference is what is defined and what derived. A tax is a price control, while a cap-and-trade system is a quantity control instrument. That is, a tax is a unit price for pollution that is set by authorities, and the market determines the quantity emitted; in cap and trade, authorities determine the amount of pollution, and the market determines the price. This difference affects a number of criteria.

Responsiveness to inflation: Cap-and-trade has the advantage that it adjusts to inflation (changes to overall prices) automatically, while emissions fees must be changed by regulators.

Responsiveness to cost changes: It is not clear which approach is better. It is possible to combine the two into a safety valve price: a price set by regulators, at which polluters can buy additional permits beyond the cap.

Responsiveness to recessions: This point is closely related to responsiveness to cost changes, because recessions cause a drop in demand. Under cap and trade, the emissions cost automatically decreases, so a cap-and-trade scheme adds another automatic stabilizer to the economy—in effect, an automatic fiscal stimulus. However, a lower pollution price also results in reduced efforts to reduce pollution. If the government is able to stimulate the economy regardless of the cap-and-trade scheme, an excessively low price causes a missed opportunity to cut emissions faster than planned. Instead, it might be better to have a price floor (a tax). This is especially true when cutting pollution is urgent, as with greenhouse gas emissions. A price floor also provides certainty and stability for investment in emissions reductions: recent experience from the UK shows that nuclear power operators are reluctant to invest on &quot;un-subsidized&quot; terms unless there is a guaranteed price floor for carbon (which the EU emissions trading scheme does not presently provide).

Responsiveness to uncertainty: As with cost changes, in a world of uncertainty, it is not clear whether emissions fees or cap-and-trade systems are more efficient—it depends on how fast the marginal social benefits of reducing pollution fall with the amount of cleanup (e.g., whether inelastic or elastic marginal social benefit schedule).

Other: The magnitude of the tax will depend on how sensitive the supply of emissions is to the price. The permit price of cap-and-trade will depend on the pollutant market. A tax generates government revenue, but full-auctioned emissions permits can do the same. A similar upstream cap-and-trade system could be implemented. An upstream carbon tax might be the simplest to administer. Setting up a complex cap-and-trade arrangement that is comprehensive has high institutional needs.

===Command-and-control regulation===

Command and control is a system of regulation that prescribes emission limits and compliance methods for each facility or source. It is the traditional approach to reducing air pollution.

Command-and-control regulations are more rigid than incentive-based approaches such as pollution fees and cap and trade. An example of this is a performance standard which sets an emissions goal for each polluter that is fixed and, therefore, the burden of reducing pollution cannot be shifted to the firms that can achieve it more cheaply. As a result, performance standards are likely to be more costly overall. The additional costs would be passed to end consumers.

==Trading systems==
Apart from the dynamic development in carbon emission trading, other pollutants have also been targeted.

===United States===
====Sulfur dioxide====

An early example of an emission trading system has been the sulfur dioxide (SO2) trading system under the framework of the Acid Rain Program of the 1990 Clean Air Act in the U.S. Under the program, which is essentially a cap-and-trade emissions trading system, SO2 emissions were reduced by 50% from 1980 levels by 2007. Some experts argue that the cap-and-trade system of SO2 emissions reduction has reduced the cost of controlling acid rain by as much as 80% versus source-by-source reduction. The SO2 program was challenged in 2004, which set in motion a series of events that led to the 2011 Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR). Under the CSAPR, the national SO2 trading program was replaced by four separate trading groups for SO2 and NOx.
SO2 emissions from Acid Rain Program sources have fallen from 17.3 million tons in 1980 to about 7.6 million tons in 2008, a decrease in emissions of 56 percent. A 2014 EPA analysis estimated that implementation of the Acid Rain Program avoided between 20,000 and 50,000 incidences of premature mortality annually due to reductions of ambient PM2.5 concentrations, and between 430 and 2,000 incidences annually due to reductions of ground-level ozone.

====Nitrogen oxides====
In 2003, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) began to administer the Budget Trading Program (NBP) under the State Implementation Plan (also known as the &quot;NOx SIP Call&quot;). The Budget Trading Program was a market-based cap and trade program created to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) from power plants and other large combustion sources in the eastern United States. NOx is a prime ingredient in the formation of ground-level ozone (smog), a pervasive air pollution problem in many areas of the eastern United States. The NBP was designed to reduce NOx emissions during the warm summer months, referred to as the ozone season, when ground-level ozone concentrations are highest. In March 2008, EPA again strengthened the 8-hour ozone standard to 0.075 parts per million (ppm) from its previous 0.08 ppm.

Ozone season emissions decreased by 43 percent between 2003 and 2008, even while energy demand remained essentially flat during the same period. CAIR will result in $85 billion to $100 billion in health benefits and nearly $2 billion in visibility benefits per year by 2015 and will substantially reduce premature mortality in the eastern United States.
NOx reductions due to the Budget Trading Program have led to improvements in ozone and PM2.5, saving an estimated 580 to 1,800 lives in 2008.

A 2017 study in the &quot;American Economic Review&quot; found that the Budget Trading Program decreased emissions and ambient ozone concentrations. The program reduced expenditures on medicine by about 1.5% ($800 million annually) and reduced the mortality rate by up to 0.5% (2,200 fewer premature deaths, mainly among individuals 75 and older).

====Volatile organic compounds====

In the United States the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classifies Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) as gases emitted from certain solids and liquids that may have adverse health effects. These VOCs include a variety of chemicals that are emitted from a variety of different products. These include products such as gasoline, perfumes, hair spray, fabric cleaners, PVC, and refrigerants; all of which can contain chemicals such as benzene, acetone, methylene chloride, freons, formaldehyde.

VOCs are also monitored by the United States Geological Survey for its presence in groundwater supply. The USGS concluded that many of the nations aquifers are at risk to low-level VOC contamination. The common symptoms of short levels of exposure to VOCs include headaches, nausea, and eye irritation. If exposed for an extended period of time the symptoms include cancer and damage to the central nervous system.

===China===
In an effort to reverse the adverse consequences of air pollution, in 2006, China started to consider a national pollution permit trading system in order to use market-based mechanisms to incentivize companies to cut pollution. This has been based on a previous pilot project called the Industrial emission trading pilot scheme, which was launched in 2002. Four provinces, three municipalities and one state-owned enterprise were involved in this pilot project (also known as the 4+3+1 project). They are Shandong, Shanxi, Jiangsu, Henan, Shanghai, Tianjin, Liuzhou and China Huaneng Group, a state-owned company in the power industry.

In 2014, when the Chinese government started considering a national level pollution permit trading system again, there were more than 20 local pollution permit trading platforms. The Yangtze River Delta region as a whole has also run test trading, but the scale was limited. In the same year, the Chinese government proposed establishing a carbon market, focused on CO2 reduction later in the decade, and it is a separate system from the pollution permit trading.

Following these regional efforts, China established its national Emissions Trading System in 2017.

A 2021 study in &quot;PNAS&quot; found that China&#x27;s emissions trading system effectively reduced firm emissions despite low carbon prices and infrequent trading. The system reduced total emissions by 16.7% and emission intensity by 9.7%.

===Linked trading systems===
Distinct cap-and-trade systems can be linked together through the mutual or unilateral recognition of emissions allowances for compliance. Linking systems creates a larger carbon market, which can reduce overall compliance costs, increase market liquidity and generate a more stable carbon market. Linking systems can also be politically symbolic as it shows willingness to undertake a common effort to reduce GHG emissions. Some scholars have argued that linking may provide a starting point for developing a new, bottom-up international climate policy architecture, whereby multiple unique systems successively link their various systems.

In 2014, the U.S. state of California (which is the world&#x27;s fifth largest economy if it were a nation, between Germany and the United Kingdom in size) and the Canadian province of Québec successfully linked their systems. In 2015, the provinces of Ontario and Manitoba agreed to join the linked system between Quebec and California. On 22 September 2017, the premiers of Quebec and Ontario, and the Governor of California, signed the formal agreement establishing the linkage.

===Renewable energy certificates===

Renewable Energy Certificates (occasionally referred to as or &quot;green tags&quot;), are a largely unrelated form of market-based instruments that are used to achieve renewable energy targets, which may be environmentally motivated (like emissions reduction targets), but may also be motivated by other aims, such as energy security or industrial policy.

== Criticism ==
===Distributional effects===
The US Congressional Budget Office (CBO, 2009) examined the potential effects of the American Clean Energy and Security Act on US households. This act relies heavily on the free allocation of permits. The Bill was found to protect low-income consumers, but it was recommended that the Bill be made more efficient by reducing welfare provisions for corporations, and that more resources be made available for consumer relief. A cap-and-trade initiative in the U.S. Northeast caused concerns it would be regressive and poorer households would absorb most of the new tax.

== Effectiveness ==

Faure and Peeters cautiously endorse the effectiveness of emissions trading in practice: &quot;Notably for the greenhouse gas emissions problem, emissions trading seems to be very much suited to reaching the necessary reductions in a cost-effective way.&quot;

==See also==
* Acid Rain Retirement Fund
* AP 42 Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors
* Asia-Pacific Emissions Trading Forum
* Emission standard
* Green certificate
* Green investment scheme
* Mobile emission reduction credit (MERC)
==References==
==External links==

* Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading and Project-based Mechanisms – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
* US EPA&#x27;s Acid Rain Program</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="0" end="17" title="Emissions trading" label="Emissions trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="63" end="72" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="86" end="94" title="economics" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414816" start="95" end="104" title="incentive" label="incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829510" start="136" end="145" title="pollutant" label="pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="177" end="190" title="Emissions trading" label="cap and trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="200" end="228" title="Emissions trading" label="[[emissions trading scheme]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037988" start="261" end="284" title="carbon emission trading" label="carbon emission trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="299" end="313" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="336" end="361" title="climate change mitigation" label="climate change mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="385" end="399" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="478" end="490" title="government agency" label="governmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152105" start="1001" end="1020" title="Command and control regulation" label="command-and-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q830463" start="1055" end="1080" title="best available technology" label="best available technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="1112" end="1121" title="subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1141" end="1150" title="Pollution" label="Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="1198" end="1209" title="externality" label="externality"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759159" start="1494" end="1510" title="emissions target" label="emissions target"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="2871" end="2887" title="greenhouse gases" label="greenhouse gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q66295" start="3011" end="3031" title="financial derivative" label="financial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="3257" end="3276" title="environmental group" label="environmental group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875012" start="3369" end="3382" title="law of demand" label="law of demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893102" start="3470" end="3483" title="tax deduction" label="tax deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="3651" end="3664" title="air pollutant" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674059" start="3701" end="3716" title="Acid Rain Program" label="national market"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="3727" end="3736" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="3792" end="3807" title="NOx" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="3910" end="3923" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="4111" end="4156" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q122937517" start="4215" end="4230" title="William Sanjour" label="William Sanjour"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="5457" end="5462" title="Ronald Coase" label="Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674059" start="5997" end="6014" title="Acid Rain Program" label="Acid Rain Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="6034" end="6052" title="1990 Clean Air Act" label="1990 Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721883" start="6296" end="6315" title="The Center for Clean Air Policy" label="US clean air policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133508" start="6319" end="6340" title="Climate change policy of the United States" label="global climate policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6429" end="6435" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="6524" end="6533" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006307" start="6595" end="6609" title="C. Boyden Gray" label="C. Boyden Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="6613" end="6624" title="George H. W. Bush" label="G.H.W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345899" start="6671" end="6697" title="Environmental Defense Fund" label="Environmental Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="6884" end="6895" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152106" start="7046" end="7065" title="Command and control (management)" label="command-and-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="7096" end="7102" title="direct tax" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771708" start="7107" end="7119" title="indirect tax" label="indirect tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14785280" start="7187" end="7216" title="Marginal Abatement Cost Curve" label="Marginal Abatement Cost Curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758440" start="7319" end="7331" title="The Problem of Social Cost" label="Coase (1960)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="7495" end="7501" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625018" start="7513" end="7529" title="bargaining power" label="bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q397832" start="7845" end="7853" title="margin (economics)" label="marginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160117" start="9017" end="9023" title="broker" label="broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="9055" end="9073" title="risk management" label="management of risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208697" start="9333" end="9349" title="financial market" label="financial market"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="9399" end="9414" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169419" start="9551" end="9569" title="perverse incentive" label="perverse incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="10066" end="10079" title="external cost" label="external cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="10497" end="10514" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323567" start="10554" end="10567" title="distortion (economics)" label="distortionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369349" start="11391" end="11403" title="Ross Garnaut" label="Ross Garnaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152105" start="11939" end="11969" title="Command and control regulation" label="Command and control regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949665" start="13801" end="13808" title="auditor" label="auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="13889" end="13894" title="fine (penalty)" label="fines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32098" start="13899" end="13908" title="sanctions (law)" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324285" start="14802" end="14820" title="fair river sharing" label="fair river sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="16284" end="16287" title="Sulfur dioxide" label="SO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="16292" end="16295" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="16306" end="16313" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q875744" start="16603" end="16621" title="Euler–Lagrange equation" label="Lagrange framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="16982" end="17001" title="Lagrange multiplier" label="Lagrange multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336079" start="17381" end="17404" title="Ordinal utility" label="Equi-Marginal Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756115" start="17917" end="17927" title="volatility (finance)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q288401" start="18506" end="18518" title="Carbon tax" label="emission tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q20681009" start="20795" end="20807" title="carbon price" label="carbon price"/>
<link wikidata="Q288401" start="21705" end="21715" title="carbon tax" label="carbon tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="21750" end="21762" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="22806" end="22815" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787358" start="23379" end="23399" title="automatic stabilizer" label="automatic stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037988" start="25793" end="25816" title="carbon emission trading" label="carbon emission trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="25965" end="25979" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674059" start="26028" end="26045" title="Acid Rain Program" label="Acid Rain Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="26058" end="26071" title="Clean Air Act (1990)" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512008" start="26501" end="26531" title="Cross-State Air Pollution Rule" label="Cross-State Air Pollution Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="27586" end="27590" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740221" start="28481" end="28505" title="The American Economic Review" label="American Economic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="28865" end="28896" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="28914" end="28940" title="Volatile organic compound" label="Volatile Organic Compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="29370" end="29401" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="30169" end="30191" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q842509" start="30337" end="30356" title="China Huaneng Group" label="China Huaneng Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100847" start="30921" end="30958" title="Chinese national carbon trading scheme" label="its national Emissions Trading System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337914" start="31184" end="31202" title="emission intensity" label="emission intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505921" start="32248" end="32256" title="Premier (Canada)" label="premiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="32288" end="32310" title="Governor of California" label="Governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143923" start="32404" end="32433" title="Renewable Energy Certificates" label="Renewable Energy Certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="32814" end="32841" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099378" start="32892" end="32930" title="American Clean Energy and Security Act" label="American Clean Energy and Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674059" start="33674" end="33699" title="Acid Rain Retirement Fund" label="Acid Rain Retirement Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653446" start="33702" end="33753" title="AP 42 Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors" label="AP 42 Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806249" start="33756" end="33792" title="Asia-Pacific Emissions Trading Forum" label="Asia-Pacific Emissions Trading Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="33795" end="33812" title="Emission standard" label="Emission standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485681" start="33815" end="33832" title="Green certificate" label="Green certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="33835" end="33858" title="Green investment scheme" label="Green investment scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887114" start="33861" end="33893" title="Mobile emission reduction credit" label="Mobile emission reduction credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="34002" end="34056" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37105" wikidata="Q4832882" url="?curid=37105" title="Metin Kaçan">
<text>Metin Kaçan (15 November 1961 – 6 January 2013) was a Turkish author, who is best known for his novel &quot;Ağır Roman&quot; (&quot;Cholera Street&quot;), which was translated into German (Kaçan 2003), and a movie (&quot;Ağır Roman&quot;), directed by Mustafa Altıoklar (1999), was based on it.

== Literary career ==

Besides &quot;Ağır Roman&quot;, Kaçan is also the author of the novel &quot;Fındık Sekiz&quot;, a collection of short stories, &quot;A ship to the Islands&quot; (&quot;Adalara Vapur&quot;, Kaçan 2002), and a book written in a mixed style between prose and poetry, entitled &quot;The Tiger at Withdrawal&quot; (&quot;Harman Kaplan&quot;, Kaçan 1999).

Much of Kaçan&#x27;s writings deals with life in Istanbul, in particular its poor quarter Dolapdere (not far from Taksim Square). To Dolapdere, he sarcastically gave the name &quot;Cholera&quot; (&quot;Kolera&quot; in Turkish) in &quot;Ağır Roman&quot;, thereby recalling both its shabbiness and the fact that the great Polish poet Adam Mickiewicz died there from the cholera in 1855. Mickiewicz Museum at Dolapdere, still open to visitors today, figures in &quot;Ağır Roman&quot;. The title of this novel plays ingeniously with the polysemy of the Turkish word &quot;Roman&quot;, which means both &quot;&quot; and &quot;novel&quot;. Also, together with the adjective &quot;ağır&quot;, which means &quot;heavy&quot; or &quot;slow&quot; in Turkish, &quot;Roman&quot; is the designation for a special kind of street music, played by some of the novel&#x27;s protagonists.

&quot;Ağır Roman&quot; tells the tragic story of a young hero, who grows up in &quot;Cholera&quot; quarter but finally fails and commits suicide. His failure parallels the failure of the quarter itself, whose ancient structures as well as its multi-ethnic and multi-religious composition disintegrate.

&quot;Fındık Sekiz&quot; tells a story about two cars, that appear sometimes as personified figures, and that take the semi-autobiographical protagonist Meto on a mystical journey. At the same time, Meto&#x27;s conflict with a woman, who manages to have him thrown into prison through fraudulent statements, is related, which might reflect some of Kaçan&#x27;s own experiences.

Kaçan&#x27;s style is heavily imbued with Turkish slang. This choice gives his writings a non-conformistic, frequently vulgar, but overall extremely vivid and creative tone, which has been hailed, among others, by Yıldız Ecevit. Other characteristics of his writing are the personification of natural phenomena
and inanimate items such as cars (in particular in &quot;Fındık Sekiz&quot;), autobiographical details (Kaçan grew up in Dolapdere), the blurring of the limitations of poetry and prose, and references to mysticism, in particular Muslim mysticism (Sufism). His best-selling novel, &quot;Ağır Roman&quot; was translated into French by Actes Sud in 2010.

== Rape conviction ==
In 1995, Kaçan was arrested for torturing and raping his ex-girlfriend. He was released on bail pending the outcome of the trial, which ended five years later with a prison sentence of eight years and nine months. The appeals court upheld Kaçan&#x27;s conviction. In 2006, he was caught by the police in his hometown while attending the funeral of a relative and sent to prison to serve his sentence. After spending close to four years in prison, the remainder of his sentence was commuted.

== Death ==
Kaçan committed suicide by jumping from the Bosphorus Bridge on 6 January 2013. On that day, he took a cab in Esenler on the European side of Istanbul and requested to be driven to Üsküdar on the Asian side. He asked the driver to stop on the bridge so that he could take photographs. He got out of the vehicle, ran to the edge of the bridge, and threw himself off. His brother confirmed the suicide on 8 January. His body washed ashore on 18 January, twelve days after his disappearance, on the coast of Marmara Sea at Beylikdüzü. Kaçan was 51 years old.

==Literature by Metin Kaçan==
*Jaklaban-Andante &quot;Graffiti&quot; (1989) Istanbul, Joker Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin et Kemal Aratan &quot;İstedikleri Yere Gidenler&quot; (1991) Istanbul, Joker Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Ağır Roman&quot; (1995) Istanbul, Can Yayınları.
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Fındık Sekiz&quot; (1997) Istanbul, Can Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Harman Kaplan&quot; (1999) Istanbul, Can Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Adalara Vapur&quot; (2002) Istanbul, Can Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Cholera Blues&quot; (2003) Berlin, Dağyeli
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Cervantesin Yeğeni&quot; (2005) Istanbul, Can Yayınları
*Kaçan, Metin &quot;Haselnuss 8&quot; (2008) Berlin, Dağyeli

==Literature about Metin Kaçan==
*Hess 1998a. Hess, Michael Reinhard: Ağır Roman. &quot;Istanbuler Almanach&quot; 2 (1998). 64–66.
*Hess 1998b. Hess, Michael Reinhard: A Glance at the Wilder Side of Turkey: Ağır Roman. &quot;Orientalia Suecana&quot; 67 (1998). 55–67.
*Ecevit 2004. Ecevit, Yıldız: Türk Romanında Postmodernist Açılımlar [Postmodern Tendencies in the Turkish novel]. 3rd ed. Istanbul: Iletisim Yayınları.
*Hess 2005. Hess, Michael Reinhard: The Turkish Car Novel on a Trip: fındık sekiz by Metin Kaçan. W&quot;iener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes&quot; 95 (2005). 87–118.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4832882" start="0" end="11" title="Metin Kaçan" label="Metin Kaçan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108" end="118" title="Ağır Roman (novel)" label="Ağır Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104306" start="221" end="231" title="Ağır Roman (film)" label="Ağır Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943225" start="252" end="269" title="Mustafa Altıoklar" label="Mustafa Altıoklar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="333" end="343" title="Ağır Roman (novel)" label="Ağır Roman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="395" end="407" title="Fındık Sekiz" label="Fındık Sekiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="719" end="727" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288862" start="760" end="769" title="Dolapdere" label="Dolapdere"/>
<link wikidata="Q736072" start="784" end="797" title="Taksim Square" label="Taksim Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="851" end="858" title="Cholera" label="Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="990" end="996" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="1002" end="1017" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679495" start="1055" end="1072" title="Adam Mickiewicz Museum, Istanbul" label="Mickiewicz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191928" start="1203" end="1211" title="polysemy" label="polysemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="1219" end="1226" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1477" end="1489" title="street music" label="street music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1850" end="1862" title="Fındık Sekiz" label="Fındık Sekiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2591" end="2603" title="Fındık Sekiz" label="Fındık Sekiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="2781" end="2787" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484" start="3457" end="3473" title="Bosphorus Bridge" label="Bosphorus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q378714" start="3523" end="3530" title="Esenler" label="Esenler"/>
<link wikidata="Q326339" start="3594" end="3601" title="Üsküdar" label="Üsküdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="3918" end="3929" title="Marmara Sea" label="Marmara Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q794356" start="3933" end="3943" title="Beylikdüzü" label="Beylikdüzü"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37107" wikidata="Q1622260" url="?curid=37107" title="United Nations Foundation">
<text>The United Nations Foundation is a charitable organization headquartered in Washington, D.C., that supports the United Nations and its activities. It was established in 1998 with a $1billion gift to the United Nations by philanthropist Ted Turner, who believed the UN was crucial for addressing the world&#x27;s problems. Originally primarily a grantmaker, the UN Foundation has evolved into a strategic partner to the UN, mobilizing support to advance the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and help the UN address issues such as climate change, global health, gender equality, human rights, data and technology, peace, and humanitarian responses. The UN Foundation&#x27;s main work occurs through building public-private partnerships, communities, initiatives, campaigns, and alliances to broaden support for the UN and solve global problems. The UN Foundation has helped build awareness and advocate for action on, among others, antimicrobial resistance, regional action on climate change, local implementation of the SDGs, as well as global campaigns such as Nothing But Nets against malaria, the Measles &amp; Rubella Initiative, the Clean Cooking Alliance, Girl Up, Shot@Life, and the Digital Impact Alliance, among others. In March 2020, the UN Foundation was also a key founder of the COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund on behalf of the World Health Organization (WHO), helping to raise over $200million USD within the first six weeks to support the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The UN Foundation was founded with the intent to build support for UN causes and to advocate for the United States to honor its financial commitments to the UN. Since then, the UN Foundation and its U.S. advocacy sister organization, the Better World Campaign, have built advocacy campaigns, provided grants, connected experts, advocates, and decision-makers, and driven public awareness in order to support the UN and its priorities and programs worldwide. The UN Foundation is now supported by a variety of philanthropic, corporate, government, and individual donors, and it continues to serve as a substantial source of private funding to the United Nations. In conjunction with the UN, it established the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships to serve as the UN counterpart to the Foundation.

The UN Foundation has made a cumulative disbursement of more than $1.5billion in grants to the UN system. The UN Foundation also works with UN partners in order to provide policy, advocacy, event, and communications recommendations and support. The UN Foundation&#x27;s budgetary breakdown in 2019 was $95.8million to program services, $5.7million to fundraising, and $8.9million going to management and overhead.

==History==

In 1998, Ted Turner, an American media proprietor, producer, and philanthropist, announced his decision to make a $1billion contribution to the United Nations at the annual United Nations Association of the USA gala dinner, with then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan present. This $1billion donation was used to establish the United Nations Foundation.

Beyond his philanthropy work, Turner is best known for founding cable television network CNN, as well as the Turner Broadcasting System (TBS) and Turner Entertainment Company. Turner chose to donate to the UN and create the UN Foundation because he was a prior donor to similar causes and felt strongly that the UN was critical to solve the world’s most pressing challenges. Turner’s gift was also inspired by the fact that the UN was underfunded at the time because the U.S. government had not met its allocated financial contribution to the UN due to a lack of sufficient appropriations in the federal budget. Prior to his $1billion donation to the UN, Turner was already an active philanthropist and had been a proponent for the protection of the environment, especially in combating global warming. Turner believed that his $100million per year donation over the course of 10 years would make a difference to the United Nations, and that he could use this donation to encourage other wealthy members of society to make financial contributions to the work of the UN. In 1996, Turner was worth $3.2billion due to his shares in Time Warner (which had bought TBS that year). By giving away nearly a third of his wealth while still living, Ted Turner became a noted participant in the Giving Pledge movement.

==Leadership==
The UN Foundation is led by President and Chief Executive Officer Elizabeth Cousens, who stepped into the role in January 2020 after serving for four years as Deputy CEO. Prior to her time at the UN Foundation, Cousens served as U.S. Ambassador to the UN Economic and Social Council, and Alternate Representative to the UN General Assembly where she led U.S. negotiations on the SDGs. Kathy Calvin, the former President of AOL Time Warner Foundation, served as the UN Foundation’s prior President and CEO from 2013 through 2019. Timothy E. Wirth, a former United States Congressman, U.S. Senator, and the first Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs in U.S. President Bill Clinton&#x27;s administration, served as the UN Foundation&#x27;s first President from 1998 to 2013. Ted Turner serves as the chairman of the board. Other current board members include Queen Rania Al-Abdullah of Jordan, former Deputy Secretary-General of the UN Mark Malloch-Brown, Founder and Chairman Emeritus of Infosys N. R. Narayana Murthy, Master of University College Oxford Valerie Amos, CEO of Verizon Communications Hans Vestberg, Former Prime Minister of Norway Gro Harlem Brundtland, Nobel Peace Prize winner Muhammad Yunus, President of the University of Miami Julio Frenk, Chairman of Endeavor Brazil Fábio Colletti Barbosa, Senior Partner of the Southbridge Group Dr. Frannie Léautier, Chair of the Captain Planet Foundation Laura Turner Seydel, and former UN Foundation Presidents Timothy E. Wirth and Kathy Calvin.

==Background of Foundation&#x27;s involvement with the UN==

When the UN Foundation was founded, it was created to assist the UN with a variety of key issues, and bring attention to particular global problems. A top priority was to build upon previously-successful UN programs, including children&#x27;s health, population and family planning issues, global environmental agreements, and the safe removal of land-mines. Additionally, it aimed to work with the private sector to raise funding for UN causes, and to raise awareness of the UN and its programs amongst the American population.

The UN Foundation has had a close relationship with the UN and its leadership from the beginning in order to set goals and provide funding for particular programs. Over time, the UN Foundation evolved from being a simple funding conduit to creating and fostering its own initiatives and communities, which enabled it to support UN priorities more deeply and diversely. At present, it continues to build and expand its role as a strategic partner to the UN across multiple sectors. The UN Foundation’s current main issue areas include the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), gender equality, climate and environment, global health, and enhancing global cooperation. The Foundation has also continued working in areas of US-UN engagement and advancing data and technology for the SDGs.

==Issue areas==

=== Sustainable Development Goals ===
One of the UN Foundation’s overarching goals is to share awareness, advance progress, understand critical gaps, and activate communities in support of the Sustainable Development Goals. The SDGs, a set of 17 interlinked goals designed to be a &quot;blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all,&quot; were adopted in 2015 by the United Nations General Assembly as a successor to the Millennium Development Goals. While all of the UN Foundation’s programs connect to at least one SDG (and often multiple), the Foundation also works to foster awareness and support of the SDGs among civil society, the private sector, academia, and engaged communities. The Foundation is also a key partner in Global Goals Week, which runs parallel to the UN General Assembly week and engages diverse partnerships for the SDGs. The Foundation also houses the Business Council for the United Nations, which creates connections between the private sector and the UN in support of the UN’s priorities and the SDGs.

===Global Health===
Global health, often with a focus on women and children, has been one of the UN Foundation’s key global issue areas. Over the Foundation’s first 20 years, 72% of grants fell under the issue area of global health. The Foundation works closely with private sector partners and UN agencies in order to address a variety of health issues including universal health coverage, antimicrobial resistance, and the response and recovery from COVID-19. In addition, the UN Foundation has built partnerships and campaigns to address issues such as measles and rubella, childhood vaccination, and malaria.

The Measles &amp; Rubella Initiative, launched in 2001, is a partnership between the UN Foundation, the American Red Cross, UNICEF, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the World Health Organization (WHO) in order to provide measles vaccinations to children across the African continent. This campaign not only focuses on vaccinating children, but also putting into place health infrastructure, and promoting better access to health-care across the continent. In ten years, the initiative has protected more than 5.5billion children from measles.

The UN Foundation also runs the Nothing But Nets Campaign, which is targeted at reducing malaria across the African continent. This campaign originally started when &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; writer Rick Reilley published an article asking his readers to donate money to a campaign to buy mosquito nets for those in Africa suffering from malaria. With support from the UN Foundation, Reilley&#x27;s project got off the ground, and has to-date provided over 13million nets across Africa. Today, the campaign also encourages Americans to learn about, advocate for, and donate to malaria eradication efforts.

The UN Foundation&#x27;s Shot@Life campaign educates, connects and empowers Americans to champion vaccines as one of the most cost-effective ways to save the lives of children in developing countries. The campaign encourages Americans to learn about, advocate for, and donate vaccines to decrease vaccine-preventable childhood deaths. As of 2019, Shot@Life had protected over $4.1billion in U.S. funding for global childhood immunization programs and helped provide more than 82million vaccines through direct grant support to UN partners.

The UN Foundation is a communications and advocacy partner for the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, a partnership that includes Rotary International, the Gates Foundation, UNICEF, CDC, and WHO. The initiative is dedicated to globally eradicating polio through vaccinations and has protected 2billion children from polio.

Every Woman Every Child was launched by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon during the United Nations Millennium Development Goals Summit in 2010 and aims to save and improve the lives of millions of women, children and adolescents around the world by 2030. It is a global effort to mobilize international and national action by governments, multilaterals, the private sector and civil society to address health challenges facing women and children around the world.

In March 2020, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the UN Foundation launched the COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund in partnership with the Swiss Philanthropy Foundation to raise funds for WHO’s COVID-19 response. The fund raised over $200million within six weeks, which went toward WHO’s efforts to track and understand the spread of the virus, to mobilize protective equipment to frontline health workers, and to develop vaccines, tests, and treatments. Beneficiaries of the fund were later expanded to include UNICEF, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), the World Food Programme (WFP), the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The foundation also helped raise funds for the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator campaign by accepting donations through the ACT Together Fund.

In September 2020, the UN Foundation launched its Unite for Health campaign, focused on the need for global collaboration amidst the disruption of health systems and services due to COVID-19, and the rollback of global health progress it brought.

=== Girls and Women ===
Gender equality is another one of the Foundation’s key issue areas. The Foundation has several campaigns and initiatives that address gender issues; their work includes girls’ leadership and empowerment, family planning and contraceptive access, maternal health, and gender data. All its work on gender equality is represented by the Equal Everywhere brand and campaign that calls for all levels of society to make equality the reality of every girl and woman.

The UN Foundation launched the Girl Up campaign in September 2010. This &quot;for girls, by girls&quot; campaign offers leadership development and education opportunities for adolescent girls. Through Girl Up&#x27;s support, girls create middle school, high school, or campus clubs, which then plan events to raise money and awareness for the importance of women&#x27;s issues. Money raised by the clubs is often used to support girls in developing countries so that they have the opportunity to become educated, healthy, safe, counted, and positioned to be the next generation of leaders.

The Universal Access Project works to achieve universal access to reproductive health care by convening donors and advocates to protect and strengthen global sexual and reproductive health and rights. Its goal is to increase and maintain the U.S. involvement and funding for global family planning by protecting key investments.

Family Planning 2020, an outcome of the 2012 London Summit on Family Planning, addresses the policy, financing, delivery and socio-cultural barriers to women accessing contraceptive information, services and supplies. Led by an 23-member Reference Group, operated daily by a Secretariat, and hosted by the United Nations Foundation, FP2020 is based on the principle that all women, no matter where they live should have access to lifesaving contraceptives.

Data2X, a collaborative technical and advocacy platform, was formed after former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton called for its creation in a policy speech in July 2012 and cited the lack of reliable and regular data on the lives of women and girls. Through research, advocacy and communications, Data2X works to improve the availability, quality, and use of gender data to make a practical difference in the lives of women and girls worldwide.

===Climate and Environment===
The UN Foundation’s priorities include tackling global climate change, advancing climate diplomacy and negotiations, building cross-issue intersections, and communicating climate science to the public. The Foundation’s climate team works with partners in the NGO sector, the UN, governments, and private corporations to come up with solutions and provide funding to programs related to this issue. The UN Foundation also advocates for the Paris Agreement on climate change, particularly in the United States where it supports the U.S. Climate Alliance, a bipartisan coalition of states and unincorporated self-governing territories that are committed to upholding the objectives of the 2015 Paris Agreement.

The UN Foundation also fosters the Clean Cooking Alliance, an initiative supporting large-scale adoption of clean and safe household cooking solutions as a way to save lives, improve livelihoods, empower women, and reduce climate change emissions. The alliance works with public, private, and non-profit partners to overcome market barriers that hamper the production, deployment, and use of clean cookstoves and fuels in the developing world. It works to develop standards for cleaner stoves and to increase public and policymaker awareness of the health and environmental benefits of improved stoves.

== List of campaigns, alliances, initiatives, and communities ==

* +SocialGood, a global community of changemakers who connect with each other and the UN, share ideas, and advance solutions to achieve the SDGs in their communities.
* 3D Program for Girls and Women, a program addressing gender equality among local governments and through civil society and private sector partnerships.
* ACT Together Fund, a fundraising initiative to increase donations to the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator program.
* Better World Campaign, the UN Foundation’s sister organization that advocates for Congress to ensure that the US maintains its financial and bipartisan support of the United Nations.
* Business Council for the United Nations, an initiative that connects forward-thinking companies with the UN to collaborate and solve global challenges.
* Clean Cooking Alliance, an alliance supporting the large-scale adoption of clean and safe household cooking solutions as a way to save lives, improve livelihoods, empower women, and reduce climate change emissions.
* Data2X, a platform working to improve the quality, availability, and use of gender data.
* Digital Impact Alliance, an alliance that identifies digital solutions to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
* Family Planning 2020, an initiative that works to expand global access to family planning and sexual and reproductive health resources.
* Girl Up, a campaign that provides leadership training, education, and opportunities for girls to get involved in organizing, advocacy, fundraising, and communication activities.
* Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, a network working to improve data to monitor and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
* Measles &amp; Rubella Initiative, an initiative focusing on eradicating measles and rubella worldwide.
* Nothing But Nets, a campaign raising awareness and funding to fight malaria.
* Peace on Purpose, a partnership with lululemon to support the mental health and wellbeing of frontline workers through mindfulness.
* Shot@Life, a campaign raising awareness and funding to ensure that children around the world have access to lifesaving vaccines.
* United Nations Association of the United States of America, an association of U.S. based chapters that promote political and public support for the United Nations among Americans.
* The U.S. Climate Alliance, a bipartisan coalition of states and unincorporated self-governing territories in the U.S. that are committed to upholding the objectives of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change.
* Universal Access Project, an initiative that convenes U.S. foreign aid donors and non-governmental organizations to protect and strengthen global sexual and reproductive health and rights.

==References==
==External links==
*Interview with Gillian Sorensen, Senior Advisor at the United Nations Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1622260" start="4" end="29" title="United Nations Foundation" label="United Nations Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="35" end="58" title="charitable organization" label="charitable organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="76" end="92" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="112" end="126" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="221" end="235" title="Philanthropy" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="236" end="246" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="457" end="486" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="534" end="548" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="550" end="563" title="global health" label="global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="565" end="580" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="582" end="594" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="935" end="959" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antimicrobial resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062722" start="1066" end="1082" title="Nothing But Nets" label="Nothing But Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1091" end="1098" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804157" start="1104" end="1136" title="Measles Initiative" label="Measles &amp;amp; Rubella Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570100" start="1142" end="1164" title="Clean Cooking Alliance" label="Clean Cooking Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q88009545" start="1296" end="1329" title="COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund" label="COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1347" end="1372" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898567" start="1741" end="1762" title="Better World Campaign" label="Better World Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="2751" end="2761" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349698" start="2915" end="2952" title="United Nations Association of the United States of America" label="United Nations Association of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="2976" end="2996" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="UN Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="2997" end="3007" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="3184" end="3187" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="3204" end="3230" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="4224" end="4235" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q203807" start="4379" end="4392" title="The Giving Pledge" label="Giving Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109036" start="4485" end="4502" title="Elizabeth M. Cousens" label="Elizabeth Cousens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="4671" end="4701" title="United Nations Economic and Social Council" label="UN Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="4739" end="4758" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377197" start="4804" end="4816" title="Kathy Calvin" label="Kathy Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027431" start="4948" end="4964" title="Timothy E. Wirth" label="Timothy E. Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4975" end="4997" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5002" end="5014" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883175" start="5030" end="5072" title="Under Secretary of State for Democracy and Global Affairs" label="Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5091" end="5103" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="5197" end="5207" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="5222" end="5243" title="Chairman" label="chairman of the board"/>
<link wikidata="Q200678" start="5281" end="5304" title="Queen Rania Al-Abdullah" label="Queen Rania Al-Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="5308" end="5314" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336213" start="5358" end="5376" title="Mark Malloch Brown, Baron Malloch-Brown" label="Mark Malloch-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q26989" start="5411" end="5418" title="Infosys" label="Infosys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398708" start="5419" end="5440" title="N. R. Narayana Murthy" label="N. R. Narayana Murthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="5452" end="5477" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q335698" start="5478" end="5490" title="Valerie Amos, Baroness Amos" label="Valerie Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="5499" end="5521" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582880" start="5522" end="5535" title="Hans Vestberg" label="Hans Vestberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5562" end="5568" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133009" start="5569" end="5590" title="Gro Harlem Brundtland" label="Gro Harlem Brundtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="5592" end="5609" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q43969" start="5617" end="5631" title="Muhammad Yunus" label="Muhammad Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="5650" end="5669" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q864157" start="5670" end="5681" title="Julio Frenk" label="Julio Frenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43230173" start="5775" end="5795" title="Frannie Léautier" label="Dr. Frannie Léautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="7063" end="7092" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="7717" end="7748" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="7771" end="7799" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8079" end="8096" title="Global Goals Week#:~:text=Global Goals Week is an,level Week&amp;quot; in New York." label="Global Goals Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="8746" end="8771" title="Universal health care" label="universal health coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="8773" end="8797" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antimicrobial resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="8834" end="8842" title="Coronavirus disease 2019" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="8938" end="8945" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="8950" end="8957" title="rubella" label="rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="8969" end="8980" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="8986" end="8993" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804157" start="9000" end="9032" title="Measles &amp;amp; Rubella Initiative" label="Measles &amp;amp; Rubella Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="9100" end="9118" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="9120" end="9126" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="9132" end="9179" title="U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9195" end="9220" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062722" start="9602" end="9618" title="Nothing But Nets" label="Nothing But Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="9741" end="9759" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895628" start="10789" end="10824" title="Global Polio Eradication Initiative" label="Global Polio Eradication Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="10854" end="10874" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary International"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="10880" end="10896" title="Gates Foundation" label="Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="11109" end="11120" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11548" end="11565" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88009545" start="11598" end="11631" title="COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund" label="COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133033" start="12041" end="12088" title="Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations" label="Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="12101" end="12121" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="12133" end="12150" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UN Refugee Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q846656" start="12168" end="12246" title="UNRWA" label="United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371431" start="12303" end="12339" title="Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator" label="Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="12880" end="12895" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786626" start="12922" end="12937" title="maternal health" label="maternal health"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666891" start="13887" end="13928" title="sexual and reproductive health and rights" label="sexual and reproductive health and rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="14598" end="14621" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="14622" end="14644" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="15267" end="15270" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="15447" end="15462" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106152" start="15538" end="15559" title="United States Climate Alliance" label="U.S. Climate Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="15563" end="15573" title="Bipartisanship" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="15587" end="15593" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15598" end="15639" title="Territories of the United States#Unincorporated organized territories" label="unincorporated self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570100" start="15752" end="15774" title="Clean Cooking Alliance" label="Clean Cooking Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371431" start="16783" end="16819" title="Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator" label="Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898567" start="16831" end="16852" title="Better World Campaign" label="Better World Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570100" start="17170" end="17192" title="Clean Cooking Alliance" label="Clean Cooking Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804157" start="18062" end="18094" title="Measles Initiative" label="Measles &amp;amp; Rubella Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062722" start="18167" end="18183" title="Nothing But Nets" label="Nothing But Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349698" start="18511" end="18569" title="United Nations Association of the United States of America" label="United Nations Association of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106152" start="18697" end="18718" title="United States Climate Alliance" label="U.S. Climate Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="18722" end="18732" title="Bipartisanship" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="18746" end="18752" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18757" end="18798" title="Territories of the United States#Unincorporated organized territories" label="unincorporated self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="18870" end="18885" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37118" wikidata="Q24905394" url="?curid=37118" title="Arabic calligraphy">
<text>Arabic calligraphy is the artistic practice of handwriting and calligraphy based on the Arabic alphabet. It is known in Arabic as &quot;khatt&quot; (), derived from the words &#x27;line&#x27;, &#x27;design&#x27;, or &#x27;construction&#x27;. Kufic is the oldest form of the Arabic script.

From an artistic point of view, Arabic calligraphy has been known and appreciated for its diversity and great potential for development. In fact, it has been linked in Arabic culture to various fields such as religion, art, architecture, education and craftsmanship, which in turn have played an important role in its advancement.

Although most Islamic calligraphy is in Arabic and most Arabic calligraphy is Islamic, the two are not identical. Coptic or other Christian manuscripts in Arabic, for example, have made use of calligraphy. Likewise, there is Islamic calligraphy in Persian and Ottoman Turkish.

==Arabic alphabet==

The Arabic alphabet is one of the most widely used scripts in the world. Many scholars believe that the alphabet was created around the 4th century CE. The alphabet consists of 28 letters written from right to left. Each letter can be written in four ways, depending on where the letter is placed in a word. These four locations are also known as initial, medial, final and isolated. All letters can connect from the right side (i.e. to the preceding letter), but some do not connect from the left side (i.e. to the subsequent letter).

Three letters can also represent long vowels in certain contexts, namely ālif (ا), wāw (و), and yā (ي).

==Implements==
The pens used for Arabic calligraphy vary from Latin calligraphy. The tools used for calligraphy are different assortments of pens and calligraphy ink. The most common calligraphy pen used is Qalam.

=== Khamish pen ===
The Khamish pen also known as a reed pen is used by Arab, Turkish, and Iranian calligraphers. The reed of the pen is grown along rivers. Although this pen has been used for over 500 years, preparing the pen is a lengthy process.

=== Java pen ===
The Java pen is known for the tool&#x27;s hardness and ability to create sharp edges. The pen is good to use for small scripts.

=== Handam pen ===
The Handam pen consists of the same strength that the Java pen has. The pen is good to use for all kinds of scripts.

=== Celi pen ===
The Celi pen is used for large writing in Arabic calligraphy. These pens are made from hardwood and cut and drilled.

== Evolution ==
Arabic calligraphy evolved from a tool for communication and documentation to an artistic form in the span of 13 centuries, it was also implemented in various other fields such as mathematics and astronomy. It is a central form of decoration in Islamic art, such as decorative design and architecture. The evolution of Arabic calligraphy lead to the appearance of various scripts, including cursive styles such as Nastaliq and Ruq&#x27;ah, and more square, angular styles such as Kufic. The linguistic features of Arabic scripts are shared between all scripts despite differences in styles.

==Scripts==

=== Kufic ===
Originally used for inscription on stone and metal, the Kufic style of Arabic calligraphy received its name due to its birth in the city of Kufa, Iraq. This script is one of the oldest scripts used in Arabic and Islamic calligraphy; due to this, the style has undergone many evolutions and changes in its life course, as many attempts were made to perfect it. However, this also led to the development of many different variations of this script, such as the floriated Kufic, square Kufic, knotted Kufic, and many others. This also means there are few distinguishing features of the Kufic script.

The Kufic style has been used almost exclusively for Arabic, as opposed to other languages, such as Persian and Urdu, that are written in systems derived from Arabic; a single exception to this is a series of Persian rhymes found on a building in Ghazni from the 11th century.

=== Naskh ===
Known as the Naskh or Naskhī script, this script is said to have originated from Mecca and Medina. The script is used as a cursive script, for example on papyrus and paper. The origins of the style are debated by scholars, but some believe it initially stemmed from the Thuluth script.But recent discoveries in Jabal Sala in Medina have proven that the Naskh script precedes the Thuluth script and that it existed before Ibn Muqla al-Shirazi. One of the main usages for this script was for writing the Holy Quran but it was also used for inscription on metal antiquities, woods and other objects of decorative purpose. The main evolutionary periods for this script were the 3rd and 4th centuries AD, coinciding with the evolution other similar popular styles such as the Rayhani, Thulth, and Muhaqqaq.

===Other scripts===
The Thuluth and Nasta&#x27;liq and Diwani script are other scripts used for Arabic scripting.

The Thuluth script, used during the medieval times, is known as one of the oldest scripts to exist. The script was used in mosques and for Quranic text due to the appearance of the text.

The Nasta&#x27;liq script is used more for Persian than Arabic scripting. Because of the upward slant to the left, the script is seen as different from the other scripts.

The Diwani script was created during the Ottoman era. The lining and lettering of this script creates a sense of closeness when writing. Due to this reason, it is difficult to read since the letters intertwine.

A few other examples:

* Rayhani script
* Muhaqqaq script
* Ruq&#x27;ah script

==List of calligraphers==
=== Medieval ===

*Al-Kindi(801-873 AD)
*Ibn Muqla (d. 939/940)
*Ibn al-Bawwab (d. 1022)
*Fakhr-un-Nisa (12th century)

=== Ottoman era ===

*Shaykh Hamdullah (1436–1520)
*Hamid Aytaç (1891-1982)
*Seyyid Kasim Gubari (d. 1624)
*Hâfiz Osman (1642–1698)
*Mustafa Râkim (1757–1826)
*Mehmed Shevki Efendi (1829–1887)

=== Contemporary ===
* Hasan Çelebi (b. 1937), Turkey
* Ali Adjalli (b. 1939), Iran
* Wijdan Ali (b. 1939), Jordan
* Hashem Muhammad al-Baghdadi, Iraq 
* Everitte Barbee (b. 1988), United States of America
* Mohammad Hosni Syria
* Shakkir Hassan Al Sa&#x27;id (1925-2004) in Iraq
* Madiha Omar Iraqi-American
* Hassan Massoudy Iraqi-French (b. 1944) 
* Sadequain Naqqash (1930-1987), Pakistan
* Ibrahim el-Salahi (b. 1930), Sudan
* Mouneer Al-Shaarani (b. 1952), Syria
* Mahmoud Taha (b. 1942), Jordan
* Mohamed Zakariya (b. 1942), United States of America
*Uthman Taha (b. 1934), Syria
*Shafiq-Uz-Zaman Khan Pakistan

== Legacy ==

=== Type design and type setting ===
Arabic calligraphy serves as a major source of inspiration for Arabic type design. For example, the Amiri typeface is inspired by the Naskh script used at the Amiri Press in Cairo.

The shift from Arabic calligraphy to Arabic typefaces presents technical challenges, as Arabic is essentially a cursive script with contextual shapes.
===Islamic world and civilization===
Credited to be the one that catalyzed the growth of Arabic calligraphy; with the earliest works of Arabic calligraphy being featured in copies of the Holy Quran dating back to the first century of Islam&#x27;s revelation such as Birmingham Quran Manuscript, Codex Parisino-Petropolitanus and several others.

Arabic calligraphy can be on occasion be found in places of worship for Muslim&#x27;s known as Mosques with engravings of Quranic verses / Ayah present on parts of the architecture itself. 

The most widely recognized example of Arabic Calligraphy on a place of Islamic worship is the Kaaba present in Mecca, Saudi Arabia.

Arabic calligraphy specializes into the term &quot;Islamic calligraphy&quot; when it is associated with the Islamic world.

=== Art ===
EL Seed, a French-Tunisian graffiti artist, makes use of Arabic calligraphy in his various art projects, in a style called &quot;calligraffiti&quot;.

The &quot;Hurufiyya&quot; ( &quot;letters&quot;) movement, since its beginnings in the early 20th century, uses the artistic manipulation of Arabic calligraphy and typography in abstraction.

&quot;Taking Shape: Abstraction From the Arab World, 1950s-1980s&quot;, a 2020 installation at New York University&#x27;s Grey Art Gallery, explored how Arabic calligraphy, with its ancient presence in visual art, influenced abstract art in the Arab world. For Madiha Omar, the Arabic alphabet was a means of expressing a secular identity and appropriating Western painting, while Omar El-Nagdi explored the inherent divinity of Arabic calligraphy.

==Modern examples==
==See also==
* Islamic calligraphy
* Abu Saymeh

==References==
=== Bibliography ===

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24905394" start="0" end="18" title="Arabic calligraphy" label="Arabic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123051" start="47" end="58" title="penmanship" label="handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="63" end="74" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="88" end="103" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="120" end="126" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647" start="242" end="247" title="Kufic" label="Kufic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="274" end="287" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="458" end="472" title="Arabic culture" label="Arabic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="499" end="507" title="Islam" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="509" end="512" title="Islamic art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="514" end="526" title="Islamic architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="636" end="655" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="736" end="742" title="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q770213" start="752" end="761" title="Christianity in the Middle East" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170234" start="855" end="877" title="Persian calligraphy" label="calligraphy in Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="882" end="897" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="925" end="940" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210674" start="1770" end="1775" title="Qalam" label="Qalam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2049" end="2057" title="Java pen" label="Java pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="2642" end="2653" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2658" end="2667" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="2707" end="2718" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133121" start="2876" end="2884" title="Nastaliq" label="Nastaliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115022" start="2889" end="2900" title="Ruqʿah script" label="Ruq&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647" start="2942" end="2947" title="Kufic" label="Kufic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="3221" end="3225" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="3293" end="3312" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3779" end="3786" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="3791" end="3795" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="3926" end="3932" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="4052" end="4057" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="4062" end="4068" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q260780" start="4241" end="4248" title="Thuluth" label="Thuluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4473" end="4483" title="Quran" label="Holy Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120479" start="4742" end="4749" title="Rayhani script" label="Rayhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q260780" start="4751" end="4757" title="Thuluth" label="Thulth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271335" start="4763" end="4771" title="Muhaqqaq" label="Muhaqqaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q260780" start="4798" end="4805" title="Thuluth" label="Thuluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133121" start="4810" end="4824" title="Nasta&amp;#x27;liq" label="Nasta&amp;#x27;liq"/>
<link wikidata="Q766817" start="4829" end="4835" title="Diwani" label="Diwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120479" start="5486" end="5493" title="Rayhani script" label="Rayhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271335" start="5503" end="5511" title="Muhaqqaq" label="Muhaqqaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115022" start="5521" end="5532" title="Ruqʿah script" label="Ruq&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="5586" end="5594" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q974105" start="5608" end="5617" title="Ibn Muqla" label="Ibn Muqla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133618" start="5632" end="5645" title="Ibn al-Bawwab" label="Ibn al-Bawwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12219197" start="5657" end="5670" title="Fakhr-un-Nisa" label="Fakhr-un-Nisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561135" start="5709" end="5725" title="Sheikh Hamdullah" label="Shaykh Hamdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673117" start="5739" end="5750" title="Hamid Aytaç" label="Hamid Aytaç"/>
<link wikidata="Q16224779" start="5764" end="5783" title="Seyyid Kasim Gubari" label="Seyyid Kasim Gubari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963076" start="5795" end="5806" title="Hâfiz Osman" label="Hâfiz Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584758" start="5820" end="5833" title="Mustafa Râkim" label="Mustafa Râkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809561" start="5847" end="5867" title="Mehmed Shevki Efendi" label="Mehmed Shevki Efendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678332" start="5904" end="5916" title="Hasan Çelebi" label="Hasan Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724559" start="5937" end="5948" title="Ali Adjalli" label="Ali Adjalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999783" start="5967" end="5977" title="Wijdan Ali" label="Wijdan Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12249635" start="5998" end="6025" title="Hashem Muhammad al-Baghdadi" label="Hashem Muhammad al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q88133357" start="6035" end="6050" title="Everitte Barbee" label="Everitte Barbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724899" start="6089" end="6103" title="Mohammad Hosni" label="Mohammad Hosni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462952" start="6112" end="6140" title="Shakir Hassan Al Said" label="Shakkir Hassan Al Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662487" start="6163" end="6174" title="Madiha Omar" label="Madiha Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128163" start="6192" end="6207" title="Hassan Massoudy" label="Hassan Massoudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q732347" start="6234" end="6251" title="Sadequain" label="Sadequain Naqqash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662098" start="6276" end="6293" title="Ibrahim el-Salahi" label="Ibrahim el-Salahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91130262" start="6313" end="6332" title="Mouneer Al-Shaarani" label="Mouneer Al-Shaarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843445" start="6352" end="6364" title="Mahmoud Taha" label="Mahmoud Taha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12240526" start="6385" end="6401" title="Mohamed Zakariya" label="Mohamed Zakariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395409" start="6439" end="6450" title="Uthman Taha" label="Uthman Taha"/>
<link wikidata="Q111537273" start="6469" end="6489" title="Shafiq-Uz-Zaman Khan" label="Shafiq-Uz-Zaman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854314" start="6614" end="6632" title="Arabic typography" label="Arabic type design"/>
<link wikidata="Q43396585" start="6651" end="6656" title="Amiri (typeface)" label="Amiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510712" start="6685" end="6690" title="Naskh (script)" label="Naskh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193291" start="6710" end="6721" title="Amiri Press" label="Amiri Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="6777" end="6785" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7071" end="7081" title="Quran" label="Holy Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7118" end="7130" title="Islam" label="Islam&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q20722902" start="7150" end="7177" title="Birmingham Quran manuscript" label="Birmingham Quran Manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939517" start="7179" end="7208" title="Codex Parisino-petropolitanus" label="Codex Parisino-Petropolitanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="7325" end="7331" title="Mosque" label="Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="7352" end="7373" title="Āyah" label="Quranic verses / Ayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="7605" end="7624" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955922" start="7690" end="7697" title="EL Seed" label="EL Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="7717" end="7725" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25060104" start="7819" end="7832" title="calligraffiti" label="calligraffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614094" start="7845" end="7866" title="Hurufiyya movement" label="&amp;quot;Hurufiyya&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972698" start="8155" end="8171" title="Grey Art Gallery" label="Grey Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="8258" end="8270" title="abstract art" label="abstract art"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="8278" end="8288" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662487" start="8294" end="8305" title="Madiha Omar" label="Madiha Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756540" start="8390" end="8406" title="Western painting" label="Western painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q43129951" start="8414" end="8427" title="Omar El-Nagdi" label="Omar El-Nagdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="8518" end="8537" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670345" start="8540" end="8550" title="Abu Saymeh" label="Abu Saymeh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37120" wikidata="Q1455718" url="?curid=37120" title="Nigger">
<text>Extensively an English word, nigger is a racial slur directed at black people, dating all the way from the 16th century. The origin of the word lies with the Latin adjective &quot;&quot; ([ˈnɪɡɛr]), meaning &quot;black&quot;. It was initially seen as a relatively neutral term, essentially synonymous with the English word &quot;negro&quot;. Early attested uses during the Atlantic slave trade (16th–19th century) often conveyed a merely patronizing attitude. The word took on a derogatory connotation from the mid-18th century onward, and &quot;degenerated into an overt slur&quot; by the middle of the 19th century. Some authors still used the term in a neutral sense up until the later part of the 20th century, at which point the use of &quot;nigger&quot; became increasingly controversial regardless of its context or intent.

Because the word &quot;nigger&quot; has historically &quot;wreaked symbolic violence, often accompanied by physical violence&quot;, it began to disappear from general popular culture from the second half of the 20th century onward, with the exception of cases derived from intra-group usage such as hip hop culture. The &quot;Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary&quot; describes the term as &quot;perhaps the most offensive and inflammatory racial slur in English&quot;. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; writes that &quot;this word is one of the most controversial in English, and is liable to be considered offensive or taboo in almost all contexts (even when used as a self-description)&quot;. At the trial of O. J. Simpson, prosecutor Christopher Darden referred to it as &quot;the filthiest, dirtiest, nastiest word in the English language&quot;. Intra-group usage has been criticized by some contemporary Black American authors, a group of them (the &quot;eradicationists&quot;) calling for the total abandonment of its usage (even under the variant &quot;nigga&quot;), which they see as contributing to the &quot;construction of an identity founded on self-hate&quot;. In wider society, the usage of the word &quot;nigger&quot; in classic works of literature (as in Mark Twain&#x27;s 1884 book &quot;The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot;) and in more recent cultural productions (such as Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s 1994 film &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot; and 2012 film &quot;Django Unchained&quot;) has sparked racial controversy and ongoing debate.

In the 1990s, the usage of the word has decreased due to changing racial views, with references to &quot;nigger&quot; are referred by the euphemism , notably in cases where &quot;nigger&quot; is mentioned but not directly used due to more progressively improved racial relations between African-Americans and white Americans. In an instance of linguistic reappropriation, the term &quot;nigger&quot; has been altered to &quot;nigga&quot;, which is used casually and fraternally among African Americans, whose spelling reflects the phonology of African-American English.

The word &quot;nigger&quot; has also been historically used to designate undesirable lower class non-Anglo-Saxons or generally certain non whites (noted from the usage &quot;Wigger/white nigger&quot; for Irish and Italian immigrants, &quot;Prairie nigger/Timber nigger&quot; for Native Americans or &quot;sand nigger&quot; for arabians) or &quot;any person whose behavior is regarded as reprehensible&quot;. In some cases, with awareness of the word&#x27;s offensive connotation, but without intention to cause offense, it can refer to a &quot;victim of prejudice likened to that endured by African Americans&quot; (as in John Lennon&#x27;s 1972 song &quot;Woman Is the Nigger of the World&quot;).

==Etymology and history==
===Early use===
The word &quot;nigger&quot;, then spelled in English &quot;neger&quot; or &quot;niger&quot;, appeared in the 16th century as an adaptation of French &quot;&quot;, itself from Spanish &quot;&quot;. They go back to the Latin adjective &quot;&quot; ([ˈnɪɡɛr]), meaning &quot;black&quot;.

In its original English-language usage, &quot;nigger&quot; (also spelled &quot;niger&quot;) was a word for a dark-skinned individual. The earliest known published use of the term dates from 1574, in a work alluding to &quot;the Nigers of Aethiop, bearing witnes&quot;. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the first derogatory usage of the term &quot;nigger&quot; was recorded two centuries later, in 1775.

In the colonial America of 1619, John Rolfe used &quot;negars&quot; in describing the African slaves shipped to the Virginia colony. Later American English spellings, &quot;neger&quot; and &quot;neggar&quot;, prevailed in New York under the Dutch and in metropolitan Philadelphia&#x27;s Moravian and Pennsylvania Dutch communities; the African Burial Ground in New York City originally was known by the Dutch name (Cemetery of the Negro). An early occurrence of &quot;neger&quot; in American English dates from 1625 in Rhode Island. Lexicographer Noah Webster suggested the &quot;neger&quot; spelling in place of &quot;negro&quot; in his 1806 dictionary.

===18th- and 19th-century United States===

During the late 18th and early 19th century, the word &quot;nigger&quot; also described an actual labor category, which African American laborers adopted for themselves as a social identity, and thus white people used the descriptor word as a distancing or derogatory epithet, as if &quot;quoting black people&quot; and their non-standard language. During the early 1800s to the late 1840s fur trade in the Western United States, the word was spelled &quot;niggur&quot;, and is often recorded in the literature of the time. George Ruxton used it in his &quot;mountain man&quot; lexicon, without pejorative connotation. &quot;Niggur&quot; was evidently similar to the modern use of &quot;dude&quot; or &quot;guy&quot;. This passage from Ruxton&#x27;s &quot;Life in the Far West&quot; illustrates the word in spoken form—the speaker here referring to himself: &quot;Travler, marm, this niggur&#x27;s no travler; I ar&#x27; a trapper, marm, a mountain-man, wagh!&quot; It was not used as a term exclusively for blacks among mountain men during this period, as Indians, Mexicans, and Frenchmen and Anglos alike could be a &quot;niggur&quot;. &quot;The noun slipped back and forth from derogatory to endearing.&quot;

By 1859, the term was clearly used to offend, in an attack on abolitionist John Brown.

The term &quot;colored&quot; or &quot;negro&quot; became a respectful alternative. In 1851, the Boston Vigilance Committee, an abolitionist organization, posted warnings to the &quot;Colored People of Boston and vicinity&quot;. Writing in 1904, journalist Clifton Johnson documented the &quot;opprobrious&quot; character of the word &quot;nigger&quot;, emphasizing that it was chosen in the South precisely because it was more offensive than &quot;colored&quot; or &quot;negro&quot;. By the turn of the century, &quot;colored&quot; had become sufficiently mainstream that it was chosen as the racial self-identifier for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). In 2008 Carla Sims, its communications director, said &quot;the term &#x27;colored&#x27; is not derogatory, [the NAACP] chose the word &#x27;colored&#x27; because it was the most positive description commonly used [in 1909, when the association was founded]. It&#x27;s outdated and antiquated but not offensive.&quot;

Mark Twain, in the autobiographic book &quot;Life on the Mississippi&quot; (1883), used the term within quotes, indicating reported speech, but used the term &quot;negro&quot; when writing in his own narrative persona. Joseph Conrad published a novella in Britain with the title &quot;The Nigger of the &quot;Narcissus&quot;&quot; (1897); in the United States, it was released as &quot;The Children of the Sea: A Tale of the Forecastle&quot;; the original had been called &quot;the ugliest conceivable title&quot; in a British review and American reviewers understood the change as reflecting American &quot;refinement&quot; and &quot;prudery.&quot;
===20th-century United States===
A style guide to British English usage, H.W. Fowler&#x27;s &quot;A Dictionary of Modern English Usage&quot;, states in the first edition (1926) that applying the word &quot;nigger&quot; to &quot;others than full or partial negroes&quot; is &quot;felt as an insult by the person described, &amp; betrays in the speaker, if not deliberate insolence, at least a very arrogant inhumanity&quot;; but the second edition (1965) states &quot;N. has been described as &#x27;the term that carries with it all the obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks&#x27;&quot;. The quoted formula goes back to the writings of the American journalist Harold R. Isaacs, who used it in several writings between 1963 and 1975. Black characters in Nella Larsen&#x27;s 1929 novel &quot;Passing&quot; view its use as offensive; one says &quot;I&#x27;m really not such an idiot that I don&#x27;t realize that if a man calls me a nigger, it&#x27;s his fault the first time, but mine if he has the opportunity to do it again.&quot;

By the late 1960s, the social change brought about by the civil rights movement had legitimized the racial identity word &quot;black&quot; as mainstream American English usage to denote black-skinned Americans of African ancestry. President Thomas Jefferson had used this word of his slaves in his &quot;Notes on the State of Virginia&quot; (1785), but &quot;black&quot; had not been widely used until the later 20th century. (See black pride, and, in the context of worldwide anti-colonialism initiatives, &quot;Négritude&quot;.)

In the 1980s, the term &quot;African American&quot; was advanced analogously to such terms as &quot;German American&quot; and &quot;Irish American&quot;, and was adopted by major media outlets. Moreover, as a compound word, &quot;African American&quot; resembles the vogue word &quot;Afro-American&quot;, an early-1970s popular usage. Some Black Americans continue to use the word &quot;nigger&quot;, often spelled as &quot;nigga&quot; and &quot;niggah&quot;, without irony, either to neutralize the word&#x27;s impact or as a sign of solidarity.

==Usage==
Surveys from 2006 showed that the American public widely perceived usage of the term to be wrong or unacceptable, but that nearly half of whites and two-thirds of blacks knew someone personally who referred to blacks by the term. Nearly one-third of whites and two-thirds of blacks said they had personally used the term within the last five years.

===In names of people, places and things===
===Political use===
&quot;Niggers in the White House&quot; was written in reaction to an October 1901 White House dinner hosted by Republican President Theodore Roosevelt, who had invited Booker T. Washington—an African-American presidential advisor—as a guest. The poem reappeared in 1929 after First Lady Lou Hoover, wife of President Herbert Hoover, invited Jessie De Priest, the wife of African-American congressman Oscar De Priest, to a tea for congressmen&#x27;s wives at the White House. The identity of the author—who used the byline &quot;unchained poet&quot;—remains unknown.

In explaining his refusal to be conscripted to fight the Vietnam War (1955–1975), professional boxer Muhammad Ali said, &quot;No Vietcong ever called me nigger.&quot; Later, his modified answer was the title of a documentary, &quot;No Vietnamese Ever Called Me Nigger&quot; (1968), about the front-line lot of the U.S. Army black soldier in combat in Vietnam. An Ali biographer reports that, when interviewed by Robert Lipsyte in 1966, the boxer actually said, &quot;I ain&#x27;t got no quarrel with them Viet Cong.&quot;

On February 28, 2007, the New York City Council symbolically banned the use of the word &quot;nigger&quot;; however, there is no penalty for using it. This formal resolution also requests excluding from Grammy Award consideration every song whose lyrics contain the word; however, Ron Roecker, vice president of communication for the Recording Academy, doubted it will have any effect on actual nominations.

The word can be invoked politically for effect. When Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick came under intense scrutiny for his conduct in 2008, he deviated from an address to the city council, saying, &quot;In the past 30 days, I&#x27;ve been called a nigger more than any time in my entire life.&quot; Opponents accused him of &quot;playing the race card&quot; to save his political life.

===Cultural use===
The implicit racism of the word &quot;nigger&quot; has generally rendered its use taboo. Magazines and newspapers typically do not use this word but instead print censored versions such as &quot;n*gg*r&quot;, &quot;n**ger&quot;, &quot;n——&quot; or &quot;the N-word&quot;; see below.
The use of &quot;nigger&quot; in older literature has become controversial because of the word&#x27;s modern meaning as a racist insult. One of the most enduring controversies has been the word&#x27;s use in Mark Twain&#x27;s novel &quot;Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot; (1885). &quot;Huckleberry Finn&quot; was the fifth most challenged book during the 1990s, according to the American Library Association. The novel is written from the point of view, and largely in the language, of an uneducated white boy, who is drifting down the Mississippi River on a raft with an adult escaped slave, Jim. The word &quot;nigger&quot; is used (mostly about Jim) over 200 times. Twain&#x27;s advocates note that the novel is composed in then-contemporary vernacular usage, not racist stereotype, because Jim, the black man, is a sympathetic character.

In 2011, a new edition published by NewSouth Books replaced the word &quot;nigger&quot; with &quot;slave&quot; and also removed the word &quot;injun&quot;. The change was spearheaded by Twain scholar Alan Gribben in the hope of &quot;countering the &#x27;pre-emptive censorship that results from the book&#x27;s being removed from school curricula over language concerns. The changes sparked outrage from critics Elon James, Alexandra Petri and Chris Meadows.

In his 1999 memoir &quot;All Souls&quot;, Irish-American Michael Patrick MacDonald describes how many white residents of the Old Colony Housing Project in South Boston used this meaning to degrade the people considered to be of lower status, whether white or black.

===In an academic setting===
The word&#x27;s usage in literature has led to it being a point of discussion in university lectures as well. In 2008, Arizona State University English professor Neal A. Lester created what has been called &quot;the first ever college-level class designed to explore the word &#x27;nigger. Starting in the following decade, colleges struggled with attempts to teach material about the slur in a sensitive manner. In 2012, a sixth grade Chicago teacher Lincoln Brown was suspended after repeating the contents of a racially charged note being passed around in class. Brown later filed a federal civil rights lawsuit against the headmaster and the Chicago public schools. A New Orleans high school also experienced controversy in 2017. Such increased attention prompted Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor, the daughter of Richard Pryor and a professor at Smith College, to give a talk opining that the word was leading to a &quot;social crisis&quot; in higher education.

In addition to Smith College, Emory University, Augsburg University, Southern Connecticut State University, and Simpson College all suspended professors in 2019 over referring to the word &quot;nigger&quot; by name in classroom settings. In two other cases, a professor at Princeton decided to stop teaching a course on hate speech after students protested his utterance of &quot;nigger&quot; and a professor at DePaul had his law course cancelled after 80% of the enrolled students transferred out. Instead of pursuing disciplinary action, a student at the College of the Desert challenged his professor in a viral class presentation which argued that her use of the word in a lecture was not justified.

===In the workplace===
In 2018, the head of the media company Netflix, Reed Hastings, fired his chief communications officer, Jonathan Friedland, for using the word twice during internal discussions about sensitive words. In explaining why, Hastings wrote:

The following year, screenwriter Walter Mosley turned down a job after his human resources department took issue with him using the word to describe racism that he experienced as a black man.

While defending Laurie Sheck, a professor who was cleared of ethical violations for quoting &quot;I Am Not Your Negro&quot; by James Baldwin, John McWhorter wrote that efforts to condemn racist language by white Americans had undergone mission creep. Similar controversies outside the United States have occurred at the University of Western Ontario in Canada and the Madrid campus of Syracuse University. In June 2020, Canadian news host Wendy Mesley was suspended and replaced with a guest host after she attended a meeting on racial justice and, in the process of quoting a journalist, used &quot;a word that no-one like me should ever use&quot;. In August 2020, BBC News, with the agreement of victim and family, mentioned the slur when reporting on a physical and verbal assault on the black NHS worker and musician K-Dogg. Within the week the BBC received over 18,600 complaints, the black radio host David Whitely resigned in protest, and the BBC apologized.

In 2021, in Tampa, Florida, a 27-year-old black employee at a Dunkin&#x27; Donuts punched a 77-year-old white customer after the customer had repeatedly called the employee a nigger. The customer fell to the floor and hit his head. Three days later, he died, having suffered a skull fracture and brain contusions. The employee was arrested, and charged with manslaughter. In a plea bargain, the employee pled guilty to felony battery, and was sentenced to two years of house arrest. In 2022, in explaining why the employee did not receive any jail time, Grayson Kamm, a spokesman for Hillsborough State Attorney Andrew Warren, said &quot;Two of the primary factors were the aggressive approach the victim took toward the defendant and everyone working with the defendant, and that the victim repeatedly used possibly the most aggressive and offensive term in the English language.&quot;

===Intra-group versus intergroup usage===

Black listeners often react to the term differently, depending on whether it is used by white speakers or by black speakers. In the former case, it is regularly understood as insensitive or insulting; in the latter, it may carry notes of in-group disparagement, or it may be understood as neutral or affectionate, a possible instance of reappropriation.

In the black community, &quot;nigger&quot; is often rendered as &quot;nigga&quot;. This usage has been popularized by the rap and hip-hop music cultures and is used as part of an in-group lexicon and speech. It is not necessarily derogatory and is often used to mean &quot;homie&quot; or &quot;friend&quot;.

Acceptance of intra-group usage of the word &quot;nigga&quot; is still debated, although it has established a foothold amongst younger generations. The NAACP denounces the use of both &quot;nigga&quot; and &quot;nigger&quot;. Usage of &quot;nigga&quot; by mixed-race individuals is still largely considered taboo, albeit not as inflammatory as &quot;nigger&quot;. As of 2001, trends indicated that usage of the term in intragroup settings is increasing even amongst white youth, due to the popularity of rap and hip hop culture. Linguist Keith Allan rejects the view that &quot;nigger&quot; is always a slur, arguing that it is also used as a marker of camaraderie and friendship, comparable to the British and Australian term &quot;mate&quot; or the American &quot;buddy&quot;.

According to Arthur K. Spears in &quot;Diverse Issues in Higher Education, 2006&quot;:
Kevin Cato, meanwhile, observes:
Addressing the use of &quot;nigger&quot; by black people, philosopher and public intellectual Cornel West said in 2007:
====2010s: increase in use and controversy====
In the 2010s, &quot;nigger&quot; in its various forms saw use with increasing frequency by African Americans amongst themselves or in self-expression, the most common swear word in hip hop music lyrics. Ta-Nehisi Coates suggested that it continues to be unacceptable for non-blacks to utter while singing or rapping along to hip-hop, and that by being so restrained it gives white Americans (specifically) an impression of what it is like to not be entitled to &quot;do anything they please, anywhere&quot;. A concern often raised is whether frequent exposure will inevitably lead to a dilution of the extremely negative perception of the word among the majority of non-black Americans who currently consider its use unacceptable and shocking.

==Related words==
===Derivatives===
In several English-speaking countries, &quot;Niggerhead&quot; or &quot;nigger head&quot; was used as a name for many sorts of things, including commercial products, places, plants and animals, as a descriptive term (lit. &#x27;black person&#x27;s head&#x27;). It also is or was a colloquial technical term in industry, mining, and seafaring. &quot;Nigger&quot; as &quot;defect&quot; (a hidden problem) derives from &quot;nigger in the woodpile&quot;, a US slave-era phrase denoting escaped slaves hiding in train-transported woodpiles. In the 1840s, the &quot;Morning Chronicle&quot; newspaper report series &quot;London Labour and the London Poor&quot;, by Henry Mayhew, records the usages of both &quot;nigger&quot; and the similar-sounding word &quot;niggard&quot; denoting a false bottom for a grate.

In American English, &quot;nigger lover&quot; initially applied to abolitionists, then to white people sympathetic towards black Americans. The portmanteau word &quot;wigger&quot; (&#x27;White&#x27; + &#x27;nigger&#x27;) denotes a white person emulating &quot;street Black behavior&quot;, hoping to gain acceptance to the hip hop, thug, and gangsta sub-cultures. Norman Mailer wrote of the antecedents of this phenomenon in 1957 in his essay &quot;The White Negro&quot;.

In Ukraine, the word &quot;zigger&quot; (&quot;Ukrainian&quot;: &#x27;зіггер&#x27;) is sometimes used as a derogatory term by Ukrainians to refer to Russian soldiers and those who follow the Russian government&#x27;s propaganda. The word comes from replacing the first letter of &quot;nigger&quot; with a Z, which is a reference to the &quot;Z&quot; tactical symbol used by Russian troops and Russian nationalists. It is used as a more offensive alternative to calling someone a &quot;vatnik.&quot;

===&quot;The N-word&quot; euphemism===
One of the first uses of &quot;the &quot; euphemism by a major public figure came during the racially contentious O. J. Simpson murder case in 1995. Key prosecution witness Detective Mark Fuhrman, of the Los Angeles Police Department—who denied using racist language on duty—impeached himself with his prolific use of &quot;nigger&quot; in tape recordings about his police work. Co-prosecutor Christopher Darden refused to say the actual word, calling it &quot;the filthiest, dirtiest, nastiest word in the English language&quot;. Media personnel who reported on Fuhrman&#x27;s testimony substituted &quot;the N-word&quot; for &quot;nigger&quot;.

===Similar-sounding words===
 (Latin for &quot;black&quot;) occurs in Latinate scientific nomenclature and is the root word for some homophones of &quot;nigger&quot;; sellers of niger seed (used as bird feed), sometimes use the spelling &quot;Nyjer&quot; seed. The classical Latin pronunciation sounds similar to the English , occurring in biologic and anatomic names, such as &quot;Hyoscyamus niger&quot; (black henbane), and even for animals that are in fact not black, such as &quot;Sciurus niger&quot; (fox squirrel).

 is the Latin feminine form of (black), used in biologic and anatomic names such as substantia nigra (black substance).

The word &quot;niggardly&quot; (miserly) is etymologically unrelated to &quot;nigger&quot;, derived from the Old Norse word (stingy) and the Middle English word . In the US, this word has been misinterpreted as related to &quot;nigger&quot; and taken as offensive. In January 1999, David Howard, a white Washington, D.C., city employee, was compelled to resign after using &quot;niggardly&quot;—in a financial context—while speaking with black colleagues, who took umbrage. After reviewing the misunderstanding, Mayor Anthony A. Williams offered to reinstate Howard to his former position. Howard refused reinstatement but took a job elsewhere in the mayor&#x27;s government.

 is the Spanish word for &#x27;black&#x27;, and is commonly a part of place names and proper names, particularly in the Southwest of the United States.

===Denotational extension===

The denotations of &quot;nigger&quot; also include non-black/non-white and other disadvantaged people. Some of these terms are self-chosen, to identify with the oppression and resistance of black Americans; others are ethnic slurs used by outsiders.

Jerry Farber&#x27;s 1967 essay collection, &quot;The Student as Nigger&quot;, used the word as a metaphor for what he saw as the role forced on students. Farber had been, at the time, frequently arrested as a civil rights activist while beginning his career as a literature professor.

In his 1968 autobiography &quot;White Niggers of America: The Precocious Autobiography of a Quebec &quot;Terrorist&quot;&quot;, Pierre Vallières, a leader, refers to the oppression of the Québécois people in North America.

In 1969, in the course of being interviewed by the British magazine &quot;Nova&quot;, artist Yoko Ono said &quot;woman is the nigger of the world&quot;; three years later, her husband, John Lennon, published the song of the same name—about the worldwide phenomenon of discrimination against women—which was socially and politically controversial to US sensibilities.

&quot;Sand nigger&quot;, an ethnic slur against Arabs, and &quot;timber nigger&quot; and &quot;prairie nigger&quot;, ethnic slurs against Native Americans, are examples of the racist extension of &quot;nigger&quot; upon other non-white peoples.

In 1978, singer Patti Smith used the word in &quot;Rock N Roll Nigger&quot;. One year later in 1979, English singer Elvis Costello used the phrase &quot;white nigger&quot; in his song &quot;Oliver&#x27;s Army&quot;. The slur usually remains uncensored on radio stations, but Costello&#x27;s usage of the word came under scrutiny, particularly after he used racial slurs during a drunken argument with Stephen Stills and Bonnie Bramlett in 1979. In the same year, Costello&#x27;s father published a letter in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; defending his son against accusations of racism, stating &quot;Nothing could be further from the truth. My own background has meant that I am passionately opposed to any form of prejudice based on religion or race ... His mother comes from the tough multiracial area of Liverpool, and I think she would still beat the tar out of him if his orthodoxy were in doubt&quot;. 

Historian Eugene Genovese, noted for bringing a Marxist perspective to the study of power, class and relations between planters and slaves in the South, uses the word pointedly in &quot;The World the Slaveholders Made&quot; (1988).
The editor of &quot;Green Egg&quot;, a magazine described in &quot;The Encyclopedia of American Religions&quot; as a significant periodical, published an essay entitled &quot;Niggers of the New Age&quot;. This argued that Neo-Pagans were treated badly by other parts of the New Age movement.

===Other languages===

Other languages, particularly Romance languages, have words that sound similar to or share etymological roots with &quot;nigger&quot; but do not necessarily mean the same. In some of these languages, the words refer to the color black in general and are not specifically used to refer to black people. When used to refer to black people, these words have acquired varying degrees of offensiveness, ranging from completely neutral (as in Spanish ) to highly racist (as in Finnish ). Examples of related words in other languages include:

*Bulgarian: (), loaned from French , is considered a neutral word for black people in Bulgaria. Some publications and institutions use or , but the use of is more widespread.
*Dutch: (&#x27;negro&#x27;) used to be neutral, but many now consider it to be avoided in favor of (&#x27;black&#x27;). (&#x27;little black one&#x27;) can be amicably or offensively used. is always pejorative.
* Finnish: (&#x27;negro/nigger&#x27;), as a loan word (&#x27;Neger&#x27;) from the Swedish language, appeared for the first time in a book published in 1771. The use of the Finnish equivalent () began in the late 19th century. Until the 1980s, it was commonly used and generally not yet considered derogatory, although a few instances of it being considered to be so have been documented since the 1950s; by the mid-1990s the word was considered racist, especially in the metropolitan area and among the younger population. It has since then usually been replaced by the metonym (&#x27;black [person]&#x27;). In a survey conducted in 2000, Finnish respondents considered the term to be among the most offensive of minority designations. 
*French: is now considered derogatory. Although was the standard term for a ghostwriter, it has largely been supplanted by . Some white Frenchmen have the surname Nègre. The word can still be used as a synonym of &quot;sweetheart&quot; in some traditional Louisiana French creole songs.
*German: is dated and now considered offensive. (&#x27;black [person]&#x27;) or (&quot;colored [person]&quot;) is more neutral.
*Haitian Creole: is used for any man in general, regardless of skin color (like &quot;dude&quot; in American English). Haitian Creole derives predominantly from French.
*Italian has three variants: , and . The first one is the most historically attested and was the most commonly used until the 1960s as an equivalent of the English word &quot;negro&quot;. It was gradually felt as offensive during the 1970s and replaced with and . was considered a better translation of the English word &quot;black&quot;, while is a loan translation of the English word &quot;colored&quot;.
*Portuguese: (as well as ) is neutral; nevertheless can be offensive or at least &quot;politically incorrect&quot; and is almost never proudly used by Afro-Brazilians. and are always extremely pejorative.
*Romanian: is derogatory;
*Russian: the word () has been commonly used as neutral word to describe black people until recent years. It can also be used as a synonym for underpaid worker; &quot; () means ghostwriter. Nowadays, a black person would often be described neutrally as &quot; (, &#x27;black-skinned&#x27;), though the organization Help Needed instead recommends &quot;&quot; (, &#x27;dark-skinned&#x27;).
*Spanish: is the word for &quot;black&quot; and is the only way to refer to that color.

==See also==
*List of ethnic slurs
**List of ethnic group names used as insults
**Kaffir (ethnic slur)
**Blackfella
*&quot;Guilty or Innocent of Using the N Word&quot;, a 2006 documentary
*List of topics related to the African diaspora
*&quot;With Apologies to Jesse Jackson&quot;, an episode of &quot;South Park&quot; with a plot revolving around the word&#x27;s extreme offensiveness
*Golliwog
*Profanity

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="15" end="27" title="English language" label="English word"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="41" end="52" title="racial slur" label="racial slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="65" end="77" title="black people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="158" end="163" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="329" end="334" title="negro" label="negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="373" end="393" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="479" end="501" title="pejorative" label="derogatory connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="1105" end="1122" title="In-group and out-group" label="intra-group usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132127" start="1131" end="1146" title="Hip hop (culture)" label="hip hop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="1158" end="1191" title="Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1310" end="1335" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="1541" end="1563" title="Murder trial of O. J. Simpson" label="trial of O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112201" start="1576" end="1594" title="Christopher Darden" label="Christopher Darden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="2110" end="2120" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="2144" end="2178" title="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="2235" end="2252" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="2276" end="2288" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q571032" start="2315" end="2331" title="Django Unchained" label="Django Unchained"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="2529" end="2538" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577553" start="2586" end="2617" title="Use–mention distinction" label="mentioned but not directly used"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="2735" end="2761" title="linguistic reappropriation" label="linguistic reappropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117010" start="2817" end="2822" title="nigga" label="nigga"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="2922" end="2931" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767245" start="2935" end="2959" title="African-American English" label="African-American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3063" end="3074" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45991" start="3136" end="3142" title="Wigger" label="Wigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3241" end="3256" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="3261" end="3284" title="List of ethnic slurs" label="&amp;quot;sand nigger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3584" end="3595" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003650" start="3619" end="3651" title="Woman Is the Nigger of the World" label="Woman Is the Nigger of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3920" end="3925" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410453" start="4227" end="4234" title="Aethiopia" label="Aethiop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4275" end="4300" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4411" end="4427" title="colonial America" label="colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="4437" end="4447" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="4520" end="4535" title="Virginia colony" label="Virginia colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="4543" end="4559" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="4626" end="4650" title="New Netherland" label="New York under the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909345" start="4658" end="4699" title="Moravian Church in North America" label="metropolitan Philadelphia&amp;#x27;s Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="4704" end="4722" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q383996" start="4740" end="4761" title="African Burial Ground" label="African Burial Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="4923" end="4935" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="4937" end="4950" title="Lexicography" label="Lexicographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="4951" end="4963" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5494" end="5532" title="North American fur trade#Fur trade in the western United States" label="fur trade in the Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544127" start="5628" end="5641" title="George Ruxton" label="George Ruxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308103" start="5663" end="5675" title="mountain man" label="mountain man"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="5710" end="5721" title="connotation" label="connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q942988" start="5791" end="5795" title="dude" label="dude"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="6379" end="6402" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="abolitionist John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="6420" end="6427" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948198" start="6501" end="6527" title="Boston Vigilance Committee" label="Boston Vigilance Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="6532" end="6557" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q21552483" start="6661" end="6676" title="Clifton Johnson (author)" label="Clifton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="7029" end="7087" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="7416" end="7426" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131648" start="7461" end="7484" title="Life on the Mississippi" label="Life on the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006348" start="7539" end="7554" title="reported speech" label="reported speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="7616" end="7633" title="Comic persona" label="narrative persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="7635" end="7648" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q478537" start="7701" end="7740" title="The Nigger of the &amp;quot;Narcissus&amp;quot;" label="The Nigger of the &amp;quot;Narcissus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="8116" end="8131" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q640096" start="8139" end="8150" title="H.W. Fowler" label="H.W. Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656430" start="8164" end="8200" title="A Dictionary of Modern English Usage" label="A Dictionary of Modern English Usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661184" start="8760" end="8776" title="Harold R. Isaacs" label="Harold R. Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q453665" start="8853" end="8865" title="Nella Larsen" label="Nella Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052495" start="8884" end="8903" title="Passing (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Passing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="9191" end="9212" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="9233" end="9248" title="identity politics" label="racial identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="9374" end="9390" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261404" start="9437" end="9467" title="Notes on the State of Virginia" label="Notes on the State of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922437" start="9564" end="9575" title="Black Pride" label="black pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q852544" start="9646" end="9655" title="Négritude" label="Négritude"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="9694" end="9710" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="9765" end="9780" title="German American" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="9797" end="9811" title="Irish American" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="9874" end="9887" title="compound word" label="compound word"/>
<link wikidata="Q82550" start="9932" end="9942" title="vogue word" label="vogue word"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117010" start="10089" end="10094" title="nigga" label="nigga"/>
<link wikidata="Q14991296" start="10643" end="10669" title="Niggers in the White House" label="Niggers in the White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204715" start="10703" end="10737" title="Booker T. Washington dinner at the White House" label="an October 1901 White House dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10769" end="10787" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="10805" end="10825" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q233669" start="10924" end="10934" title="Lou Henry Hoover" label="Lou Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="10954" end="10968" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q53957737" start="10978" end="10994" title="Jessie De Priest" label="Jessie De Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032986" start="11037" end="11052" title="Oscar De Priest" label="Oscar De Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144348" start="11057" end="11110" title="Jessie De Priest tea at the White House" label="a tea for congressmen&amp;#x27;s wives at the White House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11236" end="11272" title="Conscription in the United States#Vietnam War" label="conscripted to fight the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="11305" end="11317" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="11333" end="11341" title="Vietcong" label="Vietcong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488787" start="11616" end="11630" title="Robert Lipsyte" label="Robert Lipsyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="11753" end="11774" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="11930" end="11942" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365715" start="12203" end="12219" title="Kwame Kilpatrick" label="Kwame Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413136" start="12475" end="12484" title="race card" label="race card"/>
<link wikidata="Q429194" start="12543" end="12558" title="implicit racism" label="implicit racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="12621" end="12626" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12815" end="12820" title="#The N-word euphemism" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="13030" end="13040" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="13060" end="13090" title="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="13204" end="13232" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005141" start="13704" end="13718" title="NewSouth Books" label="NewSouth Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979964" start="13811" end="13816" title="injun" label="injun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706770" start="13868" end="13880" title="Alan Gribben" label="Alan Gribben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14081" end="14091" title="Elon James" label="Elon James"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151634" start="14093" end="14108" title="Alexandra Petri" label="Alexandra Petri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14113" end="14126" title="Chris Meadows" label="Chris Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308438" start="14186" end="14211" title="Michael Patrick MacDonald" label="Michael Patrick MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083733" start="14254" end="14280" title="Old Colony Housing Project" label="Old Colony Housing Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759693" start="14284" end="14296" title="South Boston" label="South Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="14544" end="14568" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q294912" start="15235" end="15248" title="Richard Pryor" label="Richard Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="15268" end="15281" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="15415" end="15431" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q760516" start="15433" end="15452" title="Augsburg University" label="Augsburg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253123" start="15454" end="15491" title="Southern Connecticut State University" label="Southern Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521073" start="15497" end="15512" title="Simpson College" label="Simpson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="15658" end="15667" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="15705" end="15716" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146883" start="15943" end="15964" title="College of the Desert" label="College of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="15995" end="16000" title="viral video" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="16153" end="16160" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306657" start="16162" end="16175" title="Reed Hastings" label="Reed Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188117" start="16382" end="16395" title="Walter Mosley" label="Walter Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038025" start="16640" end="16659" title="I Am Not Your Negro" label="I Am Not Your Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="16669" end="16682" title="James Baldwin" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468338" start="16684" end="16698" title="John McWhorter" label="John McWhorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887898" start="16778" end="16791" title="mission creep" label="mission creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="16862" end="16891" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="16927" end="16946" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567254" start="16981" end="16993" title="Wendy Mesley" label="Wendy Mesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="17208" end="17216" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="17521" end="17535" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="17571" end="17590" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971607" start="17786" end="17800" title="skull fracture" label="skull fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q591639" start="17805" end="17820" title="brain contusion" label="brain contusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="17867" end="17879" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="17886" end="17898" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796687" start="17935" end="17942" title="battery (crime)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="17978" end="17990" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="18777" end="18792" title="reappropriation" label="reappropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117010" start="18865" end="18870" title="nigga" label="nigga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="18917" end="18920" title="rap" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="18925" end="18932" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="19256" end="19261" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383969" start="19642" end="19653" title="Keith Allan (linguist)" label="Keith Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q712469" start="20098" end="20109" title="Cornel West" label="Cornel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452495" start="20374" end="20390" title="Ta-Nehisi Coates" label="Ta-Nehisi Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033142" start="20997" end="21007" title="Niggerhead" label="Niggerhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21096" end="21115" title="#Commercial products" label="commercial products"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21117" end="21123" title="#Place names" label="places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21125" end="21143" title="#Nature" label="plants and animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033141" start="21373" end="21395" title="nigger in the woodpile" label="nigger in the woodpile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381797" start="21512" end="21529" title="Morning Chronicle" label="Morning Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217731" start="21566" end="21599" title="London Labour and the London Poor" label="London Labour and the London Poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227273" start="21610" end="21622" title="Henry Mayhew" label="Henry Mayhew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="21761" end="21777" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="21825" end="21838" title="abolitionists" label="abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="21902" end="21913" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q45991" start="21925" end="21931" title="wigger" label="wigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="22080" end="22087" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="22099" end="22106" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="22121" end="22134" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774536" start="22206" end="22221" title="The White Negro" label="The White Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="22233" end="22240" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="22277" end="22286" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="22356" end="22366" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="22379" end="22395" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20092524" start="22421" end="22457" title="State propaganda in the Russian Federation" label="Russian government&amp;#x27;s propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q111103866" start="22566" end="22595" title="Z (military symbol)" label="&amp;quot;Z&amp;quot; tactical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354258" start="22623" end="22643" title="Russian nationalism" label="Russian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973425" start="22715" end="22721" title="vatnik" label="vatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="22811" end="22820" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="22883" end="22908" title="O. J. Simpson murder case" label="O. J. Simpson murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431786" start="22952" end="22964" title="Mark Fuhrman" label="Mark Fuhrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="22973" end="23002" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112201" start="23162" end="23180" title="Christopher Darden" label="Christopher Darden"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="23496" end="23519" title="scientific nomenclature" label="scientific nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="23531" end="23540" title="root word" label="root word"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="23550" end="23559" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818500" start="23595" end="23605" title="niger seed" label="niger seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234399" start="23692" end="23711" title="Latin spelling and pronunciation" label="Latin pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="23770" end="23778" title="anatomic" label="anatomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161058" start="23800" end="23816" title="Hyoscyamus niger" label="Hyoscyamus niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q694296" start="23903" end="23916" title="Sciurus niger" label="Sciurus niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="24024" end="24040" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="24170" end="24179" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="24202" end="24216" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165973" start="24245" end="24268" title="controversies about the word niggardly" label="has been misinterpreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430687" start="24579" end="24598" title="Anthony A. Williams" label="Anthony A. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="24858" end="24888" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="24925" end="24935" title="denotation" label="denotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="25139" end="25150" title="ethnic slur" label="ethnic slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505563" start="25172" end="25184" title="Jerry Farber" label="Jerry Farber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767109" start="25221" end="25242" title="The Student as Nigger" label="The Student as Nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093965" start="25490" end="25514" title="White Niggers of America" label="White Niggers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093965" start="25586" end="25602" title="Pierre Vallières" label="Pierre Vallières"/>
<link wikidata="Q245507" start="25646" end="25662" title="Québécois (word)" label="Québécois people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063997" start="25756" end="25760" title="Nova (UK magazine)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="25775" end="25783" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="25867" end="25878" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003650" start="25899" end="25915" title="Woman Is the Nigger of the World" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="26312" end="26323" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091445" start="26347" end="26365" title="Rock N Roll Nigger" label="Rock N Roll Nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="26412" end="26426" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714118" start="26449" end="26461" title="white nigger" label="white nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087353" start="26486" end="26504" title="Oliver&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Oliver&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="26697" end="26711" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296646" start="26716" end="26731" title="Bonnie Bramlett" label="Bonnie Bramlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="26810" end="26823" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="27100" end="27109" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407291" start="27213" end="27228" title="Eugene Genovese" label="Eugene Genovese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="27251" end="27258" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27435" end="27445" title="Oberon Zell-Ravenheart#Green Egg" label="The editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602503" start="27455" end="27464" title="Green Egg" label="Green Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375682" start="27506" end="27540" title="Encyclopedia of American Religions" label="Encyclopedia of American Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="27657" end="27667" title="Neopaganism" label="Neo-Pagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="27709" end="27716" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="27781" end="27798" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="28188" end="28195" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="28222" end="28229" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="28289" end="28298" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="28374" end="28382" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="28464" end="28469" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="28675" end="28682" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="28756" end="28772" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="29244" end="29251" title="metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29412" end="29418" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="29487" end="29498" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346789" start="29574" end="29579" title="Negre" label="Nègre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260" start="29677" end="29690" title="French-based creole languages" label="French creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="29699" end="29705" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="29827" end="29841" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q942988" start="29912" end="29916" title="dude" label="dude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="29926" end="29942" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="29996" end="30003" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="30345" end="30361" title="calque" label="loan translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="30404" end="30414" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="30490" end="30511" title="political correctness" label="politically incorrect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="30609" end="30617" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="30635" end="30642" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16681848" start="30949" end="30960" title="Help Needed" label="Help Needed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="31024" end="31031" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="31126" end="31146" title="List of ethnic slurs" label="List of ethnic slurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619040" start="31149" end="31191" title="List of ethnic group names used as insults" label="List of ethnic group names used as insults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285250" start="31194" end="31214" title="Kaffir (ethnic slur)" label="Kaffir (ethnic slur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842904" start="31217" end="31227" title="Blackfella" label="Blackfella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616408" start="31235" end="31273" title="Guilty or Innocent of Using the N Word" label="Guilty or Innocent of Using the N Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643464" start="31301" end="31347" title="List of topics related to the African diaspora" label="List of topics related to the African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q478610" start="31355" end="31386" title="With Apologies to Jesse Jackson" label="With Apologies to Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="31414" end="31424" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q984268" start="31499" end="31507" title="Golliwog" label="Golliwog"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="31509" end="31518" title="Profanity" label="Profanity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37123" wikidata="Q796617" url="?curid=37123" title="Theories of political behavior">
<text>Theories of political behavior, as an aspect of political science, attempt to quantify and explain the influences that define a person&#x27;s political views, ideology, and levels of political participation, especially in relation to the role of politicians and their impact on public opinion . Political behavior is the subset of human behavior that involves politics and power. Theorists who have had an influence on this field include Karl Deutsch and Theodor Adorno.

==Long-term influences on political orientation==
Interaction with the political views of parental figures is often thought of as the primary long-term influence on political orientation and willingness to take part in the political system.

Teachers and other educational authority figures are also often thought to have a significant impact on political orientation. During the 2003–2004 school year, In the United States, students spent an average of 180.4 days in primary and secondary education each year, with a school day being defined as approximately 6.7 class hours. This means that on average a student will spend around 1,208.68 hours in class each year. Post-secondary education appears to have an impact on both voting rates and political identification; as a study of 9,784,931 college students found that they voted at a rate of 68.5% in the 2016 Presidential Election compared to the average of 46.1% for citizens aged 18–29 who voted.

Peers also affect political orientation. Friends often, but not necessarily, have the advantage of being part of the same generation, which collectively develops a unique set of societal issues; Eric L. Dey has argued that &quot;socialisation is the process through which individuals acquire knowledge, habits, and value orientations that will be useful in the future.&quot; The ability to relate on this common level is what fuels and enables future ideological growth.

Sociologists and political scientists debate the relationship between age and the formation of political attitudes. The impressionable years hypothesis postulates that political orientation is solidified during early adulthood. By contrast, the &quot;increasing persistence hypothesis&quot; posits that attitudes become less likely to change as individuals become older, while the &quot;life-long openness hypothesis&quot; proposes that the attitudes of individuals remain flexible regardless of age.

==Short-term influences on political orientation==
Short-term factors also affect voting behavior; the media and the impact of individual election issues are among these factors. These factors differ from the long-term factors as they are often short-lived. However, they can be just as crucial in modifying political orientation. The ways in which these two sources are interpreted often relies on the individuals specific political ideology formed by the long-term factors.

Most political scientists agree that the mass media have a profound impact on voting behavior. One author asserts that &quot;few would argue with the notion that the institutions of the mass media are important to contemporary politics ... in the transition to liberal democratic politics in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe the media was a key battleground.&quot;

Second, there are election issues. These include campaign issues, debates and commercials. Election years and political campaigns can shift certain political behaviors based on the candidates involved, which have different degrees of effectiveness in influencing voters.

==The influence of social groups on political outcomes==

Recently, some political scientists have been interested in many studies which aimed to analyze the relation between the behavior of social groups and the political outcomes. Some of the social groups included in their studies have been age demographics, gender, and ethnic groups. This can be understood through the lenses of pluralism or social identity theory.

For example, in U.S. politics, the effect of ethnic groups and gender has a great influence on the political outcomes. Hispanic Americans have a profound social impact on the political outcome of their vote and are emerging as a strong up-and-coming political force. The most noticeable increase in Hispanic American voting was in the 2000 presidential election, although the votes did not share a socially common political view at that time. In the 2006 election, the Hispanic American vote aided tremendously in the election of Florida Senator Mel Martinez, although in the 2004 presidential election, about 44% of Latin Americans voted for Republican President George W. Bush. However, Hispanic Americans have the lowest voting rate in the United States, with only 47.6% voting in the 2016 Presidential Election in the United States. Currently illegal immigration has been claiming the most attention and Hispanic Americans, although not unanimous, are concerned with the education, employment and deportation of illegal immigrants in the United States. Although the majority of Hispanic Americans vote for Democratic candidates, Cuban Americans are likely the most conservative of Latinos, with 54% of Cuban American voters casting ballots for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential Election, compared to an average of 35% of all Latinos who voted. Although this was represents a net decrease in support for the Republican Party among Cuban Americans, it continues a trend created by the exile of many Cubans after the Cuban Revolution.

African Americans have the second highest voting rates in the United States and even surpassed white voters in the 2008 Presidential Election, although this has declined in the 2016 Presidential Election. In the 2008 Presidential Election and 2012 Presidential election, African Americans voted overwhelmingly for Democratic candidate, Barack Obama. This trend of African Americans voting for candidates of the Democratic Party continued into the 2016 Presidential Election.

Women in the United States have, in the past 30 years, surpassed male voting rates, with the 2016 Presidential Election having a ratio between females and males of 52 to 48. This trend is often referred to as the Gender Gap and when combined with the tendency of women to vote for Democratic candidates, their effect on political outcomes is extremely important.

== Biology and political science ==
Interdisciplinary studies in biology and political science aim to identify correlates of political behavior with biological aspects, for example the linkage of biology and political orientation, but also with other aspects like partisanship and voting behavior. This field of study is typically referred to genopolitics although it is sometimes referred to as biopolitics, although the term also has other meanings originating from the work of Michel Foucault.

The study of possible genetic bases of political behavior has grown since the 1980s. The term genopolitics was coined by political scientist James Fowler in the early-2000s to describe research into identifying specific transporter/receptor genes responsible for ideological orientation beyond the sociopsychological realm of political socialisation.

Other research on genopolitics includes the article entitled &quot;Do Genes Contribute to the “Gender Gap”&quot; which also attempts to explore genetic influences between the sexes and whether or not they contribute to political preferences. The authors concluded that “the findings support the claim that the environment (social or other) cannot be used in isolation to explain behavior differences between males and females, nor can all differences in modern political behaviors between the sexes simply be attributed to genes or presumptions about primitive man.&quot;

==Political participation==

Political scientists also aim to understand what drives individuals to participate in the democratic process, either by voting, volunteering for campaigns, signing petitions or protesting. Participation cannot always be explained by rational behavior. The voting paradox, for example, points out that it cannot be in a citizen&#x27;s self-interest to vote because the effort it takes to vote will almost always outweigh the benefits of voting, particularly considering a single vote is unlikely to change an electoral outcome. Political scientists instead propose that citizens vote for psychological or social reasons. Studies show, for example, that individuals are more likely to vote if they see their friends have voted or if someone in their household has received a nudge to vote.

==Political psychology==

Political psychology aims to explain political behavior through psychological analysis. Examples of theories include right-wing authoritarianism, social dominance orientation, and system justification theory.

==See also==
* Political parties
* Identity politics
* Votebank

==References==

26. Pantoja, A. D., &amp; Segura, G. M. (2003). The Latino Vote in the 2004 Election: Political Behavior and Electoral Trends. American Political Science Review, 97(3), 495-507.

This source would provide the accurate data and analysis for the 44% of Latino voters supporting George W. Bush in 2004, clarifying the voting patterns during that election.
27. Pew Research Center (2016). Hispanic Voter Turnout in the 2016 U.S. Election. Pew Research Center.

This report would offer the statistic on Hispanic American voter turnout in the 2016 election (47.6%), providing an up-to-date and reliable source.
28. Romer, D. (2018). Latino Political Participation and Immigration Issues: The Impact of Policies on Voting Behavior. Journal of Politics, 80(1), 122-135.

A study focusing on the concerns of Hispanic voters, particularly their stance on immigration, and how it influences their political behavior.
29. Cohen, R. (2017). Cuban Americans in the 2016 Election: Shifting Allegiances and Political Behavior. Hispanic Journal of Political Science, 25(2), 40-56.

Provides analysis of Cuban American voting trends, including the shift in voting behavior toward Trump in 2016.
30. Hinojosa, R. (2018). The Cuban American Political Tradition: From Exile to Electorate. Latino Studies, 16(3), 317-335.

Explores the historical context of Cuban American voting behavior, particularly their political exile following the Cuban Revolution and how it shapes current political affiliations.

==External links==
* &quot;Political Behavior&quot;, academic journal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796617" start="0" end="30" title="Theories of political behavior" label="Theories of political behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="48" end="65" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="159" end="167" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="246" end="257" title="Politician" label="politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q77454" start="438" end="450" title="Karl Deutsch" label="Karl Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="455" end="469" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="714" end="721" title="Teacher" label="Teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1139" end="1163" title="Post-secondary education" label="Post-secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="1330" end="1356" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000532" start="2018" end="2049" title="impressionable years hypothesis" label="impressionable years hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540376" start="2482" end="2497" title="voting behavior" label="voting behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="2503" end="2508" title="mass media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="2538" end="2546" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2882" end="2901" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3173" end="3185" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="3190" end="3204" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="3831" end="3837" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="3843" end="3856" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="3903" end="3912" title="Pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540351" start="3916" end="3938" title="social identity theory" label="social identity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="3957" end="3970" title="U.S. politics" label="U.S. politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="4060" end="4078" title="Hispanic Americans" label="Hispanic Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="4276" end="4302" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751449" start="4391" end="4404" title="United States general elections, 2006" label="2006 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4471" end="4478" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4479" end="4486" title="United States Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q435010" start="4487" end="4499" title="Mel Martinez" label="Mel Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="4517" end="4543" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4584" end="4594" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4605" end="4619" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="4729" end="4776" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Presidential Election in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5051" end="5061" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="5074" end="5089" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="5189" end="5201" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="5209" end="5235" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5356" end="5372" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562253" start="5432" end="5452" title="Cuban exile" label="exile of many Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="5463" end="5479" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="5482" end="5499" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="5597" end="5623" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="5659" end="5685" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="5725" end="5751" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="5818" end="5830" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915058" start="6387" end="6416" title="biology and political science" label="biology and political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915057" start="6518" end="6551" title="biology and political orientation" label="biology and political orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140620" start="6586" end="6598" title="partisanship" label="partisanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540376" start="6603" end="6618" title="voting behavior" label="voting behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533510" start="6665" end="6677" title="genopolitics" label="genopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904237" start="6718" end="6729" title="biopolitics" label="biopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="6802" end="6817" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533510" start="6914" end="6926" title="genopolitics" label="genopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135162" start="6961" end="6973" title="James H. Fowler" label="James Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q745768" start="8030" end="8044" title="voting paradox" label="voting paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596387" start="8589" end="8609" title="Political psychology" label="Political psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376276" start="8706" end="8733" title="right-wing authoritarianism" label="right-wing authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551065" start="8735" end="8763" title="social dominance orientation" label="social dominance orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663720" start="8769" end="8796" title="System justification" label="system justification theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="8814" end="8831" title="Political parties" label="Political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="8834" end="8851" title="Identity politics" label="Identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942141" start="8854" end="8862" title="Votebank" label="Votebank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37124" wikidata="Q2071380" url="?curid=37124" title="Austin Powers (character)">
<text>Sir Austin Danger Powers is a fictional character from the &quot;Austin Powers&quot; series of films, and is created and portrayed by Mike Myers. He is the protagonist of &quot;Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery&quot; (1997), &quot;Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me&quot; (1999) and &quot;Austin Powers in Goldmember&quot; (2002).

He is a womanizing, hard partying British spy embodying the Swinging London psyche and hippie culture of the 1960s who, with his nemesis Dr. Evil, was frozen in a cryonics experiment. The series&#x27; humor follows his attempts to adjust to the modern world as he continues to try to save it from terrorism.

==Personality==

Austin Powers was a character seen as a homage of the 1960s/1970s Bondmania, being influenced by James Bond, and other characters as Evelyn Tremble (played by Peter Sellers) in the spoof James Bond 1967 movie &quot;Casino Royale&quot;. Other notable influences were Harry Palmer (played by Michael Caine who would go on to play Austin&#x27;s father, Nigel, in Goldmember), especially his thick horn-rimmed glasses, and the flamboyant dress sense of Jason King (played by Peter Wyngarde).

The character of Austin Powers represents an archetype of 1960s Swinging London, with his advocacy for free love, his use of obscure expressions and his clothing style (including crushed velvet suits and Beatle boots).

==Development==
Myers, Matthew Sweet and Susanna Hoffs formed the faux British 1960s band Ming Tea after Myers&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; stint in the early 1990s. The band members all performed under pseudonyms with 1960s&#x27; personas. Myers adopted the pseudonym and character of Austin Powers.

This group made a number of live club and television performances in character. Myers&#x27;s then wife, Robin Ruzan, encouraged him to write a film based on Austin Powers. Obituaries of Simon Dee (1935–2009), the radio and BBC television presenter, stated that his &quot;Sixties grooviness&quot; made him the inspiration for the character.

Heavily influenced by British pop culture growing up, Mike Myers has claimed that his British-born father was the inspiration behind Austin Powers.

==Other media==
* HBO purchased the rights to produce an animated series based on the &quot;Austin Powers&quot; films in May 1999. Despite announcing plans for a thirteen-episode season, HBO ultimately shelved the project.
* Austin Powers has been used for advertising numerous products and endorsements, such as Pepsi Cola.
* He also appears in the music videos for Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Beautiful Stranger&quot;, Beyoncé&#x27;s &quot;Work It Out&quot; and Britney Spears&#x27; &quot;Boys&quot;.
* Powers appears in all video games based on the film series, including &quot;Austin Powers Pinball&quot;, &quot;Austin Powers: Welcome to My Underground Lair!&quot;, &quot;Austin Powers: Oh, Behave!&quot;, and &quot;Austin Powers Operation: Trivia&quot;.
* Powers is featured in an episode of the web show &quot;Epic Rap Battles of History&quot;, where he is pitted against James Bond. He is performed by the series co-creator Nice Peter.

==In popular culture==
The May 2010 game &quot;Red Dead Redemption&quot; features an achievement called Austin Overpowered, requiring players to clear out hideouts in the New Austin region of the game.

In November 2010, he was voted #23 in &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s list &quot;The 100 Greatest Characters of The Last 20 Years.&quot;

==See also==
* Outline of James Bond
* &quot;Our Man Flint&quot;, another James Bond parody film; Austin calls its sequel, &quot;In Like Flint&quot;, his favorite movie
* Matt Helm as played in 1960s&#x27; films by Dean Martin shares many qualities with Austin Powers, including his cover profession as a fashion photographer.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2071380" start="0" end="24" title="Austin Powers (character)" label="Sir Austin Danger Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500001" start="65" end="78" title="Austin Powers" label="Austin Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="134" end="144" title="Mike Myers" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="156" end="167" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="177" end="220" title="Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery" label="Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="241" end="278" title="Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me" label="Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q498910" start="302" end="329" title="Austin Powers in Goldmember" label="Austin Powers in Goldmember"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="353" end="363" title="womanizing" label="womanizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="379" end="386" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="387" end="390" title="spy" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="405" end="420" title="Swinging London" label="Swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="421" end="427" title="Psychedelia" label="psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="432" end="446" title="hippie culture" label="hippie culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q430599" start="482" end="490" title="Dr. Evil" label="Dr. Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="508" end="516" title="cryonics" label="cryonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="642" end="651" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="768" end="778" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="804" end="818" title="Evelyn Tremble" label="Evelyn Tremble"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="830" end="843" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="886" end="899" title="Casino Royale (1967 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749168" start="937" end="949" title="Harry Palmer" label="Harry Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="961" end="974" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628391" start="1065" end="1084" title="horn-rimmed glasses" label="horn-rimmed glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506823" start="1120" end="1130" title="Jason King (TV series)" label="Jason King"/>
<link wikidata="Q705901" start="1142" end="1156" title="Peter Wyngarde" label="Peter Wyngarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="1224" end="1239" title="Swinging London" label="Swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q867081" start="1263" end="1272" title="free love" label="free love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911851" start="1364" end="1376" title="Beatle boots" label="Beatle boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100060" start="1403" end="1416" title="Matthew Sweet" label="Matthew Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q272374" start="1421" end="1434" title="Susanna Hoffs" label="Susanna Hoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873076" start="1470" end="1478" title="Ming Tea" label="Ming Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="1504" end="1523" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518599" start="1878" end="1887" title="Simon Dee" label="Simon Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="2087" end="2097" title="Mike Myers (actor)" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2200" end="2203" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="2495" end="2505" title="Pepsi Cola" label="Pepsi Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="2532" end="2543" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="2549" end="2556" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288909" start="2570" end="2588" title="Beautiful Stranger" label="Beautiful Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="2596" end="2603" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q147945" start="2617" end="2628" title="Work It Out (Beyoncé song)" label="Work It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="2639" end="2653" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q953383" start="2666" end="2670" title="Boys (Britney Spears song)" label="Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823241" start="2756" end="2777" title="Austin Powers Pinball" label="Austin Powers Pinball"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2791" end="2837" title="Austin Powers: Welcome to My Underground Lair!" label="Austin Powers: Welcome to My Underground Lair!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2851" end="2877" title="Austin Powers: Oh, Behave!" label="Austin Powers: Oh, Behave!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2895" end="2926" title="Austin Powers Operation: Trivia" label="Austin Powers Operation: Trivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058740" start="2991" end="3018" title="Epic Rap Battles of History" label="Epic Rap Battles of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="3053" end="3063" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280173" start="3106" end="3116" title="Nice Peter" label="Nice Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q548203" start="3166" end="3185" title="Red Dead Redemption" label="Red Dead Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="3366" end="3386" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112309" start="3478" end="3499" title="Outline of James Bond" label="Outline of James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200038" start="3508" end="3521" title="Our Man Flint" label="Our Man Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200034" start="3592" end="3605" title="In Like Flint" label="In Like Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q16663769" start="3634" end="3643" title="Matt Helm" label="Matt Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="3678" end="3689" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37125" wikidata="Q782740" url="?curid=37125" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation">
<text>The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO ) is the domestic intelligence and national security agency of the Commonwealth of Australia, responsible for the protection of the country and its citizens from espionage, sabotage, acts of foreign interference, politically motivated violence, terrorism and attacks on the national defence system. ASIO is a primary entity of the Australian Intelligence Community.
ASIO has a wide range of surveillance powers to collect human and signals intelligence. Generally, ASIO operations requiring police powers of arrest and detention under warrant are co-ordinated with the Australian Federal Police and/or with state and territory police forces. The organisation is comparable to that of the FBI (US) and MI5 (UK).

ASIO Central Office is in Canberra, with a local office being located in each mainland state and territory capital. A new $630 million Central Office, Ben Chifley Building, named after Ben Chifley, prime minister when ASIO was created, was officially opened by then prime minister Kevin Rudd on 23 July 2013.

==Command, control and organisation==

ASIO is the statutory body established and regulated under the &quot;Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979&quot;, responsible to the Parliament of Australia through the Attorney-General. ASIO also reports to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, Senate’s Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee and is subject to independent review by the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security. The head of ASIO is the Director-General of Security, who oversees the strategic management of ASIO within guidelines issued by the Attorney-General. The current Director-General of Security is Mike Burgess, who assumed office on 16 September 2019. There are also two Deputy Directors-General.

In 2013, ASIO had a staff of around 1,740. The identity of ASIO officers, apart from the Director-General, remains an official secret. While ASIO is an equal opportunity employer, there has been some media comment of its apparent difficulty in attracting people from a Muslim or Middle Eastern background. Furthermore, ASIO has undergone a period of rapid growth with some 70% of its officers having joined since 2002, leading to what Paul O&#x27;Sullivan, Director-General of Security from 2005 to 2009, called &#x27;an experience gap&#x27;.

==Powers and accountability==

===Special investigative powers ===
The special investigative powers available to ASIO officers under warrant signed by the Attorney-General include:
*Interception of telecommunications,
*Examination of postal and delivery articles,
*Use of clandestine surveillance and tracking devices,
*Remote access to computers, including alteration of data to conceal that access,
*Covert entry to and search of premises, including the removal or copying of any record or thing found therein, and
*Conduct of an ordinary or frisk search of a person if they are at or near a premises specified in the warrant.

The Director-General also has the power to independently issue a warrant should a serious security situation arise and a warrant requested of the Attorney-General has not yet been granted.

An ASIO officer may, without warrant, ask an operator of an aircraft or vessel questions about the aircraft or vessel, its cargo, crew, passengers, stores or voyage; and to produce supporting documents relating to these questions.

===Special terrorism investigative powers===
When investigating terrorism, the Director-General may also seek a warrant from an independent judicial authority to allow:
*The compulsory questioning of suspects,
*The detention of suspects by the Australian Federal Police, and their subsequent interrogation by ASIO officers,
*Ordinary, frisk or strip search of suspects by AFP officers upon their detainment,
*The seizure of passports, and
*The prevention of suspects leaving Australia.

The Director-General is not empowered to independently issue a warrant in relation to the investigation of terrorism.

===Immunity from prosecution===
While the Act does not define any activities specifically to be legal, that is, to grant immunity for any specific crime, it does provide exceptions that will not be granted immunity. Section 35k (1) defines these activities as not being immune from liability for special intelligence conduct during special intelligence operations. That is to say, an ASIO operative would be deemed to have committed a crime if they were to participate in any of the following activities under any circumstances:
* An activity that causes death or serious injury,
* Torture,
* If the activity involves the commission of a sexual offence against any person, or
* If the activity causes significant loss of, or serious damage to property.

===Collection of foreign intelligence===
ASIO also has the power to collect foreign intelligence within Australia at the request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs or the Minister for Defence. Known as Joint Intelligence Operations, and usually conducted in concert with the Australian Secret Intelligence Service the purpose of these operations is the gathering of security intelligence on and from foreign officials, organisations or companies.

=== Accountability ===
Because of the nature of its work, ASIO does not make details of its activities public and law prevents the identities of ASIO officers from being disclosed. ASIO and the Australian Government say that operational measures ensuring the legality of ASIO operations have been established.

ASIO briefs the Attorney-General on all major issues affecting security and they are also informed of operations when considering granting warrants enabling the special investigative powers of ASIO. Furthermore, the Attorney-General issues guidelines with respect to the conduct of ASIO investigations relating to politically motivated violence and its functions of obtaining intelligence relevant to security.

ASIO reports to several governmental and parliamentary committees dealing with security, legislative and financial matters. This includes the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security and the Senate’s Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee. A classified annual report is provided to the government, an unclassified edited version of which is tabled in federal Parliament.

The Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security was established in 1986 to provide additional oversight of Australia’s security and intelligence agencies. The Inspector-General has complete access to all ASIO records and has a range of inquisitorial powers.

==Relationships with foreign agencies and services==
Australia’s intelligence and security agencies maintain close working relationships with the foreign and domestic intelligence and security agencies of other nations. As of 22 October 2008, ASIO has established liaison relationships with 311 authorities in 120 countries.

==History==

===Pre-ASIO===
The Australian Government assumed responsibility for national security and intelligence on Federation in 1901, and took over various state agencies and had to rationalise their functions. There was considerable overlap between the civil and military authorities. Similarly, there was also no Commonwealth agency responsible for enforcing federal laws. At the outbreak of World War I, no Australian government agency was dedicated to security, intelligence or law enforcement. The organisation of security intelligence in Australia took on more urgency with a perceived threat posed by agents provocateurs, fifth columnists and saboteurs within Australia.

In 1915, the British government arranged for the establishment of a Commonwealth branch of the Imperial Counter Espionage Bureau in Australia. The branch came to be known as the Australian Special Intelligence Bureau (SIB) in January 1916, and maintained a close relationship with state police forces, and later with the Commonwealth Police Force, created in 1917, to conduct investigations independent of state police forces. After the war, on 1 November 1919, the SIB and Commonwealth Police were merged to form the Investigation Branch within the Attorney General&#x27;s Department.

During World War II, Commonwealth Security Service was formed in 1941 to investigate organisations and individuals considered likely to be subversive or actively opposed to national interests; to investigate espionage and sabotage; to vet defence force personnel and workers in defence-related industries; to control the issue of passports and visas; and was responsible for the security of airports and wharves, and factories engaged in manufacture of munitions and other items necessary for Australia’s war effort. It was also responsible for radio security. In June 1945 it produced a report warning of the danger of the Communist Party of Australia.

Robert Frederick Bird Wake, one of the foundation directors of ASIO, is credited with getting &quot;the show&quot; started in 1949, as claimed by Valdemar Wake, in his biography &quot;No Ribbons or Medals&quot; of his father&#x27;s work as a counter espionage officer.&lt;ref name=&quot;Valdemar/Hereward&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;austlit/C524531&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;authorsden/30207&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Wake worked closely with Director-General Reed. During World War II, Reed conducted an inquiry into Wake&#x27;s performance as a security officer and found that he was competent and innocent of the charges laid by the Army&#x27;s commander-in-chief, General Thomas Blamey. This was the start of a relationship between Reed and Wake that lasted for more than 10 years. Wake was seen as the operational head of ASIO.

===Establishment and &#x27;The Case&#x27;===
Following the end of World War II, the joint United States-UK Venona project uncovered sensitive British and Australian government data being transmitted through Soviet diplomatic channels. Officers from MI5 were dispatched to Australia to assist local investigations. The leak was eventually tracked to a spy ring operating from the Soviet Embassy in Canberra. Allied Western governments expressed disaffection with the state of security in Australia.

On 9 March 1949, Prime Minister Ben Chifley created the post of Director-General of Security and appointed South Australian Supreme Court Justice Geoffrey Reed to the post. On 16 March 1949, Chifley issued a Directive for the Establishment and Maintenance of a Security Service. The Security Service&#x27;s first authorised telephone interceptions were in June 1949, followed in July by a raid on the Sydney office of the Communist Party of Australia. In August 1949, Reed advised the Prime Minister that he had decided to name the service the &#x27;Australian Security Intelligence Organization&#x27; .

The new service was to be modelled on the Security Service of the United Kingdom MI5 and an MI5 liaison team (including Sir Roger Hollis) was attached to the fledgling ASIO during the early 1950s. Historian Robert Manne describes this early relationship as &quot;special, almost filial&quot; and continues &quot;ASIO&#x27;s trust in the British counter-intelligence service appears to have been near-perfect&quot;.

The Labor Government was defeated at the December 1949 federal election, and in March 1950 the new prime minister, Robert Menzies, appointed the Deputy Director of Military Intelligence, Charles Spry, as the second Director-General of Security, commencing on 9 July 1950. Wake resigned shortly after Spry&#x27;s appointment. On 6 July 1950, a Directive of Prime Minister Menzies set out the Charter of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization, which expanded on Chifley&#x27;s 1949 Directive. ASIO was converted to a statutory body on 13 December 1956 by the &quot;Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1956&quot; (later repealed by the &quot;Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979&quot;, the current legislation as amended to 2007). Spry would continue to hold the post until January 1970. The spelling of the organisation was amended by legislation in 1999 to bring it into line with the Australian standard form &#x27;organisation&#x27;.

The operation to crack the Soviet spy ring in Canberra consumed much of the resources of ASIO during the 1950s. This operation became internally known as &quot;The Case&quot;. Among the prime suspects of the investigations were Wally Clayton, a prominent member of the Australian Communist Party, and two diplomats with the Department of External Affairs, Jim Hill and Ian Milner. However, no charges resulted from the investigations, because Australia did not have any laws against peacetime espionage at the time.

===The Petrov Affair===
5 February 1951 saw the arrival in Sydney of Vladimir Mikhaylovich Petrov, Third Secretary of the Soviet Embassy. An ASIO field officer identified Petrov as a possible &#x27;legal&#x27;, an agent of the Soviet Ministry of State Security (MGB, a forerunner to the KGB) operating under diplomatic immunity. The Organisation began gently cultivating Petrov through another agent, Dr. Michael Bialoguski, with the eventual goal of orchestrating his defection. Ultimately, Petrov was accused by the Soviet Ambassador of several lapses in judgement that would have led to his imprisonment and probable execution upon his return to the Soviet Union. Petrov feared for his life and accepted the defection life-line provided by ASIO.

The actual defection occurred on 3 April 1954. Petrov was spirited to a safe house by ASIO officers, but his disappearance and the seeming reluctance of Australian authorities to search for him made the Soviets increasingly suspicious. Fearing a defection by Petrov, MVD officers dramatically escorted his wife Evdokia to a waiting aeroplane in Sydney. There was doubt as to whether she was leaving by choice or through coercion and so Australian authorities initially did not act to prevent her being bundled into the plane. However, ASIO was in communication with the pilot and learned through relayed conversations with a flight attendant that if Evdokia spoke to her husband she might consider seeking asylum in Australia.

An opportunity to allow her to speak with her husband came when the Director-General of Security, Charles Spry, was informed that the MVD agents had broken Australian law by carrying firearms on an airliner in Australian airspace and so could be detained. When the aeroplane landed in Darwin for refuelling, the Soviet party and other passengers were asked to leave the plane. Police, acting on ASIO orders, quickly disarmed and restrained the two MVD officers and Evdokia was taken into the terminal to speak to her husband via telephone. After speaking to him, she became convinced he was alive and speaking freely and asked the Administrator of the Northern Territory for political asylum.

The affair sparked controversy in Australia when circumstantial links were noted between the leader of the Australian Labor Party and the Communist Party of Australia (and hence to the Soviet spy ring). H.V. Evatt, the leader of the Labor Party at the time, accused Prime Minister Robert Menzies of arranging the Petrov defection to discredit him. The accusations lead to a disastrous split in the Labor party.

Petrov was able to provide information on the structure of the Soviet intelligence apparatus in the mid-1950s, information that was highly valuable to the United States. It was by obtaining this information that the Organisation&#x27;s reputation in the eyes of the United States was greatly enhanced.

In fact, when Brigadier Spry retired, the Deputy Director of the CIA sent the following tribute:

:The relationship between the CIA and ASIO started as a very personal one. The real substantive relationship started with Sir Charles&#x27; visit in 1955... Since Sir Charles&#x27; first visit, the relationships with ASIO have continued to become closer and closer until today we have no secrets, regardless of classification or sensitivity, that are not made available to ASIO if it is pertinent to Australia’s internal security... I feel, as does the Director, a type of mutual trust in dealing with ASIO that is exceeded by no other service in the world today.

===The Cold War===
ASIO&#x27;s counter-intelligence successes continued throughout the Cold War. Following an elaborate investigation between 1961 and 1963, ASIO recommended the ejection of the First Secretary of the Soviet Embassy, Ivan Skripov, and his declaration as &quot;persona non-grata&quot;. Skripov had been refining Kay Marshall,&lt;ref name=&quot;theaustralian/Blundell/Butt&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; an English-Australian woman&lt;ref name=&quot;thewest/b881629087z&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; as an agent for Soviet intelligence; however, she was in fact an agent of ASIO.

In April 1983, ASIO uncovered more Soviet attempts at espionage and Valery Ivanov, who also held the post of First Secretary at the Soviet Embassy, was declared &quot;persona non-grata&quot;. He was ejected from Australia on the grounds that he had performed duties in violation of his diplomatic status.

===Penetration by the KGB===
These successes were marred, however, by the penetration of ASIO by a KGB mole in the 1970s. Due to the close defence and intelligence ties between Australia and the United States, ASIO became a backdoor to American intelligence. Upon realising ASIO was compromised, the United States pulled back on the information it shared with Australia.

Following a strenuous internal audit and a joint Federal Police investigation, George Sadil was accused of being the mole. Sadil had been a Russian interpreter with ASIO for some 25 years and highly classified documents were discovered in his place of residence. Federal Police arrested Sadil in June 1993 and charged him under the Crimes Act 1914 with several espionage and official secrets related offences. However, parts of the case against him collapsed the following year.

Sadil was committed to trial in March 1994, but the Director of Public Prosecutions decided not to proceed with the more serious espionage-related charges after reviewing the evidence against him. Sadil&#x27;s profile did not match that of the mole and investigators were unable to establish any kind of money trail between him and the KGB.

Sadil pleaded guilty in December 1994 to thirteen charges of &quot;removing ASIO documents contrary to his duty&quot;, and was sentenced to three months imprisonment. He was subsequently released on a 12-month good behaviour bond. It is believed that another ASIO officer, now retired, is suspected of being the mole but no prosecution attempts have been made.

In November 2004, former KGB Major-General Oleg Kalugin confirmed to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation&#x27;s &quot;Four Corners&quot; programme that the KGB had in fact infiltrated ASIO in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

ASIO acknowledged in October 2016 that it had been infiltrated.

In 2023, the mole was identified as Ian George Peacock. Peacock&#x27;s code name within the KGB was &quot;Mira&quot;.

===Sydney 2000 Olympic Games ===
ASIO began planning for the 2000 Olympic and Paralympic Games, held in Sydney, as early as 1995. A specific Olympics Coordination Branch was created in 1997, and began recruiting staff with &quot;specialised skills&quot; the following year. In 1998, ASIO &quot;strengthened information collection and analytical systems, monitored changes in the security environment more broadly, improved its communications technology and provided other agencies with strategic security intelligence assessments to assist their Olympics security planning&quot;.

The Olympics Coordination Branch also began planning for the Federal Olympic Security Intelligence Centre (FOSIC) in 1998. FOSIC was to &quot;provide security intelligence advice and threat assessments to State and Commonwealth authorities during the Sydney 2000 Games&quot;.

=== Surveillance of anti-coal activists ===
In 2012 it was reported that ASIO had been monitoring the actions of Australians protesting against the coal industry, and was increasing its efforts from previous years. Minister Martin Ferguson said that he was particularly concerned about protests relating to the Hazelwood power station in Victoria. An unnamed security source told &quot;The Age&quot; newspaper that &quot;providing advice and intelligence to safeguard [critical infrastructure] is clearly within ASIO&#x27;s responsibilities... ASIO has a clear role, including protection against sabotage. And it&#x27;s clear [environmental] activists pose a greater threat to energy facilities than terrorists.&quot; A spokesperson for Attorney General Nicola Roxon described ASIO&#x27;s responsibility in monitoring political action groups as &quot;limited to activity that is, or has the potential to be, violent for the purposes of achieving a political objective&quot;. Australian Greens party leader Bob Brown described ASIO monitoring environmentalists as a &quot;political weapon&quot; used by the Government for the benefit of &quot;foreign-owned mining corporations&quot;.

=== Chinese intelligence activity ===
Nicola Roxon, the Attorney-General of Australia, blocked Chinese, state-owned company Huawei from seeking a supply contract for the National Broadband Network, on the advice of the ASIO. The Australian government feared Huawei would provide backdoor access for Chinese cyber espionage.

In May 2013, ABC News claimed that China stole blueprints to the headquarters of the ASIO.

Sheri Yan and Roger Uren were investigated by ASIO on suspicion of spying for China. Uren, former Assistant Secretary responsible for the Asia section of the Office of National Assessments, was found to have removed documents pertaining to Chinese intelligence operations in Australia, and kept them in his apartment. Yan was suspected of undertaking influence operations on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party, and introducing Colonel Liu Chaoying, a military intelligence officer, to Australian contacts.

=== Expansion of powers, 2020 ===
In 2020, Peter Dutton, then Minister for Home Affairs, introduced the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2020, which expanded ASIO&#x27;s questioning powers to cover espionage, foreign interference, and political violence, while the age which ASIO can compulsively question minors has been reduced to 14 from 16. Furthermore, ASIO can authorize the usage of tracking devices without warrants. The Law Council of Australia criticized the bill and compared it to the 2020 Hong Kong national security law, due to its expansion of questioning powers to cover political violence, which the LCA argued could be used against acts of lawful protest, a claim that ASIO head Mike Burgess rejected.

==Royal commissions, inquiries and reviews==

===Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security, 1974–77 ===

On 21 August 1974, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam announced the establishment of the Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security to inquire into Australia&#x27;s intelligence agencies. Justice Robert Hope of the Supreme Court of New South Wales was appointed as Royal Commissioner. In 1977 the First Hope Commission made many findings about, and recommendations on, ASIO in the Fourth Report, some of which had been preempted by the Whitlam and Fraser governments. The commission marked the first review of the organisation and was fundamental to securing it as part of Australia&#x27;s state defensive apparatus. In a secret supplementary report, much of which remains classified, Hope indicated his belief that ASIO&#x27;s past conduct was the result of its infiltration by a hostile foreign intelligence agency. In a 1998 interview Hope stated that saw some of his major recommendations as having been wrong.

The Commission found that ASIO provided the CIA with information about prominent Australian politicians and government officials. The information included accusations of subversive activities and details of private lives.

===Protective Security Review, 1978–79 ===
Following the Sydney Hilton bombing in 1978, the government commissioned Justice Hope with conducting a review into national protective security arrangements and into co-operation between Federal and State authorities in regards to security. In the report concluded in 1979, Justice Hope designated ASIO as the agency responsible for national threat assessments in terrorism and politically motivated violence. He also recommended that relations between ASIO and State and Territory police forces be regulated by arrangements between governments.

===Royal Commission on Australian Security and Intelligence Agencies, 1983–84 ===
Following the publicity surrounding the expulsion of Valery Ivanov, First Secretary at the Soviet Embassy in Canberra, the Government established a Royal Commission to review the activities of Australian security and intelligence agencies. Justice Hope was again Royal Commissioner.

Justice Hope completed his report in December 1984. His recommendations included that:
*The security related activities which ASIO should investigate be redefined. References to subversion and terrorism be removed and replaced with politically motivated violence, attacks on Australia&#x27;s defence system and promoting communal violence;
*ASIO be given additional functions of collecting foreign intelligence and providing protective security advice; and that
*A separate office of Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security be established.

Justice Hope also recommended that amendments to the ASIO Act provide that &quot;it is not the purpose of the Act that the right of lawful advocacy, protest or dissent should be affected or that exercising those rights should, by themselves, constitute activity prejudicial to security&quot;.

===Post-Cold War review, 1992 ===
In early 1992, Prime Minister Paul Keating commissioned a review &quot;of the overall impact of changes in international circumstances on the roles and priorities of the Australian intelligence agencies&quot;. In his statement of 21 July 1992, Keating said:

:Consistent with the philosophy of a separation of the assessment, policy and foreign intelligence collection functions, the Government considers that the existing roles of the individual agencies remain valid in the 1990s. The rationale outlined by Mr Justice Hope for ASIO as a freestanding, non-executive, advisory intelligence security agency remains relevant in the 1990s and the Government has therefore decided that ASIO should continue to have the roles and responsibilities laid down in existing legislation.

:The Soviet threat certainly formed an important component of ASIO&#x27;s activities, but threats from other sources of foreign interference and politically motivated violence have been important to ASIO for some time, and will remain so. However, the implications for ASIO of the changes in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe are more far-reaching than for the other agencies. The Government has therefore decided that while ASIO&#x27;s capacity to meet its responsibilities must be maintained, there is scope for resource reductions.

The resource reductions mentioned were a cut of 60 staff and a $3.81 million budget decrease.

===Inquiry into National Security, 1993 ===
Following the trial of George Sadil over the ASIO mole scandal and from concern about the implications of material having been removed from ASIO without authority, the Prime Minister announced the appointment of Mr Michael Cook AO (former head of the Office of National Assessments) to inquire into various aspects of national security. The review was completed in 1994.

===Parliamentary Joint Committee inquiries ===
The Parliamentary Joint Committee completed several reviews and inquiries into ASIO during the 1990s. The first concerned the security assessment process. Another was held in September into &quot;the nature, scope and appropriateness of the way in which ASIO reports to the Australian public on its activities&quot;. The Committee concluded that &quot;the total package of information available to the Australian community about ASIO&#x27;s operations exceeds that available to citizens in other countries about their domestic intelligence agencies.&quot; Pursuant to this, recommendations were made regarding the ASIO website and other publicly accessible information.

=== Transfer to Home Affairs ===
In July 2018, then-Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull announced the creation of the Department of Home Affairs - a new ministry to include the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Border Force, and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. This meant the transfer of ASIO away from the Attorney-General&#x27;s Department, although the Attorney-General would remain responsible for approving ASIO warrants. This move was somewhat criticised, with John Blaxland from the Australian National University warning against tampering with a system that was &quot;arguably the envy of the world&quot;, saying &quot;I have yet to see any compelling evidence that what we have is not working, or that there is a compellingly better option out there.&quot;

In July 2024, it was reported that ASIO was to be moved back to its original setting within the Attorney-General&#x27;s Department. Under the new arrangement, the Department of Home Affairs retains responsibility for national security policy, its design and implementation, while operational control of ASIO shifts back to the Attorney-General&#x27;s Department.

==Criticisms and controversies==

=== Infiltration by Soviet spies ===
From the earliest years of ASIO&#x27;s existence, possibly from its inception, the organization has been infiltrated by Soviet spies. This was admitted by ASIO beginning in 2016, though other sources had made earlier allegations that Soviet spies had deeply infiltrated ASIO at nearly all levels of intelligence and operations.

===Raids on ASIO Central Office, 1973===

Accusations against ASIO were raised by the Attorney-General following a series of bombings from 1963 to 1970 on the consulate of Communist Yugoslavia in Australia by Croatian far-right militia. Attorney-General Lionel Murphy alleged that ASIO had withheld information on the group which could have led to preventative measures taken against further bomb attacks (however, Murphy was a member of the recently sworn-in Labor government, which still held a deep-seated suspicion of ASIO).

On 15 March 1973, Murphy and the Commonwealth Police raided the ASIO offices in Melbourne. While some claim the raid was disastrous, serving little purpose other than to shake-up both ASIO and the Whitlam government, the findings of such investigations were not published.

===The Sydney Hilton bombing allegations of conspiracy, 1978===

On 13 February 1978, the Sydney Hilton Hotel was bombed, one of the few domestic terrorist incidents on Australian soil. The Hotel was the location for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). Three people in the street were killed – two council workers and a policeman – and several others injured. Former police officer Terry Griffiths, who was injured in the explosion, provided some evidence that suggested ASIO might have orchestrated the bombing or been aware of the possibility and allowed it to proceed. In 1985, the Director-General of Security issued a specific denial of the allegation. In 1991 the New South Wales parliament unanimously called for a joint State-Federal inquiry into the bombing. However, the Federal government vetoed any inquiry.

===Anti-terrorism bungle, 2001 ===
A few weeks after the 11 September 2001 attacks on the United States, mistakes led ASIO to incorrectly raid the home of Bilal Daye and his wife. It has been revealed that the search warrant was for a different address. The couple subsequently sought damages and the embarrassing incident was settled out of court in late 2005, with all material relating to the case being declared strictly confidential.

===Kim Beazley-Ratih Hardjono investigation, 2004===
In June 2004, Kim Beazley was accused of having a &quot;special relationship&quot; with Ratih Hardjono when he was defence minister. Hardjono was allegedly accused of &quot;inappropriately&quot; photographing a secure Australian Defence facility, working with the embassy ID, and having a close working relationship with her uncle, a senior officer in BAKIN (Indonesian Intelligence). In July, journalist Greg Sheridan contacted the then head of ASIO, Dennis Richardson, and discussed a classified operational investigation. Later in July members of the Attorney General&#x27;s department were still investigating the original allegation, making Richardson&#x27;s comments premature and inaccurate. The whole episode was a salient reminder to politicians in Canberra of the British experience of &#x27;agents of influence&#x27; and honeypots. Ratih Hardjono was married to Bruce Grant in the 1990s.

===Detention and removal of Scott Parkin, 2005===
In September 2005, the visa of American citizen, Scott Parkin, was cancelled after Director-General of Security, Paul O&#x27;Sullivan, issued an adverse security assessment of the visiting peace activist. Parkin was detained in Melbourne and held in custody for five days before being escorted under guard to Los Angeles, where he was informed that he was required to pay the Australian Government A$11,700 for the cost of his detention and removal. Parkin challenged the adverse security assessment in the Federal Court in a joint civil action with two Iraqi refugees, Mohammed Sagar and Muhammad Faisal, who faced indefinite detention on the island of Nauru after also receiving adverse security assessments in 2005.

Prior to his removal, Parkin had given talks on the role of U.S. military contractor Halliburton in the Iraq war and led a small protest outside the Sydney headquarters of Halliburton subsidiary KBR. The Attorney-General at that time, Philip Ruddock, refused to explain the reasons for Parkin&#x27;s removal, leading to speculation that ASIO had acted under pressure from the United States. This was denied by O&#x27;Sullivan before a Senate committee, where he gave evidence that ASIO based its assessment only on Parkin&#x27;s activities in Australia. O&#x27;Sullivan refused to answer questions before a later Senate committee hearing after his legal counsel told the Federal Court that ASIO did not necessarily base its assessment solely on Parkin&#x27;s activities in Australia.

===Kidnap and false imprisonment of Izhar ul-Haque, 2007===
On 12 November 2007, the Supreme Court of New South Wales dismissed charges brought against a young medical student, Izhar ul-Haque. ASIO and the Australian Federal Police had investigated ul-Haque for allegedly training with Lashkar-e-Toiba in Pakistan, a declared terrorist organisation under the &quot;Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002&quot;. However, the case against the medical student collapsed when it was revealed that ASIO officers had engaged in improper conduct during the investigation. Justice Michael Adams determined that because ul-Haque was falsely led to believe that he was legally compelled to comply with the ASIO officers, the conduct of at least one of the investigating ASIO officers constituted false imprisonment and kidnap at common law, and therefore key evidence against ul-Haque was inadmissible.

==Archival material==
Non-current ASIO files are stored at the National Archives of Australia, and can be released to the public under the &quot;Archives Act 1983&quot; after 30 years, unless they fall into any of 16 exemption categories itemised in section 33 of the &quot;Archives Act&quot;.

==See also==

*Australian Federal Police (AFP)
* National Security Committee
*Australian Intelligence Community
** Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS)
** Australian Signals Directorate (ASD)
** Office of National Assessments (ONA)
** Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO)
** Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation (AGO)
* Oversight bodies
** Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security (PJCIS)
** Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS)
* Relevant legislation
** Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 (ASIO Act)
** Intelligence Services Act 2001 (ISA)
** Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004
*Overseas counterparts
** Canada: Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS)
** China: Chinese Ministry of State Security (MSS)
** New Zealand: New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS)
** UK: Security Service (MI5) and GCHQ
** US: National Security Branch of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (NSB/FBI)
** Russia: Federal Security Service (FSB)
** Japan: Japanese National Police Agency and Public Security Intelligence Agency (PSIA)

==References==
==Further reading==
* available from Digital Print, South Australia.
*McKnight, David. &quot;Australia&#x27;s Spies and Their Secrets&quot;. Allen &amp; Unwin, Sydney, 1994. .
*Fowler, Andrew: &quot;Trust and Betrayal&quot; (transcripts), &quot;Four Corners&quot; (ABC TV), 1 November 2004.

==External links==
*Website: ASIO Website
*PDF Document: Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 (Commonwealth)
*PDF Document: Statement of Procedures – warrants issued under Division 3 of Part III of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979.
*Open Australia Search: Parliamentary records mentioning ASIO.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="4" end="49" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="51" end="55" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="ASIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="65" end="86" title="Intelligence agency" label="domestic intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238445" start="100" end="115" title="security agency" label="security agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="123" end="148" title="Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="218" end="227" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="229" end="237" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000626" start="301" end="310" title="Terrorism in Australia" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="387" end="420" title="Australian Intelligence Community" label="Australian Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="478" end="483" title="human intelligence (intelligence gathering)" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="488" end="508" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="625" end="650" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="663" end="682" title="States and territories of Australia" label="state and territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="744" end="747" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="749" end="751" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="757" end="760" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="762" end="764" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="794" end="802" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="953" end="964" title="Ben Chifley" label="Ben Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="1049" end="1059" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824660" start="1186" end="1240" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="1267" end="1290" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="1303" end="1319" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138997" start="1346" end="1404" title="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security" label="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038339" start="1502" end="1548" title="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (Australia)" label="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280508" start="1574" end="1602" title="Director-General of Security" label="Director-General of Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q76440450" start="1744" end="1756" title="Mike Burgess (intelligence chief)" label="Mike Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="1997" end="2014" title="equal opportunity" label="equal opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="3685" end="3710" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="4937" end="4965" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="4973" end="4993" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="5077" end="5115" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="Australian Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138997" start="6115" end="6173" title="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security" label="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="6346" end="6364" title="Australian parliament" label="federal Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038339" start="6385" end="6431" title="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (Australia)" label="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="7088" end="7098" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7368" end="7379" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q392752" start="7582" end="7601" title="agents provocateurs" label="agents provocateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="7603" end="7615" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="7624" end="7633" title="saboteurs" label="saboteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8247" end="8259" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="8864" end="8892" title="Communist Party of Australia" label="Communist Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8895" end="8921" title="Robert Frederick Bird Wake" label="Robert Frederick Bird Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="9137" end="9154" title="counter espionage" label="counter espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q952813" start="9593" end="9606" title="Thomas Blamey" label="Thomas Blamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q696328" start="9858" end="9872" title="Venona project" label="Venona project"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="10000" end="10003" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10130" end="10136" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="10282" end="10293" title="Ben Chifley" label="Ben Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280508" start="10314" end="10342" title="Director-General of Security" label="Director-General of Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q356259" start="10357" end="10387" title="South Australian Supreme Court" label="South Australian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534856" start="10396" end="10409" title="Geoffrey Reed" label="Geoffrey Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280474" start="10458" end="10527" title="Directive for the Establishment and Maintenance of a Security Service" label="Directive for the Establishment and Maintenance of a Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="10651" end="10657" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="10672" end="10700" title="Communist Party of Australia" label="Communist Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="10936" end="10939" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439081" start="10979" end="10991" title="Roger Hollis" label="Roger Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10363193" start="11062" end="11074" title="Robert Manne" label="Robert Manne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="11312" end="11342" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="December 1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="11386" end="11400" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082603" start="11458" end="11470" title="Charles Spry" label="Charles Spry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086774" start="11662" end="11722" title="Charter of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization" label="Charter of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824660" start="11935" end="11989" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872316" start="12478" end="12491" title="Wally Clayton" label="Wally Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="12519" end="12545" title="Australian Communist Party" label="Australian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="12574" end="12604" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Australia)" label="Department of External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012660" start="12619" end="12629" title="Ian Milner" label="Ian Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="12733" end="12742" title="peacetime" label="peacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="12743" end="12752" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360751" start="12836" end="12864" title="Vladimir Mikhaylovich Petrov (diplomat)" label="Vladimir Mikhaylovich Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420727" start="13029" end="13032" title="Ministry for State Security (USSR)" label="MGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="13054" end="13057" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q753022" start="13075" end="13094" title="diplomatic immunity" label="diplomatic immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828624" start="13172" end="13190" title="Michael Bialoguski" label="Michael Bialoguski"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13420" end="13432" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q531349" start="13589" end="13599" title="safe house" label="safe house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192838" start="13784" end="13787" title="MVD" label="MVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148045" start="14223" end="14242" title="asylum in Australia" label="asylum in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192838" start="14379" end="14382" title="MVD" label="MVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249421" start="14876" end="14915" title="Administrator of the Northern Territory" label="Administrator of the Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="15046" end="15068" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388459" start="15142" end="15152" title="H.V. Evatt" label="H.V. Evatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="15220" end="15234" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623367" start="15414" end="15433" title="Soviet intelligence" label="Soviet intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="16348" end="16368" title="counter-intelligence" label="counter-intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="16404" end="16412" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="16593" end="16610" title="persona non-grata" label="persona non-grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911483" start="16963" end="16976" title="Valery Ivanov" label="Valery Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="17300" end="17303" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q137350" start="17304" end="17308" title="mole (espionage)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="17622" end="17636" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544217" start="17652" end="17664" title="George Sadil" label="George Sadil"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="17772" end="17792" title="classified information" label="classified documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185486" start="17905" end="17920" title="Crimes Act 1914" label="Crimes Act 1914"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18105" end="18136" title="Director of Public Prosecutions#Australia" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="18605" end="18619" title="Parole" label="good behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q938110" start="18800" end="18812" title="Oleg Kalugin" label="Oleg Kalugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="18830" end="18865" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475096" start="18879" end="18891" title="Four Corners (Australian TV program)" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="19236" end="19243" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855688" start="19248" end="19258" title="2000 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394273" start="19934" end="19951" title="threat assessment" label="threat assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466245" start="20252" end="20267" title="Martin Ferguson (politician)" label="Martin Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786119" start="20339" end="20362" title="Hazelwood Power Station" label="Hazelwood power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="20414" end="20421" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q518856" start="20782" end="20794" title="Nicola Roxon" label="Nicola Roxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="21003" end="21020" title="Australian Greens" label="Australian Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24598" start="21034" end="21043" title="Bob Brown" label="Bob Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q518856" start="21250" end="21262" title="Nicola Roxon" label="Nicola Roxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="21336" end="21342" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q108864859" start="21511" end="21534" title="Cyberwarfare by China" label="Chinese cyber espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650197" start="21550" end="21558" title="ABC News (Australia)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21572" end="21577" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q123274545" start="21629" end="21638" title="Sheri Yan" label="Sheri Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125348514" start="21643" end="21653" title="Roger Uren" label="Roger Uren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079272" start="21787" end="21817" title="Office of National Assessments" label="Office of National Assessments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738862" start="21980" end="22000" title="Agent of influence" label="influence operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="22018" end="22041" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653459" start="22067" end="22079" title="Liu Chaoying" label="Liu Chaoying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173778" start="22182" end="22194" title="Peter Dutton" label="Peter Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17578116" start="22201" end="22226" title="Minister for Home Affairs" label="Minister for Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503006" start="22596" end="22620" title="Law Council of Australia" label="Law Council of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="22664" end="22700" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="2020 Hong Kong national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="23031" end="23044" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007063" start="23080" end="23125" title="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security" label="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485366" start="23182" end="23201" title="Robert Marsden Hope" label="Justice Robert Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644956" start="23209" end="23241" title="Supreme Court of New South Wales" label="Supreme Court of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659970" start="24190" end="24211" title="Sydney Hilton bombing" label="Sydney Hilton bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394273" start="24519" end="24536" title="threat assessment" label="threat assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038339" start="25574" end="25620" title="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (Australia)" label="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="25996" end="26008" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079272" start="27679" end="27709" title="Office of National Assessments" label="Office of National Assessments"/>
<link wikidata="Q927550" start="28585" end="28601" title="Malcolm Turnbull" label="Malcolm Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071190" start="28632" end="28658" title="Department of Home Affairs (Australia)" label="Department of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="28691" end="28716" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000879" start="28722" end="28745" title="Australian Border Force" label="Australian Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044789" start="28848" end="28882" title="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department (Australia)" label="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="28897" end="28913" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="29031" end="29061" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044789" start="29404" end="29438" title="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department (Australia)" label="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071190" start="29471" end="29497" title="Department of Home Affairs (Australia)" label="Department of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044789" start="29635" end="29669" title="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department (Australia)" label="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="29863" end="29875" title="KGB" label="Soviet spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="30158" end="30174" title="Attorney-General" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153828" start="30635" end="30654" title="Commonwealth Police" label="Commonwealth Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="30973" end="30985" title="Hilton Hotel" label="Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247874" start="31097" end="31129" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="31564" end="31579" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="31675" end="31693" title="Government of Australia" label="Federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="31772" end="31797" title="11 September 2001 attacks" label="11 September 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q304561" start="32222" end="32233" title="Kim Beazley" label="Kim Beazley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295712" start="32296" end="32310" title="Ratih Hardjono" label="Ratih Hardjono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619338" start="32560" end="32565" title="State Intelligence Agency (Indonesia)" label="BAKIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606248" start="32613" end="32626" title="Greg Sheridan" label="Greg Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258898" start="32660" end="32677" title="Dennis Richardson (diplomat)" label="Dennis Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738862" start="33004" end="33035" title="Agent of influence" label="&amp;#x27;agents of influence&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33040" end="33049" title="Clandestine HUMINT asset recruiting#Sex, honeypots and recruitment" label="honeypots"/>
<link wikidata="Q73106287" start="33081" end="33092" title="Bruce Grant (writer)" label="Bruce Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="33181" end="33185" title="visa (document)" label="visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437007" start="33207" end="33219" title="Scott Parkin" label="Scott Parkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280508" start="33241" end="33269" title="Director-General of Security" label="Director-General of Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796190" start="33271" end="33291" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (diplomat)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893296" start="33728" end="33742" title="Mohammed Sagar" label="Mohammed Sagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932450" start="33747" end="33762" title="Muhammad Faisal" label="Muhammad Faisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="33812" end="33817" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="33963" end="33974" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q596499" start="34073" end="34076" title="KBR (company)" label="KBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379071" start="34113" end="34127" title="Philip Ruddock" label="Philip Ruddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644956" start="34748" end="34780" title="Supreme Court of New South Wales" label="Supreme Court of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="34869" end="34894" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q736955" start="34949" end="34964" title="Lashkar-e-Toiba" label="Lashkar-e-Toiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="34968" end="34976" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q694752" start="35462" end="35480" title="false imprisonment" label="false imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="35485" end="35491" title="kidnap" label="kidnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="35495" end="35505" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684918" start="35633" end="35663" title="National Archives of Australia" label="National Archives of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="35880" end="35905" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220534" start="35914" end="35941" title="National Security Committee (Australia)" label="National Security Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="35943" end="35976" title="Australian Intelligence Community" label="Australian Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="35980" end="36018" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="Australian Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="36029" end="36059" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="Australian Signals Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079272" start="36069" end="36099" title="Office of National Assessments" label="Office of National Assessments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021190" start="36109" end="36142" title="Defence Intelligence Organisation" label="Defence Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251198" start="36152" end="36199" title="Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138997" start="36228" end="36286" title="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security" label="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038339" start="36298" end="36344" title="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (Australia)" label="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824660" start="36378" end="36432" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043903" start="36447" end="36477" title="Intelligence Services Act 2001" label="Intelligence Services Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043906" start="36487" end="36527" title="Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004" label="Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032405" start="36562" end="36600" title="Canadian Security Intelligence Service" label="Canadian Security Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068951" start="36618" end="36652" title="Ministry of State Security (China)" label="Chinese Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195581" start="36675" end="36716" title="New Zealand Security Intelligence Service" label="New Zealand Security Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="36732" end="36748" title="MI5" label="Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="36759" end="36763" title="GCHQ" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424594" start="36771" end="36795" title="National Security Branch" label="National Security Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="36803" end="36834" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="36856" end="36880" title="Federal Security Service" label="Federal Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q154200" start="36897" end="36928" title="National Police Agency (Japan)" label="Japanese National Police Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346667" start="36933" end="36968" title="Public Security Intelligence Agency" label="Public Security Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475096" start="37237" end="37249" title="Four Corners (Australian TV program)" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="37257" end="37263" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37126" wikidata="Q181694" url="?curid=37126" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service">
<text>The Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS ) is the foreign intelligence agency of the Commonwealth of Australia, responsible for gathering, processing, and analysing national security information from around the world, primarily through the use of human intelligence. The service was formed in 1952, however its existence remained secret within much of the government and to the public until 1972. ASIS is a primary entity of the Australian Intelligence Community. 

ASIS is part of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) portfolio and has its headquarters in Canberra. Its director-general, currently Kerri Hartland, reports to the minister for foreign affairs. The service is comparable to the CIA (US) and MI6 (UK).

==History==
On 13 May 1952, in a meeting of the Executive Council, Prime Minister Robert Menzies established ASIS by executive order under s. 61 of the Australian constitution, appointing Alfred Deakin Brookes as the first director-general of ASIS. The existence of ASIS remained secret even within the Australian Government until 1972.

Its Charter of 15 December 1954 described ASIS&#x27;s role as &#x27;to obtain and distribute secret intelligence, and to plan for and conduct special operations as may be required&#x27;. ASIS was expressly required to &quot;operate outside Australian territory&quot;. A Ministerial Directive of 15 August 1958 indicated that its special operations role included conducting &quot;special political action&quot;. It also indicated that the organisation would come under the control and supervision of the Minister for External Affairs rather than the Minister for Defence. At the time, ASIS was substantially modelled on the United Kingdom&#x27;s Secret Intelligence Service, also known as MI6. ASIS was at one time referred to as MO9.

On 1 November 1972, the existence of ASIS was sensationally revealed by &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; which ran an exposé of recruitment of ASIS agents from Australian universities for espionage activities in Asia. Soon after &quot;The Australian Financial Review&quot; published a more in-depth piece on ASIS, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO), and the then Joint Intelligence Organisation (JIO), Defence Signals Division (DSD) and Office of National Assessments (ONA). It stated that &quot;[t]he ASIS role is to collect and disseminate facts only. It is not supposed to be in the analytical or policy advising business though this is clearly difficult to avoid at times&quot;. The Ministerial Statement of 1977 stated that the &quot;main function&quot; of ASIS was to &quot;obtain, by such means and subject to such conditions as are prescribed by the Government, foreign intelligence for the purpose of the protection or promotion of Australia or its interests&quot;.

On 21 August 1974, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam established the Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security (the first Hope Royal Commission, 1974–77) to investigate the country&#x27;s intelligence agencies. On 25 October 1977, Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser publicly announced the existence of ASIS and its functions on a recommendation of the Commission.

In 1992, two reports were prepared on ASIS by officers within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Office of National Assessments for the Secretaries Committee on Intelligence and Security (SCNS) and the National Security Committee (NSC). The Richardson Report in June examined the roles and relationships of the collection agencies (ASIO, ASIS and DSD) in the post-Cold War era. The Hollway Report in December examined shortfalls in Australia&#x27;s foreign intelligence collection. Both reports endorsed the structure and roles of the organisations and commended the performance of ASIS.

The &quot;Intelligence Services Act 2001&quot; (ISA) converted ASIS to a statutory body. The Act set out the functions of ASIS and the limits on those functions. Use of weapons by ASIS were prohibited (except for self-defence). Conduct of violent or para-military operations was also curtailed. The Act authorised the responsible minister to issue directions to the agency and required Ministerial authorisation for intelligence collection activities involving Australians, but limited the circumstances in which that could be done. The Act requires the responsible minister to make rules regulating the communication and retention of intelligence information concerning Australian persons, and provides for the establishment of a parliamentary oversight committee, then called the Parliamentary Joint Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD.

The &quot;Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004&quot; removed ISA prohibitions on ASIS operatives carrying firearms (but only for protection) and allows ASIS to work with foreign intelligence agencies such as the CIA or MI6 in the planning of paramilitary and violent operations provided ASIS is not involved in the execution of the operations.

==Royal Commissions examining ASIS==
Three Royal Commissions have examined, among other things, ASIS and its operations: in 1974 and 1983 (the Hope Royal Commissions), and in 1994 (the Samuels and Codd Royal Commission).

===First Hope Royal Commission===
On 21 August 1974, the Whitlam Government appointed Justice Robert Hope to conduct a Royal Commission into the structure of Australian security and intelligence services, the nature and scope of the intelligence required and the machinery for ministerial control, direction and coordination of the security services. The Hope Royal Commission delivered eight reports, four of which were tabled in Parliament on 5 May 1977 and 25 October 1977. Aside from the observation that ASIS was &quot;singularly well run and well managed&quot;, the report(s) on ASIS were not released. Results from the other reports included the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979, the establishment of the ONA and the passage of the &quot;Office of National Assessments Act 1977&quot;.

===Second Hope Royal Commission===
On 17 May 1983, the Hawke Government reappointed Justice Hope to conduct a second Royal Commission into Australia&#x27;s intelligence agencies. The inquiry was to examine progress in implementing the previous recommendations; arrangements for developing policies, assessing priorities and coordinating activities among the organisations; ministerial and parliamentary accountability; complaints procedures; financial oversight and the agencies&#x27; compliance with the law. As with the first Hope Royal Commission, the reports on ASIS and DSD, which included draft legislation on ASIS, were not made public.

===Samuels and Codd Royal Commission===
In response to a &quot;Four Corners&quot; TV program aired on 21 February 1994, the Minister for Foreign Affairs Gareth Evans announced on 23 February 1994 a &quot;root and branch&quot; review of ASIS. The Government appointed Justice Gordon Samuels and Mr Mike Codd to inquire into the effectiveness and suitability of existing arrangements for control and accountability, organisation and management, protection of sources and methods, and resolution of grievances and complaints. The Royal Commission reported in March 1995.

&quot;Four Corners&quot; reporter Ross Coulthart made allegations regarding intelligence held by ASIS on Australians. He claimed that &quot;ASIS secretly holds tens of thousands of files on Australian citizens, a database completely outside privacy laws&quot;. The allegation was investigated and denied by Samuels and Codd (see below), but the Minister did acknowledge that ASIS maintained files. The Minister said: &quot;ASIS does have some files, as one would expect in an organisation of that nature, even though its brief extends to activities outside the country rather than inside. They are essentially of an administrative nature.&quot; However, Samuels and Codd did find that certain grievances of the former officers were well founded. They appeared to support the officers&#x27; concerns regarding the grievance procedures:

Bearing in mind the context in which the members of ASIS work, it is not surprising that there should develop a culture which sets great store by faithfulness and stoicism and tends to elevate conformity to undue heights and to regard the exercise of authority rather than consultation as the managerial norm.

However, Samuels and Codd observed that the information published in the &quot;Four Corners&quot; program was &quot;skewed towards the false&quot;, that &quot;the level of factual accuracy about operational matters was not high&quot;, and, quoting an aphorism, that &quot;what was disturbing was not true and what was true was not disturbing&quot;. They concluded that the disclosure of the information was unnecessary and unjustifiable and had damaged the reputation of ASIS and Australia overseas. The commissioners stated that &quot;evidence presented to us of action and reaction in other countries satisfies us that the publication was damaging&quot;: They rejected any suggestion that ASIS was unaccountable or &quot;out of control&quot;. They said, &quot;its operational management is well structured and its tactical decisions are thoroughly considered and, in major instances, subject to external approval&quot;. They recommended that complaints regarding ASIS operations continue to be handled by the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) but that staff grievances be handled by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

In addition to their recommendations, Samuels and Codd put forward draft legislation to provide a statutory basis for ASIS and to protect various information from disclosure. The Samuels and Codd Bill, like the bulk of the reports, was not made public.

==Activities==
Since 2004, ASIS has been running anti-people smuggling operations inside countries such as Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Indonesia.

In 2013, intelligence provided by ASIS was crucial to the capture, after a 14-month manhunt, of a rogue soldier from the Afghan National Army, who had killed three Australian soldiers. The joint operation involved ASIS, AGO, the Defence Intelligence Organisation and Australian Signals Directorate, along with Britain&#x27;s MI6 and Special Air Service, the United States&#x27; CIA and National Security Agency, and Pakistan&#x27;s Inter-Services Intelligence.
In 2021, ASIS had deployed a small team to provide security and to help with the evacuation of Australian nationals and the nation&#x27;s informants during the Kabul airlift in Afghanistan.

==Controversies==

===ASIS in Chile 1973===
An ASIS station was established in Chile out of the Australian embassy in July 1971 at the request of the CIA and authorised by then Liberal Party Foreign Minister William McMahon. New Labor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was informed of the operation in February 1973 and signed a document ordering the closure of the operation several weeks later. On 1 July 1973, the ASIS station in Chile reported that it had shut down and destroyed all records. However, the last ASIS agent did not leave Chile until October 1973, one month after the CIA-backed 1973 Chilean coup d&#x27;état had brought down the Allende government. Two officers of ASIO were also based in Santiago, working as migration officers during this period. The incident was one of two that caused a confrontation between Whitlam and Bill Robertson, the director-general of ASIS, which culminated in Robertson&#x27;s sacking on 21 October 1975, with effect from 7 November, just four days before Whitlam&#x27;s own dismissal in the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis. Whitlam said Robertson had disobeyed instructions by delaying the closure of the ASIS station in Chile in 1973 and not informing Whitlam that ASIS had an active agent in East Timor in 1975. Robertson disputed the details in a personal statement lodged with the National Archives in 2009.

ASIS&#x27;s involvement in Chile was revealed in 1974 when Whitlam set up the First Hope Royal Commission to investigate Australia&#x27;s security services. Whitlam told parliament that &quot;when my government took office, Australian intelligence personnel were working as proxies of the CIA in destabilising the government of Chile&quot;. After the coup by Augusto Pinochet, Whitlam&#x27;s government created a special program for Chilean refugees to come to Australia. Under the program, about 6,000 Chileans came to Australia between 1974 and 1981 and hundreds more joined them as part of a family reunion program.

The National Archives of Australia holds documents related to ASIS operations to help the CIA undermine the government of Allende in the years 1971-1974. In 2021, the archives refused a request from Clinton Fernandes, professor of International and Political Studies at the University of New South Wales, to access records relating to ASIS operations in Chile. Heavily redacted versions of some documents were released to Fernandes in June 2021. The documents show that the ASIS base in Chile assisted the CIA&#x27;s destabilisation of Allende&#x27;s government by handling CIA-recruited Chilean assets and filing intelligence reports to CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. In November 2021, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) upheld the decision to reject Fernandes&#x27;s request for access to the documents. The AAT said the release of documents would &quot;cause damage to the security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth&quot;. Most of the AAT hearing was held behind closed doors, because Attorney-General Michaelia Cash issued a public interest certificate, suppressing the disclosure of evidence provided by ASIS, ASIO and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

===The Favaro affair===
During the lead-up to Indonesia&#x27;s invasion of East Timor in 1975, ASIS paid a Dili-based Australian businessman, Frank Favaro, for information on local political developments. The leaking of his identity in late 1975 was another factor in the confrontation between Whitlam and Robertson. Bill Robertson disputed the reason for his dismissal in documents lodged with the National Archives in 2009.

===The Sheraton Hotel incident===
On 30 November 1983, ASIS garnered unwanted negative attention when a training operation held at the Sheraton Hotel, now the Mercure (Spring Street), in Melbourne went wrong. The exercise was to be a mock surveillance and hostage rescue of foreign intelligence officers. In March 1983, ASIS had begun training a covert team of civilians at Swan Island in Victoria whose role was to protect or release Australians who may be threatened or captured by terrorists overseas. The military in 1981 had established a counter-terrorist unit for operations only in Australia. The personnel involved in the training operation included ten operators, four ASIS officers and six ASIS civilian trainees, and two commandos from the Army Reserve 1st Commando Regiment with a sergeant participating as an observer in the hotel foyer.

The training operation involved junior officers who had undergone three weeks&#x27; prior training and who were given considerable leeway in planning and executing the operation. The mock hostage rescue was staged on the 10th floor of the hotel without the permission of the hotel&#x27;s owner or staff. When ASIS operators were refused entry into a hotel room, they broke down the door with sledgehammers. The hotel manager, Nick Rice, was notified of a disturbance on the 10th floor by a hotel guest. When he went to investigate, he was forced back into the lift by an ASIS operator who rode the lift down to the ground floor and forcibly ejected Rice into the lobby. Believing a robbery was in progress, Rice called the police. When the lift started returning to the ground floor, ASIS operators emerged wearing masks and openly brandishing 9mm Browning pistols and Heckler &amp; Koch MP5 submachine guns, two of them with silencers. They forced their way through the lobby to the kitchen, where two getaway cars were waiting outside the kitchen door. Police stopped one of the cars and arrested the occupants – two ASIS officers and three ASIS civilian trainees – who refused to produce any form of identification.

Within two days, the minister for foreign affairs, Bill Hayden announced that an &quot;immediate and full&quot; investigation would be conducted under the auspices of the second Hope Royal Commission, which was still in progress. A report was prepared and tabled by February 1984. It described the exercise as being &quot;poorly planned, poorly supervised and poorly run&quot;, and recommended that measures be taken in training to improve planning and eliminate adverse impacts on the public.

Victoria Police conducted their own investigation but were frustrated because ASIS Director-General John Ryan refused to cooperate. Bill Hayden offered to provide the real names of the seven officers involved, in confidence. Premier of Victoria John Cain told Hayden that &quot;as far as the police were concerned, there was no such thing as information in confidence&quot;.

Following the incident, &quot;The Sunday Age&quot; disclosed the names, or the assumed names, of five of the operators involved. The journalist noted that &quot;according to legal advice taken by &quot;The Sunday Age&quot; there is no provision that prevents the naming of an ASIS agent&quot;. Although not included within the public version of the report, the Hope Royal Commission prepared an appendix that would appear to have dealt with the security and foreign relations consequences of &quot;The Sunday Age&quot;″s disclosure of participants&#x27; names. Subsequently, in &quot;A v Hayden&quot;, the High Court held that the Commonwealth owed no enforceable duty to ASIS officers to maintain confidentiality of their names or activities.

At the time of the Sheraton Hotel incident, the extant Ministerial Directive permitted ASIS to undertake &quot;covert action&quot;, including &quot;special operations&quot; which, roughly described, comprised &quot;unorthodox, possibly para-military activity, designed to be used in case of war or some other crisis&quot;. Following the incident and the recommendations of the Royal Commission, the covert action function was apparently abolished. The functions of ASIS can be found in section 6 of the Intelligence Services Act, as can those functions which are proscribed by the act.

Ultimately, in executing the operation, the operators were found to have used considerable force, menacing a number of the staff and guests with weapons and physically assaulting the hotel manager. Hope found Ryan to be at fault for authorising the training operation in a public place using concealed weapons. Ryan resigned in February 1984. Hope said it was not part of his terms of reference to make findings or recommendations on whether any individual had committed any offence. However, he did note that the individuals could potentially be prosecuted by the State of Victoria with a long list of criminal offences, including possession of firearms without a licence, possession of prohibited implements (including machine guns, silencers and housebreaking tools), aggravated burglary in possession of a firearm, common assault, wilful damage to property, possession of a disguise without lawful excuse and numerous motor vehicle offences. More than a year after the raid, the Victorian Director of Public Prosecutions concluded that while certain offences had been committed, including criminal damage and assault with a weapon, there was insufficient evidence to charge any person with a specific offence.

Victorian Holdings Ltd, the company managing the hotel, subsequently took legal action against the Commonwealth on behalf of itself and 14 hotel staff. The matter was settled out of court; the hotel was offered $300,000 in damages. The total payout to the hotel and staff was $365,400.

===Involvement in Papua New Guinea===
Between 1989 and 1991, ASIS came under scrutiny following allegations relating to its role and activities in Papua New Guinea. It was alleged that ASIS had been involved in training Papua New Guinean troops to suppress independence movements in Irian Jaya and Bougainville. In 1997 it was alleged that ASIS and DSD had failed to collect, or the Government had failed to act upon, intelligence regarding the role and presence of Sandline contractors in relation to the independence movement in Bougainville.

===&quot;Four Corners&quot; program===
Towards the end of 1993, ASIS became the subject of media attention after allegations were made by former ASIS officers that ASIS was unaccountable and out of control. The Sunday Telegraph alleged that &quot;ASIS regularly flouted laws, kept dossiers on Australian citizens ... and hounded agents out of the service with little explanation&quot;. In particular, it alleged that agents were being targeted in a purge by being threatened with criminal charges relating to their official conduct, reflecting a pattern which suggested to some that ASIS or a senior ASIS officer had been &quot;turned&quot; by a foreign intelligence service.

On 21 February 1994, &quot;Four Corners&quot; ran a program which aired the key allegations. Two former ASIS officers made claims regarding cultural and operational tensions between ASIS and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. They claimed that embassy staff had maliciously or negligently compromised activities involving the running of foreign informants and agents and the defection of foreign agents to Australia. They claimed that their grievances had been ignored and that they were &quot;deserted in the field&quot; and made scapegoats by ASIS. The officers and the reporter, Ross Coulthart, also made claims regarding operational activities and priorities: the officers claimed that ASIS advice had been ignored by DFAT and the reporter repeated claims regarding ASIS operations aimed at destabilising the Aquino Government in the Philippines. He also made claims regarding ASIS assistance to MI6 in the Falklands War, in Hong Kong and in Kuwait for the benefit of British interests, including commercial interests, and potentially to the detriment of Australian national interests. The bulk of the personal statements by the officers concerned their private grievances. They raised two issues of public interest regarding the effect of secrecy on the operation of grievance procedures and the extent to which the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade was aware of or in control of ASIS operations. The reporter directly raised the issue of the appropriateness of ASIS operations, particularly with respect to priority setting in overseas postings and operations, cooperation with foreign intelligence services, and the privacy of Australian persons and organisations. By implication, the program queried the extent to which ASIS was or should be accountable to the Minister, to Government and to Parliament.

The following day, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs called for an independent judicial inquiry into the allegations. He expressed particular concern about the nature of ASIS cooperation with foreign agencies and the defects in ASIS grievance procedures. He later called for the inquiry to examine the &quot;poisoned relationship between ASIS and DFAT&quot;. A Democrats spokesperson called for a standing parliamentary committee.

Two days after the program aired, the Samuels and Codd Royal Commission was convened by Minister for Foreign Affairs Gareth Evans.

===Ratih Hardjono, Bruce Grant and Gareth Evans===
On 19 February 2000, Singapore journalist Susan Sim accused Ratih Harjono of working for her uncle, a senior BAKIN (Indonesian intelligence service) intelligence officer while working for the President of Indonesia. Earlier in her career as a journalist, Ratih was married to Bruce Grant, who during this period was senior policy adviser to Gareth Evans, co-authoring the book, &quot;Australia&#x27;s foreign relations: in the world of the 1990s&quot;. Gareth Evans was responsible for ASIS from 1988 to 1996.

===Alleged management and staffing problems===
In 2005, &quot;The Bulletin&quot; ran an article based on allegations by serving ASIS officers that alluded to gross mismanagement of intelligence operations, staff assignments, and taskings, particularly with respect to the war on terrorism. The unnamed officers pointed out various problems within the agency that were plaguing the organisation&#x27;s ability to collect vital and timely intelligence. By this, they meant the recruitment of &quot;...young mostly white university educated agents with limited language skills and little knowledge of Islam against poor, zealous extremists intent on becoming suicide bombers&quot;, the &quot;inappropriate&quot; assignment of &quot;...young female IOs [intelligence officers] against Islamic targets...&quot;, in addition to poor staff retention rates, and general lack of officers possessing significant practical field experience. The officers also cited a lack of proper support given to intelligence officers tasked against terrorist targets, and the doctoring of intelligence by ASIS management, as also contributing to the lack of progress of the agency in the war on terrorism.
===Australia–East Timor spying scandal===

It was revealed in 2013 that ASIS planted devices to listen to the East Timorese government during negotiations over the Greater Sunrise oil and gasfields.

==See also==
*Australian intelligence agencies

==Notes==
===References===
*
==Credit==
A large portion of the history of ASIS in this article was adapted from the Parliament of Australia Bills Digest No. 11 of 2001–02 of Intelligence Services Act 2001.

==External links==
*ASIS home page 
*Open Australia Search: Parliamentary records mentioning ASIS.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="4" end="42" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="Australian Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="44" end="48" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="ASIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="66" end="85" title="intelligence agency" label="intelligence agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="93" end="118" title="Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="173" end="190" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="255" end="273" title="Human intelligence (intelligence gathering)" label="human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="437" end="470" title="Australian Intelligence Community" label="Australian Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="494" end="533" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="579" end="587" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280509" start="593" end="609" title="Director-General of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="director-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q105302857" start="621" end="635" title="Kerri Hartland" label="Kerri Hartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="652" end="680" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="minister for foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="715" end="718" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="720" end="722" title="United States of America" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="728" end="731" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="733" end="735" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988632" start="787" end="804" title="Federal Executive Council (Australia)" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="806" end="820" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="821" end="835" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795484" start="856" end="871" title="Statutory instrument" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="891" end="914" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Australian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722526" start="927" end="948" title="Alfred Deakin Brookes" label="Alfred Deakin Brookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="1580" end="1609" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="1626" end="1646" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="1890" end="1909" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809545" start="2046" end="2077" title="The Australian Financial Review" label="The Australian Financial Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="2129" end="2174" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269258" start="2196" end="2227" title="Joint Intelligence Organisation (Australia)" label="Joint Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="2235" end="2259" title="Defence Signals Division" label="Defence Signals Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079272" start="2270" end="2300" title="Office of National Assessments" label="Office of National Assessments"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="2843" end="2856" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007063" start="2873" end="2918" title="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security" label="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485366" start="2930" end="2934" title="Robert Marsden Hope" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="3054" end="3068" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191489" start="3234" end="3274" title="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Australia)" label="Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3322" end="3372" title="National Security Committee#Secretaries Committee on National Security" label="Secretaries Committee on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220534" start="3388" end="3415" title="National Security Committee (Australia)" label="National Security Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3427" end="3444" title="Richardson Report" label="Richardson Report"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3568" end="3582" title="Hollway Report" label="Hollway Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043903" start="3785" end="3815" title="Intelligence Services Act 2001" label="Intelligence Services Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138997" start="4557" end="4608" title="Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security" label="Parliamentary Joint Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043906" start="4621" end="4661" title="Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004" label="Intelligence Services Amendment Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="4857" end="4869" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="5003" end="5019" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="5145" end="5178" title="Samuels and Codd Royal Commission" label="Samuels and Codd Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485366" start="5276" end="5287" title="Robert Marsden Hope" label="Robert Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824660" start="5835" end="5889" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5949" end="5988" title="Office of National Assessments Act 1977" label="Office of National Assessments Act 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="6052" end="6068" title="Bob Hawke" label="Hawke Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475096" start="6705" end="6717" title="Four Corners (Australian TV program)" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q381902" start="6795" end="6807" title="Gareth Evans (politician)" label="Gareth Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585785" start="6917" end="6931" title="Gordon Samuels" label="Gordon Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105057" start="6939" end="6948" title="Mike Codd" label="Mike Codd"/>
<link wikidata="Q119152471" start="7245" end="7259" title="Ross Coulthart" label="Ross Coulthart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038339" start="9369" end="9415" title="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (Australia)" label="Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057825" start="9467" end="9498" title="Administrative Appeals Tribunal" label="Administrative Appeals Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9804" end="9825" title="People smuggling#Law enforcement and discouragement" label="anti-people smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="10019" end="10039" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251198" start="10118" end="10121" title="Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation" label="AGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021190" start="10127" end="10160" title="Defence Intelligence Organisation" label="Defence Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="10165" end="10195" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="Australian Signals Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="10223" end="10226" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="10231" end="10250" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="10284" end="10308" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="10330" end="10357" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="10497" end="10507" title="Informant" label="informants"/>
<link wikidata="Q108274219" start="10519" end="10547" title="2021 Kabul airlift" label="Kabul airlift in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="10758" end="10773" title="William McMahon" label="William McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="11142" end="11171" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="11193" end="11200" title="Salvador Allende" label="Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910666" start="11389" end="11403" title="Bill Robertson (Australian intelligence officer)" label="Bill Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="11587" end="11624" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 Australian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007063" start="11993" end="12020" title="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security" label="First Hope Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="12274" end="12290" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684918" start="12539" end="12569" title="National Archives of Australia" label="National Archives of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="12625" end="12628" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26527171" start="12734" end="12751" title="Clinton Fernandes" label="Clinton Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="12809" end="12838" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q523606" start="13193" end="13210" title="Langley, Virginia" label="Langley, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057825" start="13234" end="13265" title="Administrative Appeals Tribunal" label="Administrative Appeals Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="13560" end="13576" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q572783" start="13577" end="13591" title="Michaelia Cash" label="Michaelia Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="13687" end="13691" title="ASIO" label="ASIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="13700" end="13739" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190997" start="13788" end="13827" title="Australia and the Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s invasion of East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653455" start="14543" end="14554" title="Swan Island (Victoria)" label="Swan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596277" start="14934" end="14955" title="1st Commando Regiment (Australia)" label="1st Commando Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="15582" end="15586" title="elevator" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q248874" start="15866" end="15878" title="Browning Hi-Power" label="9mm Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q155901" start="15891" end="15913" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5"/>
<link wikidata="Q250087" start="16293" end="16304" title="Bill Hayden" label="Bill Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406658" start="16737" end="16752" title="Victoria Police" label="Victoria Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050739" start="16837" end="16846" title="John Ryan (diplomat)" label="John Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="16962" end="16981" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091741" start="16982" end="16991" title="John Cain II" label="John Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="17143" end="17157" title="The Sunday Age" label="The Sunday Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="20094" end="20110" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="20230" end="20240" title="Irian Jaya" label="Irian Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18826" start="20245" end="20257" title="Bougainville Province" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932556" start="20413" end="20421" title="Sandline" label="Sandline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241093" start="21993" end="22010" title="Presidency of Corazon Aquino" label="Aquino Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="22091" end="22104" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="22126" end="22132" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055084" start="23021" end="23056" title="Shadow Cabinet of Australia" label="Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q781392" start="23365" end="23374" title="Australian Democrats" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619338" start="23735" end="23766" title="State Intelligence Agency (Indonesia)" label="Indonesian intelligence service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025604" start="24192" end="24204" title="The Bulletin (Australian periodical)" label="The Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939410" start="24957" end="24972" title="Employee retention" label="staff retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="25422" end="25432" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="25526" end="25558" title="Australian intelligence agencies" label="Australian intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043903" start="25734" end="25764" title="Intelligence Services Act 2001" label="Intelligence Services Act 2001"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37127" wikidata="Q267707" url="?curid=37127" title="Australian Signals Directorate">
<text>The Australian Signals Directorate (ASD), formerly the Defence Signals Directorate, is a statutory agency of the Government of Australia responsible for signals intelligence, providing intelligence support to Australian military operations, conducting cyberwarfare and ensuring information security. The ASD is a part of the larger Australian Intelligence Community, and its role within the so-called Five Eyes intelligence-sharing alliance is to monitor signals intelligence in South and East Asia. The Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) is an agency within the ASD.

The unit was established in 1947 by executive order as the Defence Signals Bureau within the Department of Defence, and underwent several name changes until its current name ASD was adopted in 2013. ASD was converted to a statutory body by the &quot;Intelligence Services Act 2001&quot;. ASD is based in Canberra, at the Defence Department Headquarters at Russell Offices. As of February 2020, Rachel Noble is the Director-General of ASD, replacing Mike Burgess, who was appointed Director-General of Security in September 2019.

In April 2018, a proposal to empower ASD to collect intelligence on Australians was backed by former Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton, but was strongly opposed by some in Cabinet who argued it was not necessary. Under legislation, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) and the Australian Federal Police (AFP) are already allowed to seek assistance from ASD in conducting investigations on Australian citizens and businesses.

==History==
The Directorate has operated under a number of different names since its founding:

* 1947 – Defence Signals Bureau established within the Department of Defence
* 1949 – name changed to Defence Signals Branch
* 1964 – name changed to Defence Signals Division
* 1977 – name changed to Defence Signals Directorate on recommendation of the Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security (Hope Commission)
* 2013 – name changed to Australian Signals Directorate

ASD commissioned an official history in 2019, which will cover the organisation&#x27;s history from its establishment to 2001.

==Roles and responsibilities==
The principal functions of ASD are to collect and disseminate foreign signals intelligence (SIGINT) and to provide information security products and services to the Australian Government and Australian Defence Force (ADF), its foreign partners and militaries.

ASD operates at least three receiving stations: 
* the Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station (ADSCS), located at Kojarena, near Geraldton, Western Australia,
* the Shoal Bay Receiving Station, located at Shoal Bay, Northern Territory, and 
* a small station on the Cocos (Keeling) Islands.

ASD also maintains a workforce at Pine Gap in central Australia.

ADSCS and Shoal Bay are part of the United States signals intelligence and ECHELON analysis network. These stations also contribute signals intelligence for many Australian Government bodies, as well as the other UKUSA partners.

Electronic warfare operators in the Royal Australian Corps of Signals work closely with ASD. 7 Signal Regiment (Electronic Warfare) at Borneo Barracks, , Queensland is also associated with ASD..

In addition, it has been reported that many Australian embassies and overseas missions also house small facilities which provide a flow of signals intelligence to ASD.

===UKUSA Agreement (Five Eyes)===

Australia joined the UKUSA Agreement in 1948, a multilateral agreement for cooperation in signals intelligence between Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The alliance is also known as the Five Eyes. Other countries, known as &quot;third parties&quot;, such as West Germany, the Philippines, and several Nordic countries also joined the UKUSA community. As the Agreement was a secret treaty, its existence was not even disclosed to the Australian Prime Minister until 1973, when Gough Whitlam insisted on seeing it. The existence of the UKUSA Agreement was discovered by the Australian government during the 1973 Murphy raids on the headquarters of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO). After learning about the agreement, Whitlam discovered that Pine Gap, a secret surveillance station close to Alice Springs, Australia, had been operated by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Pine Gap is now operated jointly by both Australia and the United States.

The existence of the Agreement was not disclosed to the public until 2005. On 25 June 2010, for the first time, the full text of the agreement was publicly released by the United Kingdom and the United States, and can now be viewed online. Under the agreement, ASD&#x27;s intelligence is shared with UKUSA signals intelligence partner agencies: 
* the National Security Agency (NSA)United States, 
* the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ)United Kingdom, 
* the Communications Security Establishment (CSE)Canada, and 
* the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB)New Zealand.

==Organisational structure==
The Australian Signals Directorate is led by a Director-General and a Principal Deputy Director-General who oversee strategy. The ASD also comprises the Australian Cyber Security Centre, a Signals Intelligence and Network Operations Group, and a Corporate and Capability Group.

===SIGINT and Network Operations Group===
The Signals Intelligence and Network Operations Group is responsible for signals intelligence collection, analysis and production, and ASD&#x27;s network based access and effects operations. The Group comprises an Intelligence Division and a Network Operations and Access Division responsible for foreign signals intelligence and offensive cyber operations.

===Defence SIGINT and Cyber Command===
The Defence Signals-Intelligence (SIGINT) and Cyber Command (DSCC) was established in January 2018 by the Chief of the Defence Force consolidating all ADF personnel within the ASD within the Joint Cyber Unit and Joint SIGINT Unit. The Commander of the DSCC is responsible to the Head of Information Warfare under the Chief of Joint Capabilities to the Chief of the Defence Force.

== Leadership ==
=== Director/Director-General ===
==See also==

* Australian Intelligence Community
* Defence Signal Intelligence and Cyber Command
*List of intelligence agencies
* Espionage
* ECHELON

==References==
===Sources===

==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="4" end="34" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="Australian Signals Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="36" end="39" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="ASD"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="55" end="82" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="Defence Signals Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604698" start="89" end="105" title="Statutory body" label="statutory agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="113" end="136" title="Australian Government" label="Government of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="153" end="173" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="252" end="264" title="cyberwarfare" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189900" start="278" end="298" title="information security" label="information security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="332" end="365" title="Australian Intelligence Community" label="Australian Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978258" start="401" end="410" title="Five Eyes" label="Five Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113801" start="504" end="536" title="Australian Cyber Security Centre" label="Australian Cyber Security Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795484" start="610" end="625" title="Statutory Instrument" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q267707" start="633" end="655" title="Australian Signals Directorate" label="Defence Signals Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981744" start="667" end="688" title="Department of Defence (Australia)" label="Department of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043903" start="824" end="854" title="Intelligence Services Act 2001" label="Intelligence Services Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="878" end="886" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453492" start="930" end="945" title="Russell Offices" label="Russell Offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q76440450" start="1023" end="1035" title="Mike Burgess (intelligence chief)" label="Mike Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280508" start="1055" end="1083" title="Director-General of Security" label="Director-General of Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865868" start="1205" end="1230" title="Minister for Home Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173778" start="1231" end="1243" title="Peter Dutton" label="Peter Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="1345" end="1390" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="1406" end="1431" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007063" start="1904" end="1949" title="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security" label="Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368745" start="2045" end="2061" title="official history" label="official history"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="2375" end="2399" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824079" start="2500" end="2551" title="Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station" label="Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="2587" end="2596" title="Geraldton" label="Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="2598" end="2615" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499723" start="2623" end="2650" title="Shoal Bay Receiving Station" label="Shoal Bay Receiving Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q29197572" start="2663" end="2692" title="Shoal Bay, Northern Territory" label="Shoal Bay, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="2724" end="2747" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754535" start="2784" end="2792" title="Pine Gap" label="Pine Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="2866" end="2886" title="SIGINT" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217386" start="2891" end="2898" title="ECHELON" label="ECHELON"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="3046" end="3064" title="Electronic warfare" label="Electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373746" start="3082" end="3115" title="Royal Australian Corps of Signals" label="Royal Australian Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824695" start="3139" end="3177" title="7th Signal Regiment (Australia)" label="7 Signal Regiment (Electronic Warfare)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="3200" end="3210" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197115" start="3467" end="3482" title="UKUSA Agreement" label="UKUSA Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="3536" end="3556" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3565" end="3574" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3576" end="3582" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3584" end="3595" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3601" end="3615" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3625" end="3638" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978258" start="3674" end="3683" title="Five Eyes" label="Five Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3746" end="3758" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="3789" end="3805" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="3921" end="3946" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Australian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="3964" end="3977" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826585" start="4093" end="4110" title="1973 Murphy raids" label="1973 Murphy raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="4138" end="4183" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754535" start="4252" end="4260" title="Pine Gap" label="Pine Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4357" end="4384" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="4773" end="4793" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="4819" end="4843" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="4871" end="4909" title="Government Communications Headquarters" label="Government Communications Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q597935" start="4939" end="4976" title="Communications Security Establishment" label="Communications Security Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q382463" start="5001" end="5042" title="Government Communications Security Bureau" label="Government Communications Security Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113801" start="5245" end="5277" title="Australian Cyber Security Centre" label="Australian Cyber Security Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985706" start="5917" end="5943" title="Chief of the Defence Force (Australia)" label="Chief of the Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055589" start="6128" end="6155" title="Chief of Joint Capabilities" label="Chief of Joint Capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985706" start="6163" end="6189" title="Chief of the Defence Force (Australia)" label="Chief of the Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388246" start="6259" end="6292" title="Australian Intelligence Community" label="Australian Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6295" end="6340" title="#Defence_SIGINT_and_Cyber_Command" label="Defence Signal Intelligence and Cyber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369460" start="6342" end="6371" title="List of intelligence agencies" label="List of intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="6374" end="6383" title="Espionage" label="Espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q217386" start="6386" end="6393" title="ECHELON" label="ECHELON"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37129" wikidata="Q160119" url="?curid=37129" title="Darkthrone">
<text>Darkthrone is a Norwegian black metal band hailing from Kolbotn, Akershus. Formed in 1986 as a death metal band named Black Death, in 1991, Darkthrone transitioned to a black metal style influenced by Bathory and Celtic Frost and emerged as one of the leading bands in the Norwegian black metal scene. 

Their first three black metal albums — &quot;A Blaze in the Northern Sky&quot; (1992), &quot;Under a Funeral Moon&quot; (1993), and &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot; (1994) — are frequently referred to as the &quot;Unholy Trinity.&quot; These albums are regarded as the epitome of the band&#x27;s career and among the most influential releases in the black metal genre.

Darkthrone has been a duo consisting of Fenriz and Nocturno Culto since guitarist Zephyrous departed from the band in 1993. While they have aimed to remain outside the mainstream music scene, in recent years they have collaborated with the National Library of Norway for exhibitions focused on Norwegian cultural history and black metal. Since 2006, Darkthrone&#x27;s music has diverged from traditional black metal, incorporating more elements of classic heavy metal, punk, and speed metal, while their more recent albums have also incorporated elements of doom metal.

==History== 
===Death metal years: 1986–1991=== 
The band that would eventually become Darkthrone formed in late 1986 in Kolbotn, a small town south of Oslo. Originally known as Black Death, they were a death metal band composed of members Gylve Nagell, Ivar Enger, and Anders Risberget. Their primary inspirations included Autopsy, Venom, Hellhammer, Celtic Frost, Slayer, and Nocturnus. In late 1987, the band changed their name to Darkthrone and welcomed Dag Nilsen as a new member. Ted Skjellum joined in the spring of 1988. During 1988 and 1989, the band independently released four demo tapes: &quot;Land of Frost&quot;, &quot;A New Dimension&quot;, &quot;Thulcandra&quot;, and &quot;Cromlech&quot;.

Subsequently, they signed a four-album contract with the independent record label Peaceville Records. In 1990, they recorded their debut studio album, &quot;Soulside Journey&quot;. Due to a limited recording budget, the band was unable to secure the studio they desired. However, thanks to the support of members from Nihilist and Entombed, they were able to record their album at Sunlight Studios. Although primarily a death metal record, it featured elements of black metal in terms of artwork and songwriting.

Following the release of this album, the band continued writing and recording new material, working on tape until a complete album was ready. These tracks were entirely instrumental, showcasing the band&#x27;s gradual shift toward black metal. In 1996, the completed album &quot;Goatlord&quot; was released, featuring vocals added by Fenriz.

===Black metal years=== 
====Early black metal years: 1991–1994==== 
In 1991, influenced by Euronymous of Mayhem, Darkthrone adopted the aesthetic that would come to symbolize the black metal scene, donning corpse paint and working under pseudonyms. Gylve Nagell became &quot;Fenriz,&quot; Ted Skjellum became &quot;Nocturno Culto,&quot; and Ivar Enger adopted the name &quot;Zephyrous.&quot; In August 1991, they recorded their second album, which was released in early 1992 and titled &quot;A Blaze in the Northern Sky&quot;. This album featured Darkthrone&#x27;s first black metal recordings, although Peaceville Records was initially skeptical about releasing it due to the band&#x27;s drastic shift from their original death metal style. After the album was recorded, bassist Dag Nilsen left the band, stating that he did not wish to play black metal; he is credited only as &quot;session bass&quot; and does not appear in any photographs on the album.

The band&#x27;s third album, &quot;Under a Funeral Moon&quot;, was recorded in the summer of 1992 and released in early 1993. It marked Darkthrone&#x27;s complete transition to the black metal style and is considered a landmark in the development of the genre as a whole. This album also represented the last collaboration with guitarist Zephyrous.

Following this, their fourth album, &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot;, was released in February 1994. This marked the first album to feature only two members, Nocturno Culto and Fenriz. Fenriz was credited with all instrumentation and songwriting, while Nocturno Culto contributed solely vocals. From this point forward, the band would operate as a duo. &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot; was characterized by a raw or low-fidelity recording style, featuring monotone riffing with minimal melody. The album&#x27;s release sparked some controversy, as half of its lyrics were penned by the Norwegian black metal musician Varg Vikernes, and the booklet contained the phrase &quot;Norsk Arisk Black Metal,&quot; which translates to &quot;Norwegian Aryan Black Metal&quot; in English.

====With Moonfog Records: 1995–2004==== 
Darkthrone transitioned to another independent record label, Moonfog Productions, for their subsequent releases. This label was run by Satyr of Satyricon. 

Their fifth album, &quot;Panzerfaust&quot;, was released in 1995. Its production closely resembled that of &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot;, with Fenriz credited for all instrumentation and songwriting, while Nocturno Culto contributed solely vocals. The lyrics for the track &quot;Quintessence&quot; were written by Varg Vikernes. Their sixth album, &quot;Total Death&quot;, was released in 1996 and is notable for featuring lyrics penned by four other black metal musicians, with none written by the band&#x27;s primary lyricist, Fenriz.

During the years 1993–1995, drummer Fenriz was involved in numerous side projects. This included his solo dark ambient project Neptune Towers, his solo folk black metal project Isengard, recording an album with Satyr as part of the trio Storm, and playing bass on Dødheimsgard&#x27;s debut album. Additionally, he resumed playing drums for Valhall, having been one of the founding members in 1988 before leaving in 1990 to focus on Darkthrone.

On 6 April 1996, Easter Eve, Darkthrone played their last live gig at &quot;A Night of Unholy Black Metal&quot; in a sold-out Rockefeller in Oslo.

In 1999, Darkthrone released the album &quot;Ravishing Grimness&quot;, followed by their next album, &quot;Plaguewielder&quot;, in 2001. While &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot; and &quot;Panzerfaust&quot; featured songs exclusively written by Fenriz, these two albums contained tracks predominantly composed by Nocturno Culto and were both recorded at Ronny Le Tekrøe&#x27;s studio in Toten, Norway. This accounts for the somewhat &quot;clearer&quot; sound on those records.

In the latter part of the 1990s, two tribute albums dedicated to Darkthrone were released: &quot;Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone&quot; in 1998 and &quot;The Next Thousand Years Are Ours&quot; in 1999. The band also released &quot;Preparing for War&quot;, a compilation featuring songs from 1988 to 1994. In 2002, the intro of their song &quot;Kathaarian Life Code&quot; was included in the final scene of the film &quot;Demonlover&quot;.

In 2003, the band launched the album &quot;Hate Them&quot;. Although this record and the following one incorporate electronic introductions, they remain faithful to Darkthrone&#x27;s early black metal style. &quot;Sardonic Wrath&quot; was released in 2004, marking the band&#x27;s last album with Moonfog Productions and their final work recorded exclusively in the black metal style. This album received a nomination for Norway&#x27;s Alarm Awards; however, the entry was withdrawn at the band&#x27;s request. Their subsequent releases would exhibit strong crust punk influences.

===Punk-influenced years: 2005–2010=== 
In 2005, Darkthrone announced their return to Peaceville Records after departing from the label in 1994. They also launched their own record label, Tyrant Syndicate Productions, to release their future albums. To commemorate their return, Peaceville reissued the &quot;Preparing for War&quot; compilation, which included a bonus CD of demos and a DVD of live performances. Additionally, Darkthrone&#x27;s first four albums were re-released with video interviews about each.

In January 2006, the group released the EP &quot;Too Old, Too Cold&quot;, featuring the track &quot;High on Cold War,&quot; performed by Enslaved&#x27;s vocalist Grutle Kjellson. The EP also included a cover of &quot;Love in a Void&quot; by Siouxsie and the Banshees. For the first time in their career, the band produced a music video for the EP&#x27;s title track. &quot;Too Old, Too Cold&quot; also marked Darkthrone&#x27;s first record to chart, reaching the top 15 of the best-selling singles in Norway and Denmark. That same year, Darkthrone released their eleventh album, &quot;The Cult Is Alive&quot;. This album marked a stylistic shift, incorporating crust punk elements. While Darkthrone&#x27;s black metal roots remained evident, their departure from the genre&#x27;s typical sound was increasingly pronounced. &quot;The Cult Is Alive&quot; was the first Darkthrone album to enter the album chart in Norway, debuting at number 22.

In July 2007, the band released the EP &quot;NWOBHM&quot; (an acronym for &#x27;New Wave of Black Heavy Metal&#x27;, a play on the original &#x27;New Wave of British Heavy Metal&#x27;) as a preview of their next album. In September of that year, Darkthrone released &quot;F.O.A.D.&quot; (an acronym for &quot;Fuck Off and Die&quot;). This phrase was frequently employed by numerous thrash metal and punk bands during the 1980s. While the music continued the punk-oriented style introduced on &quot;The Cult Is Alive&quot;, this time the band placed greater emphasis on traditional heavy metal.

Also in 2007, Nocturno Culto completed and released &quot;The Misanthrope&quot;, a film exploring black metal and life in Norway. The film includes some of his own solo recordings. In October 2008, &quot;Dark Thrones and Black Flags&quot; was released, following a style similar to that of the previous album. In 2010, the band released &quot;Circle the Wagons&quot;, which showcased significantly fewer crust punk elements in favor of strong speed metal and traditional heavy metal characteristics.

===2010 to present=== 
In late 2010, Peaceville acquired the rights to the band&#x27;s Moonfog albums and reissued &quot;Panzerfaust&quot; as a two-disc set and on vinyl. The reissue of &quot;Total Death&quot; was scheduled for 14 March 2011. In July 2012, Darkthrone announced a new album titled &quot;The Underground Resistance&quot;, which was released on 25 February 2013. This album marked a complete departure from black metal and blackened crust, musically returning to classic heavy metal and speed metal. The band released their 16th studio album, titled &quot;Arctic Thunder&quot;, on 14 October 2016. This album represented another significant musical shift for the band, featuring a rawer, more blackened sound reminiscent of their 1990s output, but with the classic metal influences of the previous record.

On 22 October 2016, the band announced via Facebook that they would be releasing a compilation album entitled &quot;The Wind of 666 Black Hearts&quot;. Released on 25 November 2016, the album comprises rehearsals recorded in 1991 and 1992 for songs that later appeared on &quot;A Blaze in the Northern Sky&quot; and &quot;Under a Funeral Moon&quot;.

In March 2019, Darkthrone announced the release of their seventeenth studio album, &quot;Old Star&quot;, which came out on 31 May of the same year. The album featured a stronger emphasis on doom metal characteristics than previous releases, with their Candlemass influences becoming more apparent. In January 2021, the band announced they had completed the recording of a new album. In April 2021, a box set containing early and rare material titled &quot;Shadows of Iconoclasm&quot; was unveiled. The band&#x27;s eighteenth studio album, &quot;Eternal Hails...&quot;, was released on 25 June 2021, through Peaceville Records on physical media and digital platforms. Musically, the album continues the band&#x27;s incorporation of traditional doom metal, heavily influenced by Candlemass, alongside inspiration from other bands such as Trouble and Black Sabbath. The band&#x27;s nineteenth album, &quot;Astral Fortress&quot;, was released on 28 October 2022. The band&#x27;s twentieth album, &quot;It Beckons Us All...&quot;, was released on 26 April 2024. It was recorded in April and May of 2023 at Chaka Khan Studio in Oslo.

== Band members ==

=== Current ===
* Fenriz (Gylve Fenris Nagell) – drums, guitars, bass, keyboards, vocals, lyrics (1986–present)
* Nocturno Culto (Ted Skjellum) – vocals, guitars, bass, keyboards, lyrics (1988–present)

=== Former ===
* Zephyrous (Ivar Enger) – guitars (1986–1993)
* Anders Risberget – guitars (1986–1988)
* Dag Nilsen – bass (1988–1991)

===Timeline===
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Demos===
* 1988 – &quot;Land of Frost&quot;
* 1988 – &quot;A New Dimension&quot; - rehearsal demo
* 1989 – &quot;Thulcandra&quot;
* 1989 – &quot;Cromlech&quot; - live demo

===EPs and singles===
* 2005 – &quot;Under Beskyttelse av Mørke&quot; – outtakes from the &quot;Under a Funeral Moon&quot; rehearsal sessions; released only in Japan.
* 2006 – &quot;Too Old, Too Cold&quot; – outtakes from &quot;The Cult Is Alive&quot; recording sessions.
* 2006 – &quot;Forebyggende Krig&quot; – single.
* 2007 – &quot;NWOBHM&quot; – outtakes from the &quot;F.O.A.D.&quot; recording sessions.
* 2013 – &quot;Leave No Cross Unturned&quot; (Edit) – single.
* 2017 – &quot;Burial Bliss / Visual Aggression&quot; – single.
* 2019 – &quot;The Hardship of the Scots&quot; – single.
* 2021 – &quot;Hate Cloak&quot; – single.

===Compilations and tribute albums===
* 1998 – &quot;Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone&quot; – tribute album featuring eight Norwegian bands.
* 1999 – &quot;The Next Thousand Years Are Ours&quot; – tribute album featuring fourteen bands and a multimedia disc.
* 2000 – &quot;Preparing for War&quot; – compilation of songs from 1988–1994; re-released in 2005 with a bonus CD of demos and a DVD.
* 2008 – &quot;Frostland Tapes&quot; – compilation containing the band&#x27;s early demos (&quot;Land of Frost&quot;, &quot;A New Dimension&quot;, &quot;Thulcandra&quot;, &quot;Cromlech&quot;), the original instrumental version of &quot;Goatlord&quot;, and a recording of a concert in Denmark.
* 2011 – &quot;Sempiternal Past – The Darkthrone Demos&quot; – re-mastered versions of Darkthrone&#x27;s demos (including bonus tracks).
* 2013 – &quot;Introducing Darkthrone&quot; – eighteen-song album containing Darkthrone songs from past albums and singles.
* 2013 – &quot;Peaceville Presents... Darkthrone&quot;.
* 2014 – &quot;Black Death and Beyond&quot; – compilation released as a vinyl box set and book.
* 2016 – &quot;The Wind of 666 Black Hearts&quot; – compilation of demos from 1991 and 1992.
* 2021 – &quot;Shadows of Iconoclasm&quot; – compilation box set of early material.

==References==
==External links==

* [ Darkthrone] on AllMusic
* Darkthrone biography on Peaceville Records
* Darkthrone on Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="0" end="10" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="26" end="37" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698870" start="56" end="63" title="Kolbotn" label="Kolbotn"/>
<link wikidata="Q50615" start="65" end="73" title="Akershus" label="Akershus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="95" end="106" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="169" end="180" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="201" end="208" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="213" end="225" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="273" end="300" title="Early Norwegian black metal scene" label="Norwegian black metal scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q300336" start="349" end="376" title="A Blaze in the Northern Sky" label="A Blaze in the Northern Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418892" start="397" end="417" title="Under a Funeral Moon" label="Under a Funeral Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331877" start="442" end="462" title="Transilvanian Hunger" label="Transilvanian Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="714" end="720" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="725" end="739" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Nocturno Culto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348289" start="756" end="765" title="Ivar Enger" label="Zephyrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q924551" start="914" end="940" title="National Library of Norway" label="National Library of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1130" end="1141" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1143" end="1147" title="Punk music" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211723" start="1153" end="1164" title="speed metal" label="speed metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="1232" end="1242" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698870" start="1366" end="1373" title="Kolbotn" label="Kolbotn"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="1397" end="1401" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="1448" end="1459" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="1485" end="1497" title="Fenriz" label="Gylve Nagell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348289" start="1499" end="1509" title="Ivar Enger" label="Ivar Enger"/>
<link wikidata="Q676620" start="1569" end="1576" title="Autopsy (band)" label="Autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="1578" end="1583" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q685190" start="1585" end="1595" title="Hellhammer" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="1597" end="1609" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="1611" end="1617" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637723" start="1623" end="1632" title="Nocturnus" label="Nocturnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="1731" end="1743" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Ted Skjellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465200" start="2034" end="2052" title="Peaceville Records" label="Peaceville Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q614406" start="2109" end="2125" title="Soulside Journey" label="Soulside Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433231" start="2270" end="2278" title="Nihilist (band)" label="Nihilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q526132" start="2283" end="2291" title="Entombed (band)" label="Entombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461212" start="2745" end="2753" title="Goatlord (album)" label="Goatlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="2901" end="2911" title="Euronymous" label="Euronymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="2915" end="2921" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="2989" end="3000" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="3016" end="3028" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="3047" end="3056" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="3085" end="3091" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="3125" end="3139" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Nocturno Culto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348289" start="3185" end="3194" title="Ivar Enger" label="Zephyrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q300336" start="3302" end="3329" title="A Blaze in the Northern Sky" label="A Blaze in the Northern Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418892" start="3803" end="3823" title="Under a Funeral Moon" label="Under a Funeral Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331877" start="4160" end="4180" title="Transilvanian Hunger" label="Transilvanian Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4650" end="4661" title="Transilvanian Hunger#Release and controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207824" start="4735" end="4748" title="Varg Vikernes" label="Varg Vikernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q612268" start="4999" end="5018" title="Moonfog Productions" label="Moonfog Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067783" start="5073" end="5078" title="Sigurd Wongraven" label="Satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="5082" end="5091" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464317" start="5120" end="5131" title="Panzerfaust (album)" label="Panzerfaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509319" start="5452" end="5463" title="Total Death" label="Total Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="5742" end="5754" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338304" start="5763" end="5777" title="Neptune Towers" label="Neptune Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="5788" end="5804" title="folk black metal" label="folk black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221072" start="5813" end="5821" title="Isengard (band)" label="Isengard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668837" start="5873" end="5878" title="Storm (Norwegian band)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271568" start="5900" end="5912" title="Dødheimsgard" label="Dødheimsgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756603" start="6274" end="6292" title="Ravishing Grimness" label="Ravishing Grimness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756555" start="6336" end="6349" title="Plaguewielder" label="Plaguewielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q679351" start="6801" end="6827" title="Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186490" start="7119" end="7129" title="Demonlover" label="Demonlover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756597" start="7181" end="7190" title="Hate Them" label="Hate Them"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="7253" end="7263" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756542" start="7352" end="7366" title="Sardonic Wrath" label="Sardonic Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q825769" start="7696" end="7706" title="crust punk" label="crust punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="8275" end="8277" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="8372" end="8380" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320495" start="8397" end="8412" title="Grutle Kjellson" label="Grutle Kjellson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883442" start="8452" end="8466" title="Mittageisen" label="Love in a Void"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="8476" end="8501" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q966122" start="8820" end="8837" title="The Cult Is Alive" label="The Cult Is Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q825769" start="8896" end="8906" title="crust punk" label="crust punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755468" start="9224" end="9230" title="NWOBHM (album)" label="NWOBHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q370515" start="9325" end="9356" title="New Wave of British Heavy Metal" label="New Wave of British Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756568" start="9451" end="9459" title="F.O.A.D." label="F.O.A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="9637" end="9641" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="9748" end="9771" title="traditional heavy metal" label="traditional heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="9788" end="9802" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Nocturno Culto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756581" start="9978" end="10006" title="Dark Thrones and Black Flags" label="Dark Thrones and Black Flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933000" start="10117" end="10134" title="Circle the Wagons" label="Circle the Wagons"/>
<link wikidata="Q211723" start="10217" end="10228" title="speed metal" label="speed metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464317" start="10396" end="10407" title="Panzerfaust (album)" label="Panzerfaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509319" start="10467" end="10478" title="Total Death" label="Total Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687696" start="10578" end="10604" title="The Underground Resistance" label="The Underground Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262128" start="10845" end="10859" title="Arctic Thunder (album)" label="Arctic Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="11212" end="11240" title="The Wind of 666 Black Hearts" label="The Wind of 666 Black Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q64220992" start="11536" end="11544" title="Old Star" label="Old Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="11637" end="11647" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q840197" start="11699" end="11709" title="Candlemass (band)" label="Candlemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062170" start="12283" end="12290" title="Trouble (band)" label="Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="12295" end="12308" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="12614" end="12620" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="12710" end="12724" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Nocturno Culto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348289" start="12816" end="12825" title="Zephyrous" label="Zephyrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755468" start="13498" end="13504" title="NWOBHM (album)" label="NWOBHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q679351" start="13851" end="13877" title="Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone Holy Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629921" start="14200" end="14215" title="Frostland Tapes" label="Frostland Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461212" start="14422" end="14430" title="Goatlord (album)" label="Goatlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="14907" end="14935" title="The Wind of 666 Black Hearts" label="The Wind of 666 Black Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="15124" end="15132" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465200" start="15159" end="15177" title="Peaceville Records" label="Peaceville Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="15194" end="15201" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37131" wikidata="Q193172" url="?curid=37131" title="Burzum">
<text>Burzum (; ) was a Norwegian music project founded by former Mayhem member Varg Vikernes in 1991. Although Burzum never played live performances, it became a staple of the early Norwegian black metal scene and is considered one of the most influential acts in black metal&#x27;s history. The word &quot;burzum&quot; means &quot;darkness&quot; in the Black Speech, a fictional language crafted by &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; writer J. R. R. Tolkien. Burzum&#x27;s lyrics and imagery are often inspired by fantasy and Norse mythology. 

Vikernes founded Burzum in 1991 and recorded the first four Burzum albums between January 1992 and March 1993. From 1994 to 2009, Vikernes was imprisoned for the murder of Mayhem guitarist Øystein &quot;Euronymous&quot; Aarseth and the arson of eight churches. While imprisoned, he recorded two dark ambient albums using only synthesizers, as he had no access to drums, guitar, or bass. 

Since his release from prison in 2009, he has recorded several more albums, including those in the dark ambient and neofolk genres. Vikernes ended the Burzum project in 2020 before announcing a new album in 2024.

== History ==
=== Early years (1988–1992) ===

Varg Vikernes began making music in 1988 with the band Kalashnikov. The following year, the name was changed to Uruk-Hai, after the creatures from J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. In 1990 and 1991, Vikernes played guitar for the death metal band Old Funeral, which also consisted of members who would later form the band Immortal. He appears on the Old Funeral EP &quot;Devoured Carcass&quot;. Vikernes left Old Funeral in 1991 to concentrate on creating his own musical visions. He had a short-lived project called Satanel, along with Abbath Doom Occulta. He then began a solo project under the name Burzum. The word &quot;burzum&quot; means &quot;darkness&quot; in the Black Speech, a language crafted by Tolkien. Soon after recording two demo tapes, he became part of the Norwegian black metal scene. With his demo tapes, he had attracted attention from Øystein &quot;Euronymous&quot; Aarseth of Mayhem, who had just recently formed Deathlike Silence Productions. Aarseth then signed Burzum to the label, and shortly after, Vikernes―under the pseudonym of Count Grishnackh (another name adapted from &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;)―began to record Burzum&#x27;s self-titled debut album. According to Vikernes&#x27; autobiography on his website, he had intended to record the album in the worst recording quality possible (due to this being a typical trademark of the early Norwegian black metal scene), while still making it sound acceptable. Burzum&#x27;s eponymous debut album was released in 1992, being the second album released on Deathlike Silence Productions. The song &quot;War&quot; from this album had a guest appearance from Euronymous, playing a guitar solo &quot;just for fun&quot;, according to Vikernes.

Vikernes has stated that he had never played any live shows with Burzum, though at one point was interested in it, so Samoth of Emperor accompanied him as a session bassist, though only appearing on the &quot;Aske&quot; EP. Additionally, Erik Lancelot was hired to be the band&#x27;s drummer, though did not record on any Burzum material, and along with Samoth did not play a live show. Vikernes had by then lost his interest in playing live concerts, and stated that he &quot;didn&#x27;t even need session musicians anymore&quot;. Therefore, Samoth and Lancelot had parted ways with Burzum. &quot;Det som engang var&quot; was released as Burzum&#x27;s second album in 1993, recorded in 1992.

=== Imprisonment (1993–2009) ===

May 1994 saw the release of &quot;Hvis lyset tar oss&quot;, a new album of previously recorded material from 1992. Burzum remained as a solo project until 1994, when Vikernes was arrested for the murder of Euronymous and the burnings of several churches in Norway. During his time in prison, Vikernes released his next album, titled &quot;Filosofem&quot;, on 1 January 1996. Recorded in March 1993, &quot;Filosofem&quot; was the last recording Vikernes made before his imprisonment. &quot;Burzum / Aske&quot;, a compilation comprising the &quot;Burzum&quot; album and &quot;Aske&quot; EP, was released in 1995. While imprisoned, Vikernes managed to record two other albums in a dark ambient style. They were released as &quot;Dauði Baldrs&quot; (1997) and &quot;Hliðskjálf&quot; (1999). Both of these albums were created with a synthesizer, as Vikernes was prohibited from using any other instruments in prison.

In 1998, all Burzum albums released up to that point were re-released as vinyl picture discs in a special box set called &quot;1992–1997&quot;; however &quot;Filosofem&quot; did not contain &quot;Rundtgåing av den transcendentale egenhetens støtte&quot; due to its length. The regular vinyl issue of &quot;Filosofem&quot; on Misanthropy had tracks 1–4 plus &quot;Decrepitude II&quot; on side 1 and &quot;Rundtgåing av den transcendentale egenhetens støtte&quot; on side 2.

=== Post-imprisonment and retirement (2009–2020) ===
 Soon after being released, Vikernes started writing new tracks (nine metal tracks and an ambient intro and outro) for an upcoming Burzum album. According to Vikernes&#x27; recounts, several record companies were interested in releasing his first album in eleven years. He stated about the new album, &quot;I want to take my time, and make it the way I want it. It will be metal, and the fans can expect genuine Burzum.&quot;

The album was going to be originally titled &quot;Den hvite guden&quot; (&quot;The White God&quot;), but he later decided to change it to &quot;Belus&quot;, which was released by the independent record label Byelobog Productions (&quot;byelobog&quot; is the transliteration of &quot;белобог&quot; in Slavic languages, meaning &#x27;white god&#x27;, Belobog) on 8 March 2010. It was also announced that a movie would be released in 2010, based on Varg Vikernes&#x27; life in the early 1990s. The movie would mainly draw inspiration from the book &quot;Lords of Chaos&quot;, with the film being of the same name. Vikernes expressed his contempt towards both the movie and the book upon which it is based.

A second new album of original Burzum material, &quot;Fallen&quot;, was released on 7 March 2011, followed by a compilation album, &quot;From the Depths of Darkness&quot;, containing re-recordings of tracks from Burzum&#x27;s self-titled album and &quot;Det som engang var&quot;, on 28 November 2011. A third new studio album of original material, titled &quot;Umskiptar&quot;, was released in May 2012. &quot;Sôl austan, Mâni vestan&quot; (&quot;East of the Sun, West of the Moon&quot;), Burzum&#x27;s first electronic album since 1999, was released in May 2013. On 27 April 2013, a song was posted on the official YouTube channel of Vikernes, titled &quot;Back to the Shadows&quot;. In a blog post, Vikernes stated that &quot;Back to the Shadows&quot; would be the last metal track released by Burzum. Another album, &quot;The Ways of Yore,&quot; was released in June 2014.

After a period of inactivity, Vikernes posted a video on his YouTube account in June 2018 announcing that &quot;[he had] moved on [from Burzum]&quot;, saying &quot;bye bye&quot; to the project.

In July 2018, a YouTube user named Hermann posted unreleased materials of Uruk-Hai from 1988 to 1990 and Burzum&#x27;s Bergen prison recordings from 1994, which he received from Tiziana Stupia.

In October 2019, Vikernes posted a tweet saying he intended to release another album as Burzum. He announced that the tentative name of the album would be &quot;Thulêan Mysteries&quot;, which would have 23 songs. The tracks from the album were previously used as background music on Vikernes&#x27; YouTube channel, which was taken down the same year. Vikernes also said that the music of &quot;Thulêan Mysteries&quot; is meant to be used as a background soundtrack for his MYFAROG role-playing game. On 18 December, Vikernes tweeted the album cover for &quot;Thulêan Mysteries&quot; and announced its release date as 13 March 2020. Vikernes has stated it would be Burzum&#x27;s last album at the time.

=== &quot;Burzum (NEW)&quot; (2023–2024) ===
On 8 September 2023, Vikernes released a new song titled &quot;The Reincarnation of Ódinn&quot;. In April 2024, Vikernes announced the return of the project on his X account, with a new album titled &quot;The Land of Thulê&quot;. It is the first metal album since &quot;Umskiptar&quot;. From late April to May 2024 Vikernes released numerous singles from the upcoming album under the name &quot;Burzum (NEW)&quot;. Vikernes claimed on his X account that he is only releasing the music as &quot;Burzum (NEW)&quot; because he does not control the Burzum accounts on major streaming services, and that the album will be released as &quot;Burzum&quot; when complete. However, the album art Vikernes used for the released singles all list the project name as &quot;Burzum (NEW)&quot;. On November 4th 2024, Vikernes announced the end of the project on his X account saying &quot;I stopped making music (again), because I appreciate a lot more to work with my books, and especially #ReconQuest. And I don&#x27;t have the time for it all.&quot;.

== Musical style ==
Burzum&#x27;s music includes both straightforward black metal as well as dark ambient, neofolk and neo-medieval music. It is often minimalist and dark, with repetition and simple song structures. Vikernes has described Burzum as a kind of &quot;spell&quot; or recreation of an imaginary world tied in with Pagan history. Each album, he claims, was designed as a kind of &quot;spell&quot; in itself, with each beginning song intending to make the listener more susceptible to &quot;magic&quot;, the following songs to inspire a &quot;trance-like state of mind&quot;, and the last song to carry the listener into a &quot;world of fantasy&quot; (dreams, for the listener would fall asleep—Burzum was supposed to have been evening music). Vikernes claims the intent to create this fantasy world came from dissatisfaction with the real world. He has stated the &quot;message&quot; of Burzum can be found in the lyrics of the first song of the first album (&quot;Feeble Screams from Forests Unknown&quot;).

Burzum&#x27;s lyrics and imagery are often inspired by fantasy and Norse mythology, and do not feature the far-right political views Vikernes is known for. In a 2010 interview, Vikernes said: &quot;Burzum is not a political or religious band, or even an anti-religious band. Burzum is music; art if you like, and the interpretation of art lies in the eye of the beholder. I might be Nordic, heterosexual and have a Pagan ideology myself, but why would I expect the fans of my music to be just like me?&quot;. Despite the project&#x27;s apolitical nature, Burzum is included on Meta&#x27;s Dangerous Individuals and Organizations list.

Burzum&#x27;s early work was influenced by Tolkien; for example, Vikernes&#x27; early moniker &quot;Count Grishnackh&quot; is taken from an orc character called Grishnákh in Tolkien&#x27;s works. &quot;Burzum&quot; is a word of the Black Speech of Mordor meaning &quot;darkness&quot; (though Vikernes views what Christians consider &quot;darkness&quot; as &quot;light&quot;), and is inscribed on the One Ring in Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;.

== Influences and legacy ==
Vikernes said that the German thrash metal band Destruction &quot;changed my approach towards playing my instrument&quot; despite having only discovered them in 1991. In a 1996 interview with &quot;Terrorizer&quot;, Vikernes also named Bathory&#x27;s &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot; and Celtic Frost&#x27;s &quot;Morbid Tales&quot; as significant influences on Burzum. He credited Dead Can Dance&#x27;s &quot;Within the Realm of a Dying Sun&quot; for being one of Burzum&#x27;s first non-metal influences. Other non-metal artists he has cited as influence include the Cure, Depeche Mode and New Order. In 2011, Vikernes said that he no longer kept up with new black metal bands and listened mostly to the Cure instead.

Burzum is widely considered to be the most influential act in black metal history. Bands that have listed Burzum as an influence include Deafheaven, Liturgy, Wolves in the Throne Room and Altar of Plagues. The project has also inspired musicians from other genres, including Chelsea Wolfe, Mount Eerie, Thurston Moore, and Vision Eternel.

== Discography ==
Main releases
* &quot;Burzum&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Det som engang var&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Hvis lyset tar oss&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Filosofem&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Dauði Baldrs&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Hliðskjálf&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Belus&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Fallen&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Umskiptar&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Sôl austan, Mâni vestan&quot; (2013)
* &quot;The Ways of Yore&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Thulêan Mysteries&quot; (2020)
* &quot;The Land of Thulê&quot; (TBA)

EPs
* &quot;Aske&quot; (1993)

Singles
* &quot;Mythic Dawn&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Forgotten Realms&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Thulean Mysteries&quot; (2015)
* &quot;The Reincarnation of Ódinn&quot; (2023)
* &quot;The Magic of the Grave&quot; (2024)
* &quot;The Hidden Name&quot; (2024)
* &quot;The Nature of the Gods&quot; (2024)
* &quot;The Call of the Kraken&quot; (2024)
* &quot;Beyond the Gate&quot; (2024)
* &quot;Winds of the Vanished Realm&quot; (2024)
* &quot;Memories in the Mist&quot; (2024)

Demos and promos
* &quot;Burzum Demo&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Reh/Demo 91&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Burzum Promo&quot; (1992)

Music videos
* &quot;Dunkelheit&quot; (1996)

Compilation albums
* &quot;Burzum / Aske&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Burzum Anthology&quot; (2002) (bootleg)
* &quot;Draugen – Rarities&quot; (2005) (bootleg, mistakenly featuring an Ildjarn track)
* &quot;Burzum Anthology&quot; (2008)
* &quot;From the Depths of Darkness&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Foreldra&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Thulê&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Unreleased Material 1988–1994&quot; (2021)

Box sets
* &quot;Burzum 1992–1997&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Burzum 1992–1999&quot; (2010)
* &quot;XIII&quot; (2018)
* &quot;In the Arms of Darkness&quot; (2019)

Other appearances
* &quot;Presumed Guilty&quot; (1998) (contributed &quot;Et hvitt lys over skogen&quot;)
* &quot;Gummo&quot; soundtrack (1998) (contributed &quot;Rundtgåing av den transcendentale egenhetens støtte&quot;)
* &quot;Fenriz Presents... The Best of Old-School Black Metal&quot; (2004) (contributed &quot;Ea, Lord of the Depths&quot;)

==See also==
*List of ambient music artists

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="0" end="6" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="60" end="66" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207824" start="74" end="87" title="Varg Vikernes" label="Varg Vikernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="171" end="204" title="early Norwegian black metal scene" label="early Norwegian black metal scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="259" end="270" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q686210" start="349" end="361" title="Black Speech" label="Black Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623733" start="365" end="383" title="fictional language" label="fictional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="401" end="422" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="436" end="452" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="521" end="536" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="712" end="718" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="729" end="767" title="Euronymous" label="Øystein &amp;quot;Euronymous&amp;quot; Aarseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="835" end="847" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="866" end="877" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="1045" end="1052" title="neofolk" label="neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q194061" start="1318" end="1331" title="Uruk-hai" label="the creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="1337" end="1353" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="1367" end="1388" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="1445" end="1456" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350820" start="1462" end="1473" title="Old Funeral" label="Old Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="1537" end="1545" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="1577" end="1579" title="extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q306080" start="1752" end="1771" title="Abbath" label="Abbath Doom Occulta"/>
<link wikidata="Q686210" start="1887" end="1899" title="Black Speech" label="Black Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="2073" end="2111" title="Euronymous" label="Øystein &amp;quot;Euronymous&amp;quot; Aarseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="2115" end="2121" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q372787" start="2152" end="2181" title="Deathlike Silence Productions" label="Deathlike Silence Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850279" start="2384" end="2407" title="Burzum (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q457595" start="3060" end="3066" title="Samoth" label="Samoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q731246" start="3151" end="3155" title="Aske (EP)" label="Aske"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130088" start="3540" end="3558" title="Det som engang var" label="Det som engang var"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129211" start="3704" end="3722" title="Hvis lyset tar oss" label="Hvis lyset tar oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="3876" end="3886" title="Euronymous" label="Euronymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q644331" start="4009" end="4018" title="Filosofem" label="Filosofem"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="4348" end="4360" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q585574" start="4396" end="4408" title="Dauði Baldrs" label="Dauði Baldrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139172" start="4432" end="4442" title="Hliðskjálf (album)" label="Hliðskjálf"/>
<link wikidata="Q816242" start="5681" end="5686" title="Belus (album)" label="Belus"/>
<link wikidata="Q587825" start="5886" end="5893" title="Chernobog and Belobog" label="Belobog"/>
<link wikidata="Q427570" start="6088" end="6102" title="Lords of Chaos (book)" label="Lords of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394577" start="6295" end="6301" title="Fallen (Burzum album)" label="Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940570" start="6378" end="6405" title="From the Depths of Darkness" label="From the Depths of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933036" start="6602" end="6611" title="Umskiptar" label="Umskiptar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275601" start="6651" end="6674" title="Sôl austan, Mâni vestan" label="Sôl austan, Mâni vestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062330" start="7066" end="7082" title="The Ways of Yore" label="The Ways of Yore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="7989" end="8006" title="Tabletop role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933036" start="8526" end="8535" title="Umskiptar" label="Umskiptar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="9366" end="9377" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="9389" end="9401" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="9403" end="9410" title="neofolk" label="neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q446241" start="9415" end="9433" title="Neo-Medieval music" label="neo-medieval music"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="10385" end="10400" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="10895" end="10899" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q111167967" start="10907" end="10946" title="Dangerous Individuals and Organizations policy" label="Dangerous Individuals and Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="10997" end="11004" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q686210" start="11186" end="11198" title="Black Speech" label="Black Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q202886" start="11202" end="11208" title="Mordor" label="Mordor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="11354" end="11362" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="11387" end="11408" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q159497" start="11493" end="11504" title="Destruction (band)" label="Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774859" start="11637" end="11659" title="Terrorizer (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Terrorizer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="11681" end="11688" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q804532" start="11702" end="11718" title="Blood Fire Death" label="Blood Fire Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="11729" end="11741" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q932092" start="11755" end="11767" title="Morbid Tales" label="Morbid Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q324400" start="11823" end="11837" title="Dead Can Dance" label="Dead Can Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934282" start="11851" end="11882" title="Within the Realm of a Dying Sun" label="Within the Realm of a Dying Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="12006" end="12014" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="12016" end="12028" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="12033" end="12042" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245804" start="12299" end="12309" title="Deafheaven" label="Deafheaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602155" start="12311" end="12318" title="Liturgy (band)" label="Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q763887" start="12320" end="12345" title="Wolves in the Throne Room" label="Wolves in the Throne Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736180" start="12350" end="12366" title="Altar of Plagues" label="Altar of Plagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090148" start="12437" end="12450" title="Chelsea Wolfe" label="Chelsea Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920570" start="12452" end="12463" title="Mount Eerie" label="Mount Eerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="12465" end="12479" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q29287816" start="12485" end="12499" title="Vision Eternel" label="Vision Eternel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850279" start="12542" end="12548" title="Burzum (album)" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130088" start="12570" end="12588" title="Det som engang var" label="Det som engang var"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129211" start="12610" end="12628" title="Hvis lyset tar oss" label="Hvis lyset tar oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q644331" start="12650" end="12659" title="Filosofem" label="Filosofem"/>
<link wikidata="Q585574" start="12681" end="12693" title="Dauði Baldrs" label="Dauði Baldrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139172" start="12715" end="12725" title="Hliðskjálf (album)" label="Hliðskjálf"/>
<link wikidata="Q816242" start="12747" end="12752" title="Belus (album)" label="Belus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394577" start="12774" end="12780" title="Fallen (Burzum album)" label="Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933036" start="12802" end="12811" title="Umskiptar" label="Umskiptar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275601" start="12833" end="12856" title="Sôl austan, Mâni vestan" label="Sôl austan, Mâni vestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062330" start="12878" end="12894" title="The Ways of Yore" label="The Ways of Yore"/>
<link wikidata="Q90153115" start="12916" end="12933" title="Thulêan Mysteries" label="Thulêan Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q731246" start="12998" end="13002" title="Aske (EP)" label="Aske"/>
<link wikidata="Q660566" start="13821" end="13828" title="Ildjarn" label="Ildjarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940570" start="13882" end="13909" title="From the Depths of Darkness" label="From the Depths of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618211" start="14297" end="14325" title="Gummo (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Gummo&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315132" start="14419" end="14472" title="Fenriz Presents... The Best of Old-School Black Metal" label="Fenriz Presents... The Best of Old-School Black Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q688818" start="14550" end="14579" title="List of ambient music artists" label="List of ambient music artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37135" wikidata="Q461696" url="?curid=37135" title="Barbecue">
<text>Barbecue or barbeque (often shortened to BBQ worldwide; barbie or barby in Australia and New Zealand) is a term used with significant regional and national variations to describe various cooking methods that employ live fire and smoke to cook the food. The term is also generally applied to the devices associated with those methods, the broader cuisines that these methods produce, and the meals or gatherings at which this style of food is cooked and served. The cooking methods associated with barbecuing vary significantly but most involve outdoor and indoor cooking.

The various regional variations of barbecue can be broadly categorized into those methods which use direct and those which use indirect heating. Indirect barbecues are associated with North American cuisine, in which meat is heated by roasting or smoking over wood or charcoal. These methods of barbecue involve cooking using smoke at low temperatures and long cooking times, for several hours. Elsewhere, barbecuing more commonly refers to the more direct application of heat, grilling of food over hot coals or a gas fire. This technique is usually done over direct, dry heat or a hot fire for a few minutes. Within these broader categorizations are further national and regional differences.

==Etymology and spelling==
The English word &quot;barbecue&quot; and its cognates in other languages come from the Spanish word &quot;barbacoa&quot;, which has its origin in an indigenous American word. Etymologists believe this to be derived from &quot;barabicu&quot; found in the language of the Arawak people of the Caribbean and the Timucua people of Florida; it has entered some European languages in the form of &quot;barbacoa&quot;. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (OED) traces the word to Hispaniola and translates it as a &quot;framework of sticks set upon posts&quot;. 

A popular folk etymology of the word says that the term is derived from the French (&quot;from beard to tail&quot;) signifying a whole animal being roasted on a spit, but this origin for the word is not supported by academic etymology.

The term itself has two spellings in English: &quot;barbecue&quot; and &quot;barbeque&quot;. While in most countries the spelling &quot;barbecue&quot; is used, the spelling &quot;barbeque&quot; is occasionally used in Australia, New Zealand, and the US.

==History==
Spanish explorer Gonzalo Fernández De Oviedo y Valdés was the first to use the word &quot;barbecoa&quot; in print in Spain in 1526 in the &quot;Diccionario de la Lengua Española (2nd Edition) of the Real Academia Española&quot;. After Columbus landed in the Americas in 1492, the Spaniards apparently found Taíno roasting meat over a grill consisting of a wooden framework resting on sticks above a fire. This framework was also used to store food above ground and for sleeping. The flames and smoke rose and enveloped the meat, giving it a certain flavor. Spaniards called the framework a barbacoa.

Another form of &quot;barbacoa&quot; involves digging a hole in the ground, burning logs in it and placing stones in it to absorb and retain heat. Large cuts of meat, often wrapped in leaves, often a whole goat or lamb, are placed above a pot so the juices can be used to make a broth. It is then covered with maguey leaves and coal, and set alight. The cooking process takes a few hours. Olaudah Equiano, an African abolitionist, described this method of roasting alligators among the &quot;Mosquito people&quot; (Miskito people) on his journeys to Cabo Gracias a Dios on the Mosquito Coast, in his narrative &quot;The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano&quot;.

Linguists have suggested the word was loaned successively into Spanish, then Portuguese, French, and English. In the form &quot;barbacado&quot;, the word was used in English in 1648 by the supposed Beauchamp Plantagenet in the tract &quot;A description of the province of New Albion&quot;: &quot;the Indians in stead of salt doe barbecado or dry and smoak fish&quot;.

According to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, the first recorded use in modern form was in 1661, in Edmund Hickeringill&#x27;s &quot;Jamaica Viewed&quot;: &quot;Some are slain, And their flesh forthwith Barbacu&#x27;d and eat&quot;; it also appears in 1672 in the writings of John Lederer following his travels in the North American southeast in 1669–1670. 

The first known use as a noun was in 1697 by the English buccaneer William Dampier. In his &quot;New Voyage Round the World&quot;, Dampier wrote, &quot;and lay there all night, upon our Borbecu&#x27;s, or frames of Sticks, raised about 3 foot [] from the Ground&quot;.

As early as the 1730s, New England Puritans were familiar with barbecue, as on 4 November 1731, New London, Connecticut, resident Joshua Hempstead wrote in his diary: &quot;I was at Madm Winthrops at an Entertainment, or Treat of Colln [Colonel] or Samll Brownes a Barbaqued.&quot; Samuel Johnson&#x27;s 1755 dictionary gave the following definitions:

* &quot;To Barbecue – a term for dressing a whole hog&quot; (attestation to Pope)
* &quot;Barbecue – a hog dressed whole&quot;
While the standard modern English spelling of the word is &quot;barbecue&quot;, variations including &quot;barbeque&quot; and truncations such as &quot;bar-b-q&quot; or &quot;BBQ&quot; may also be found. The spelling &quot;barbeque&quot; is given in Merriam-Webster as a variant, whereas the Oxford Dictionaries explain that it is a misspelling which is not accepted in standard English and is best avoided. In the Southeastern United States, the word barbecue is used predominantly as a noun referring to roast pork, while in the Southwestern states cuts of beef are often cooked.

== Associations ==

Because the word &quot;barbecue&quot; came from native groups, Europeans gave it &quot;savage connotations&quot;. This association with barbarians and &quot;savages&quot; is strengthened by Edmund Hickeringill&#x27;s work &quot;Jamaica Viewed: with All the Ports, Harbours, and their Several Soundings, Towns, and Settlements&quot; through its descriptions of cannibalism. However, according to Andrew Warnes, there is very little proof that Hickeringill&#x27;s tale of cannibalism in the Caribbean is even remotely true. Another notable false depiction of cannibalistic barbecues appears in Theodor de Bry&#x27;s &quot;Great Voyages&quot;, which in Warnes&#x27;s eyes, &quot;present smoke cookery as a custom quintessential to an underlying savagery [...] that everywhere contains within it a potential for cannibalistic violence&quot;. Today, people in the US associate barbecue with &quot;classic Americana&quot;.

==Styles==


In American English usage, grilling refers to a fast process over high heat while barbecuing usually refers to a slow process using indirect heat or hot smoke, similar to some forms of roasting. In a typical US home grill, food is cooked on a grate directly over hot charcoal, while in a US barbecue the coals are dispersed to the sides or at a significant distance from the grate. In British usage, barbequeing refers to a fast cooking process done directly over high heat, while grilling refers to cooking under a source of direct, moderate-to-high heat—known in the United States as broiling. Its South American versions are the southern Brazilian churrasco and the Southern Cone asado.


For barbecue in the United States, each Southern locale has its own variety of barbecue, particularly sauces. In recent years, the regional variations have blurred as restaurants and consumers experiment and adapt the styles of other regions. South Carolina is the only state that traditionally features all four recognized barbecue sauces, including mustard-based, vinegar-based, and light and heavy tomato-based sauces. North Carolina sauces vary by region; eastern North Carolina uses a vinegar-based sauce, the center of the state uses Lexington-style barbecue, with a combination of ketchup and vinegar as its base, and western North Carolina uses a heavier ketchup base. Memphis barbecue is best known for tomato- and vinegar-based sauces. In some Memphis establishments and in Kentucky, meat is rubbed with dry seasoning (dry rubs) and smoked over hickory wood without sauce. The finished barbecue is then served with barbecue sauce on the side.

In South Africa, braais are informal gatherings of people who convene around an open fire for any occasion and at any location with a grill. They are linked to the consistent warm weather of South Africa that leads to much communal, outdoor activity. The act of convening around a grill is reminiscent of past generations gathering around open fires after a hunt, solidifying the braais&#x27; importance to tradition. Modernity has expanded grilling to the use of gas grills, but steel grill grates and campfires are often used. The use of a gas grill is frowned upon and the use of charcoal is accepted, but wood is seen as the best method to cook the meat.

It is expected that people attending a braai bring snacks, drinks, and other meat to eat until the main meal has finished cooking on the grill. This potluck-like activity is known as &quot;bring and braai&quot;. Cooking on the braai is a bonding experience for fathers and sons, while women prepare salads and other side dishes in kitchens or other areas away from the grill. Examples of meat prepared for a braai are lamb, steaks, spare ribs, sausages, chicken, and fish. Mielie pap, also known as &quot;Krummel pap&quot;, is a crumbled cornmeal that is often served as a side dish.

==Techniques==

Barbecuing encompasses multiple types of cooking techniques. The original technique is cooking using smoke at low temperatures—usually around —and significantly longer cooking times (several hours), known as smoking.

Grilling is done over direct, dry heat, usually over a hot fire over for a few minutes. Grilling and smoking are done with wood, charcoal, gas, electricity, or pellets. The time difference between smoking and grilling is because of the temperature difference; at low temperatures used for smoking, meat takes several hours to reach the desired internal temperature.

===Smoking===

Smoking is the process of flavoring, cooking, and/or preserving food by exposing it to smoke from burning or smoldering material, most often wood. Meat and fish are the most common smoked foods, though cheeses, vegetables, nuts, and ingredients used to make beverages such as beer or smoked beer are also smoked.

=== Grilling ===
Grilling is a form of cooking that involves a dry heat applied to the food, either from above or below. Grilling is an effective technique in order to cook meat or vegetables quickly since it involves a significant amount of direct, radiant heat. Outside of the US, this is the most common technique when cooking classic barbecue foods, although some variants of grilling require direct, but moderate heat.

The words &quot;barbecue&quot; and &quot;grilling&quot; are often used interchangeably, although some argue that barbecue is a type of grilling, and that grilling involves the use of a higher level of heat to sear the food, while barbecuing is a slower process over a low heat.

In practice, the lines blur because it is hard to define what is low temperature and what is high temperature and because many champion barbecue cooks now cook meats such as beef brisket at higher temperatures than was traditional.

==Other uses==
The term &quot;barbecue&quot; is also used to designate a flavor added to food items, the most prominent of which are potato chips.

==See also==
* 

** 
** , South Africa
** 
** 
** , Kenya
** 
** 
** 
** , Cantonese barbecued meat
** 
** 

* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
==External links==

* Barbecue Food Safety (US Dept. of Agriculture)
* The Internet BBQ FAQ 
* Barbecue: A History of the World&#x27;s Oldest Culinary Art Web cast from the Library of Congress</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="0" end="8" title="Barbecue" label="Barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="12" end="20" title="Barbecue" label="barbeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="41" end="44" title="Barbecue" label="BBQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="56" end="62" title="Barbecue" label="barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="66" end="71" title="Barbecue" label="barby"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="187" end="202" title="cooking methods" label="cooking methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="346" end="353" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783089" start="585" end="616" title="regional variations of barbecue" label="regional variations of barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682434" start="820" end="827" title="smoked meat" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="841" end="849" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="1051" end="1059" title="grilling" label="grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1384" end="1391" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838998" start="1403" end="1411" title="barbacoa" label="barbacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="1472" end="1483" title="Etymologist" label="Etymologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="1567" end="1573" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1588" end="1597" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q56168" start="1606" end="1613" title="Timucua" label="Timucua"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1624" end="1631" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1719" end="1744" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="1870" end="1884" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1936" end="1942" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2315" end="2324" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2326" end="2337" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="2671" end="2676" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q449506" start="3171" end="3175" title="Goat meat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="3179" end="3183" title="lamb and mutton" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q161115" start="3275" end="3281" title="Agave americana" label="maguey"/>
<link wikidata="Q379887" start="3354" end="3369" title="Olaudah Equiano" label="Olaudah Equiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q332976" start="3480" end="3494" title="Miskito people" label="Miskito people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024890" start="3515" end="3534" title="Cabo Gracias a Dios" label="Cabo Gracias a Dios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742270" start="3581" end="3637" title="The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano" label="The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3684" end="3690" title="loanword" label="loaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3709" end="3716" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3723" end="3733" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3735" end="3741" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3747" end="3754" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339559" start="4125" end="4144" title="Edmund Hickeringill" label="Edmund Hickeringill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012459" start="4301" end="4313" title="John Lederer" label="John Lederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221125" start="4451" end="4466" title="William Dampier" label="William Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="4677" end="4697" title="Puritans" label="New England Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="4936" end="4950" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="5057" end="5060" title="Pig" label="hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="5384" end="5399" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5562" end="5575" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339559" start="5927" end="5946" title="Edmund Hickeringill" label="Edmund Hickeringill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="6097" end="6108" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q708961" start="6329" end="6343" title="Theodor de Bry" label="Theodor de Bry"/>
<link wikidata="Q840832" start="6671" end="6687" title="Comparison of American and British English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="6695" end="6703" title="grilling" label="grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="6853" end="6861" title="roasting" label="roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="7053" end="7060" title="British English" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089959" start="7319" end="7328" title="churrasco" label="churrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q236118" start="7337" end="7350" title="Southern Cone" label="Southern Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q720254" start="7351" end="7356" title="asado" label="asado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859544" start="7364" end="7393" title="barbecue in the United States" label="barbecue in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783089" start="7424" end="7435" title="regional variations of barbecue" label="own variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7603" end="7617" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q807791" start="7684" end="7698" title="barbecue sauce" label="barbecue sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="7782" end="7796" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699570" start="7900" end="7924" title="Lexington Barbecue Festival" label="Lexington-style barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q178143" start="7948" end="7955" title="ketchup" label="ketchup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815783" start="8037" end="8053" title="Memphis-style barbecue" label="Memphis barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257988" start="8189" end="8197" title="spice rub" label="dry rubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="8203" end="8209" title="smoking (cooking)" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="8215" end="8222" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783089" start="8331" end="8337" title="Regional variations of barbecue" label="braais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="9447" end="9457" title="Ugali" label="Mielie pap"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036916" start="9953" end="9960" title="Pellet grill" label="pellets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361459" start="10137" end="10157" title="Doneness" label="internal temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="10451" end="10455" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q597787" start="10459" end="10470" title="smoked beer" label="smoked beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="10506" end="10514" title="Grilling" label="Grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q173265" start="11559" end="11570" title="potato chip" label="potato chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="11883" end="11902" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37137" wikidata="Q157892" url="?curid=37137" title="Arabidopsis">
<text>Arabidopsis (rockcress) is a genus in the family Brassicaceae. They are small flowering plants related to cabbage and mustard. This genus is of great interest since it contains thale cress (&quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot;), one of the model organisms used for studying plant biology and the first plant to have its entire genome sequenced. Changes in thale cress are easily observed, making it a very useful model.

==Status==
Currently, the genus &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; has nine species and a further eight subspecies recognised. This delimitation is quite recent and is based on morphological and molecular phylogenies by O&#x27;Kane and Al-Shehbaz and others.

Their findings confirm the species formerly included in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; made it polyphyletic. The most recent reclassification moves two species previously placed in &quot;Cardaminopsis&quot; and &quot;Hylandra&quot; and three species of &quot;Arabis&quot; into &quot;Arabidopsis&quot;, but excludes 50 that have been moved into the new genera &quot;Beringia, Crucihimalaya, Ianhedgea, Olimarabidopsis&quot;, and &quot;Pseudoarabidopsis&quot;.

All of the species in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; are indigenous to Europe, while two of the species have broad ranges also extending into North America and Asia.

In the last two decades, &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; has gained much interest from the scientific community as a model organism for research on numerous aspects of plant biology. The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) is a curated online information source for &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; genetic and molecular biology research, and The Arabidopsis Book is an online compilation of invited chapters on &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; biology. (Note that as of 2013 no further chapters will be published.) In Europe, the model organism resource centre for &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; germplasm, bioinformatics and molecular biology resources (including GeneChips) is the Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC) whilst in North America germplasm services are provided by the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) based at Ohio State University. The ordering system for ABRC was incorporated into the TAIR database in June 2001 whilst NASC has always (since 1991) hosted its own ordering system and genome browser.

In 1982, the crew of the Soviet Salyut 7 space station grew some Arabidopsis, thus becoming the first plants to flower and produce seeds in space. They had a life span of 40 days. &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; seeds were taken to the Moon on the Chang&#x27;e 4 lander in 2019, as part of a student experiment. As of May 2022 &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; has successfully been grown in samples of lunar soil.

&quot;Arabidopsis&quot; is quite similar to the &quot;Boechera&quot; genus.

==List of species and subspecies==
* &quot;Arabidopsis arenicola&quot; — Arctic rock cress (Greenland, Labrador, Nunavut, Québec, Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan)
* &quot;Arabidopsis arenosa&quot; — sand rock cress
** &quot;A. arenosa&quot; subsp. &quot;arenosa&quot; (Europe: native in Austria, Belarus, Bosnia Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, NE France, Germany, Hungary, N Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, and Ukraine; naturalized in Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Netherlands, Norway, Russia and W Siberia, and Sweden; absent in Albania, Greece, C and S Italy, and Turkey)
** &quot;A. arenosa&quot; subsp. &quot;borbasii&quot; (E Belgium, Czech Republic, NE France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland, Ukraine, doubtfully occurring in Denmark)
* &quot;Arabidopsis cebennensis&quot; (SE France)
* &quot;Arabidopsis croatica&quot; (Bosnia, Croatia)
* &quot;Arabidopsis halleri&quot; 
** &quot;A. halleri&quot; subsp. &quot;halleri&quot; (Austria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Germany, N and C Italy, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, and S Ukraine. Probably introduced in N France and extinct in Belgium)
** &quot;A. halleri&quot; subsp. &quot;ovirensis&quot; (Albania, Austria, NE Italy, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, SW Ukraine, Yugoslavia)
** &quot;A. halleri&quot; subsp. &quot;gemmifera&quot; (Russian Far East, northeastern China, Korea, Japan, and Taiwan)
* &quot;Arabidopsis lyrata&quot; — sand cress
** &quot;A. lyrata&quot; subsp. &quot;lyrata&quot; (NE European Russia, Alaska, Canada (Ontario west into British Columbia), and southeastern and central United States (Vermont south into northern Georgia and Mississippi northward into Missouri and Minnesota))
** &quot;A. lyrata&quot; subsp. &quot;petraea&quot; (Austria, Czech Republic, England, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, N. Italy, Norway, Russia (NW Russia, Siberia and Far East), Scotland, Sweden, Ukraine, boreal North America (Alaska and Yukon). Apparently extinct in Poland)
** &quot;A. lyrata&quot; subsp. &quot;kamchatica&quot; (boreal Alaska, Canada (Yukon, Mackenzie District, British Columbia, northern Saskatchewan), Aleutian Islands, eastern Siberia, the Russian Far East, Korea, northern China, Japan and Taiwan)
* &quot;Arabidopsis neglecta&quot; (Carpathian Mountains (Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and adjacent Ukraine))
* &quot;Arabidopsis pedemontana&quot; (northwestern Italy and presumably extinct in adjacent SW Switzerland)
* &quot;Arabidopsis suecica&quot; (Fennoscandinavia and the Baltic region)
* &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; — thale cress (native range almost all Europe to central Asia, now naturalized worldwide)

===Reclassified species===
The following species previously placed in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; are not currently considered part of the genus.
==Cytogenetics==
Cytogenetic analysis has shown the haploid chromosome number (n) is variable and varies across species in the genus:

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; is n=5 and the DNA sequencing of this species was completed in 2001. &quot;A. lyrata&quot; has n=8 but some subspecies or populations are tetraploid. Various subspecies &quot;A. arenosa&quot; have n=8 but can be either 2n (diploid) or 4n (tetraploid).
&quot;A. suecica&quot; is n=13 (5+8) and is an amphidiploid species originated through hybridization between &quot;A. thaliana&quot; and diploid &quot;A. arenosa&quot;.

&quot;A. neglecta&quot; is n=8, as are the various subspecies of &quot;A. halleri&quot;.

As of 2005, &quot;A. cebennensis&quot;, &quot;A. croatica&quot; and &quot;A. pedemontana&quot; have not been investigated cytologically.

==See also==
* Calcium signaling in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Al-Shehbaz, I. A., O&#x27;Kane, Steve L. (2002). Taxonomy and Phylogeny of Arabidopsis (Brassicaceae). &quot;The Arabidopsis Book&quot;: 1-22.
* Ceccato, Luca; Masiero, Simona; Sinha Roy, Dola; Bencivenga, Stefano; Roig-Villanova, Irma; Ditengou, Franck Anicet; Palme, Klaus; Simon, Rüdiger; Colombo, Lucia (2013-06-17). Grebe, Markus (ed.). &quot;Maternal Control of PIN1 Is Required for Female Gametophyte Development in Arabidopsis&quot;. &quot;PLoS ONE&quot;. 8 (6): e66148. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0066148. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 3684594. PMID 23799075.
* O&#x27;Kane Jr, S. L., i Al-Shehbaz, I. A. (1997). A synopsis of Arabidopsis (Brassicaceae): &quot;Novon&quot; 7: 323–327.
* O&#x27;Kane Jr, S. L., i Al-Shehbaz, I. A. (2003). Phylogenetic position and generic limits of Arabidopsis (Brassicaceae) based on sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA: &quot;Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden&quot; 90 (4): 603–612.
* (Note that in 2013 ASPB decided to stop publishing new chapters.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157892" start="13" end="22" title="Arabidopsis" label="rockcress"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="49" end="61" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="78" end="93" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="106" end="113" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="118" end="125" title="Mustard plant" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="177" end="188" title="thale cress" label="thale cress"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="236" end="250" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="754" end="766" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157396" start="918" end="924" title="Arabis" label="Arabis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1024" end="1032" title="Beringia (plant)" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261843" start="1034" end="1047" title="Crucihimalaya" label="Crucihimalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15942903" start="1049" end="1058" title="Ianhedgea" label="Ianhedgea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10340631" start="1060" end="1075" title="Olimarabidopsis" label="Olimarabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10355107" start="1093" end="1110" title="Pseudoarabidopsis" label="Pseudoarabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1183" end="1189" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1254" end="1267" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1272" end="1276" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="1310" end="1330" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="1397" end="1411" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519804" start="1463" end="1499" title="The Arabidopsis Information Resource" label="The Arabidopsis Information Resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q589029" start="1883" end="1892" title="germplasm" label="germplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="1894" end="1908" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="1913" end="1930" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1952" end="1961" title="GeneChips" label="GeneChips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063591" start="1970" end="2005" title="Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre" label="Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q589029" start="2037" end="2046" title="germplasm" label="germplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783451" start="2076" end="2114" title="Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center" label="Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="2131" end="2152" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2349" end="2355" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="2356" end="2364" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105286" start="2455" end="2469" title="Plants in space" label="seeds in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="2573" end="2594" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4 lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="2658" end="2678" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q289735" start="2794" end="2802" title="Boechera" label="Boechera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147791" start="2860" end="2881" title="Arabidopsis arenicola" label="Arabidopsis arenicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="2909" end="2918" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="2920" end="2928" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="2930" end="2937" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2939" end="2945" title="Québec" label="Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2947" end="2954" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="2956" end="2964" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="2966" end="2978" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159787" start="2988" end="3007" title="Arabidopsis arenosa" label="Arabidopsis arenosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3669" end="3692" title="Arabidopsis cebennensis" label="Arabidopsis cebennensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3703" end="3709" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3719" end="3739" title="Arabidopsis croatica" label="Arabidopsis croatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="3747" end="3753" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3755" end="3762" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157892" start="3772" end="3791" title="Arabidopsis halleri" label="Arabidopsis halleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206119" start="4297" end="4315" title="Arabidopsis lyrata" label="Arabidopsis lyrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="4532" end="4539" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="4571" end="4579" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="4839" end="4844" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5131" end="5151" title="Arabidopsis neglecta" label="Arabidopsis neglecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="5159" end="5179" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5239" end="5262" title="Arabidopsis pedemontana" label="Arabidopsis pedemontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165103" start="5348" end="5367" title="Arabidopsis suecica" label="Arabidopsis suecica"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="5423" end="5443" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q246128" start="5700" end="5711" title="Cytogenetics" label="Cytogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="5735" end="5742" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="5743" end="5753" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="6141" end="6153" title="Polyploidy" label="amphidiploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q112300388" start="6507" end="6551" title="Calcium signaling in Arabidopsis" label="Calcium signaling in &amp;quot;Arabidopsis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25670" start="7069" end="7072" title="Doi (identifier)" label="doi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131276" start="7103" end="7107" title="ISSN (identifier)" label="ISSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q229883" start="7119" end="7122" title="PMC (identifier)" label="PMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q180686" start="7132" end="7136" title="PMID (identifier)" label="PMID"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37138" wikidata="Q158695" url="?curid=37138" title="Arabidopsis thaliana">
<text>Arabidopsis thaliana, the thale cress, mouse-ear cress or arabidopsis, is a small plant from the mustard family (Brassicaceae), native to Eurasia and Africa. Commonly found along the shoulders of roads and in disturbed land, it is generally considered a weed.

A winter annual with a relatively short lifecycle, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is a popular model organism in plant biology and genetics. For a complex multicellular eukaryote, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; has a relatively small genome of around 135 megabase pairs. It was the first plant to have its genome sequenced, and is an important tool for understanding the molecular biology of many plant traits, including flower development and light sensing.

==Description==
&quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; is an annual (rarely biennial) plant, usually growing to 20–25 cm tall. The leaves form a rosette at the base of the plant, with a few leaves also on the flowering stem. The basal leaves are green to slightly purplish in color, 1.5–5 cm long, and 2–10 mm broad, with an entire to coarsely serrated margin; the stem leaves are smaller and unstalked, usually with an entire margin. Leaves are covered with small, unicellular hairs called trichomes. The flowers are 3 mm in diameter, arranged in a corymb; their structure is that of the typical Brassicaceae. The fruit is a silique 5–20 mm long, containing 20–30 seeds. Roots are simple in structure, with a single primary root that grows vertically downward, later producing smaller lateral roots. These roots form interactions with rhizosphere bacteria such as &quot;Bacillus megaterium&quot;.

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; can complete its entire lifecycle in six weeks. The central stem that produces flowers grows after about 3 weeks, and the flowers naturally self-pollinate. In the lab, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; may be grown in Petri plates, pots, or hydroponics, under fluorescent lights or in a greenhouse.

==Taxonomy==
The plant was first described in 1577 in the Harz Mountains by (1542–1583), a physician from Nordhausen, Thüringen, Germany, who called it &quot;Pilosella siliquosa&quot;. In 1753, Carl Linnaeus renamed the plant &quot;Arabis thaliana&quot; in honor of Thal. In 1842, German botanist Gustav Heynhold erected the new genus &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; and placed the plant in that genus. The generic name, &quot;&quot;, comes from Greek, meaning &quot;resembling &quot;Arabis&quot;&quot; (the genus in which Linnaeus had initially placed it).

Thousands of natural inbred accessions of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; have been collected from throughout its natural and introduced range. These accessions exhibit considerable genetic and phenotypic variation, which can be used to study the adaptation of this species to different environments.

==Distribution and habitat==

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; is native to Europe, Asia, and Africa, and its geographic distribution is rather continuous from the Mediterranean to Scandinavia and Spain to Greece. It also appears to be native in tropical alpine ecosystems in Africa and perhaps South Africa. It has been introduced and naturalized worldwide, including in North America around the 17th century.

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; readily grows and often pioneers rocky, sandy, and calcareous soils. It is generally considered a weed, due to its widespread distribution in agricultural fields, roadsides, railway lines, waste ground, and other disturbed habitats, but due to its limited competitive ability and small size, it is not categorized as a noxious weed. Like most Brassicaceae species, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is edible by humans in a salad or cooked, but it does not enjoy widespread use as a spring vegetable.

==Use as a model organism==

Botanists and biologists began to research &quot;A. thaliana&quot; in the early 1900s, and the first systematic description of mutants was done around 1945. &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is now widely used for studying plant sciences, including genetics, evolution, population genetics, and plant development. Although &quot;A. thaliana&quot; the plant has little direct significance for agriculture, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; the model organism has revolutionized our understanding of the genetic, cellular, and molecular biology of flowering plants.
The first mutant in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; was documented in 1873 by Alexander Braun, describing a double flower phenotype (the mutated gene was likely &quot;Agamous&quot;, cloned and characterized in 1990). Friedrich Laibach (who had published the chromosome number in 1907) did not propose &quot;A. thaliana&quot; as a model organism, though, until 1943. His student, Erna Reinholz, published her thesis on &quot;A. thaliana&quot; in 1945, describing the first collection of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; mutants that they generated using X-ray mutagenesis. Laibach continued his important contributions to &quot;A. thaliana&quot; research by collecting a large number of accessions (often questionably referred to as &quot;ecotypes&quot;). With the help of Albert Kranz, these were organised into a large collection of 750 natural accessions of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; from around the world.

In the 1950s and 1960s, John Langridge and George Rédei played an important role in establishing &quot;A. thaliana&quot; as a useful organism for biological laboratory experiments. Rédei wrote several scholarly reviews instrumental in introducing the model to the scientific community. The start of the &quot;A. thaliana&quot; research community dates to a newsletter called &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; Information Service, established in 1964. The first International &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; Conference was held in 1965, in Göttingen, Germany.

In the 1980s, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; started to become widely used in plant research laboratories around the world. It was one of several candidates that included maize, petunia, and tobacco. The latter two were attractive, since they were easily transformable with the then-current technologies, while maize was a well-established genetic model for plant biology. The breakthrough year for &quot;A. thaliana&quot; as a model plant was 1986, in which T-DNA-mediated transformation and the first cloned &quot;A. thaliana&quot; gene were described.

===Genomics===

====Nuclear genome====

Due to the small size of its genome, and because it is diploid, &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; is useful for genetic mapping and sequencing — with about 157 megabase pairs and five chromosomes, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; has one of the smallest genomes among plants. It was long thought to have the smallest genome of all flowering plants, but that title is now considered to belong to plants in the genus &quot;Genlisea&quot;, order Lamiales, with &quot;Genlisea tuberosa&quot;, a carnivorous plant, showing a genome size of approximately 61 Mbp. It was the first plant genome to be sequenced, completed in 2000 by the &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; Genome Initiative. The most up-to-date version of the &quot;A. thaliana&quot; genome is maintained by the Arabidopsis Information Resource.

The genome encodes ~27,600 protein-coding genes and about 6,500 non-coding genes. However, the Uniprot database lists 39,342 proteins in their &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; reference proteome. Among the 27,600 protein-coding genes 25,402 (91.8%) are now annotated with &quot;meaningful&quot; product names, although a large fraction of these proteins is likely only poorly understood and only known in general terms (e.g. as &quot;DNA-binding protein without known specificity&quot;). Uniprot lists more than 3,000 proteins as &quot;uncharacterized&quot; as part of the reference proteome.

====Chloroplast genome====

The plastome of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is a 154,478 base-pair-long DNA molecule, a size typically encountered in most flowering plants (see the list of sequenced plastomes). It comprises 136 genes coding for small subunit ribosomal proteins (&quot;rps&quot;, in yellow: see figure), large subunit ribosomal proteins (&quot;rpl&quot;, orange), hypothetical chloroplast open reading frame proteins (&quot;ycf&quot;, lemon), proteins involved in photosynthetic reactions (green) or in other functions (red), ribosomal RNAs (&quot;rrn&quot;, blue), and transfer RNAs (&quot;trn&quot;, black).

====Mitochondrial genome====

The mitochondrial genome of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is 367,808 base pairs long and contains 57 genes. There are many repeated regions in the &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; mitochondrial genome. The largest repeats recombine regularly and isomerize the genome. Like most plant mitochondrial genomes, the &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; mitochondrial genome exists as a complex arrangement of overlapping branched and linear molecules &quot;in vivo&quot;.

===Genetics===

Genetic transformation of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is routine, using &quot;Agrobacterium tumefaciens&quot; to transfer DNA into the plant genome. The current protocol, termed &quot;floral dip&quot;, involves simply dipping flowers into a solution containing &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; carrying a plasmid of interest and a detergent. This method avoids the need for tissue culture or plant regeneration.

The &quot;A. thaliana&quot; gene knockout collections are a unique resource for plant biology made possible by the availability of high-throughput transformation and funding for genomics resources. The site of T-DNA insertions has been determined for over 300,000 independent transgenic lines, with the information and seeds accessible through online T-DNA databases. Through these collections, insertional mutants are available for most genes in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;.

Characterized accessions and mutant lines of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; serve as experimental material in laboratory studies. The most commonly used background lines are L&quot;er&quot; (Landsberg &quot;erecta&quot;), and Col, or Columbia. Other background lines less-often cited in the scientific literature are Ws, or Wassilewskija, C24, Cvi, or Cape Verde Islands, Nossen, etc. (see for ex.) Sets of closely related accessions named Col-0, Col-1, etc., have been obtained and characterized; in general, mutant lines are available through stock centers, of which best-known are the Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Center-NASC and the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center-ABRC in Ohio, USA.
The Col-0 accession was selected by Rédei from within a (nonirradiated) population of seeds designated &#x27;Landsberg&#x27; which he received from Laibach. Columbia (named for the location of Rédei&#x27;s former institution, University of Missouri-Columbia) was the reference accession sequenced in the &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; Genome Initiative. The Later (Landsberg erecta) line was selected by Rédei (because of its short stature) from a Landsberg population he had mutagenized with X-rays. As the L&quot;er&quot; collection of mutants is derived from this initial line, L&quot;er&quot;-0 does not correspond to the Landsberg accessions, which designated La-0, La-1, etc.

Trichome formation is initiated by the GLABROUS1 protein. Knockouts of the corresponding gene lead to glabrous plants. This phenotype has already been used in gene editing experiments and might be of interest as visual marker for plant research to improve gene editing methods such as CRISPR/Cas9.

====Non-Mendelian inheritance controversy====
In 2005, scientists at Purdue University proposed that &quot;A. thaliana&quot; possessed an alternative to previously known mechanisms of DNA repair, producing an unusual pattern of inheritance, but the phenomenon observed (reversion of mutant copies of the &quot;HOTHEAD&quot; gene to a wild-type state) was later suggested to be an artifact because the mutants show increased outcrossing due to organ fusion.

===Lifecycle===

The plant&#x27;s small size and rapid lifecycle are also advantageous for research. Having specialized as a spring ephemeral, it has been used to found several laboratory strains that take about 6 weeks from germination to mature seed. The small size of the plant is convenient for cultivation in a small space, and it produces many seeds. Further, the selfing nature of this plant assists genetic experiments. Also, as an individual plant can produce several thousand seeds, each of the above criteria leads to &quot;A. thaliana&quot; being valued as a genetic model organism.

===Cellular biology===
&quot;Arabidopsis&quot; is often the model for study of SNAREs in plants. This has shown SNAREs to be heavily involved in vesicle trafficking. Zheng et al. 1999 found an &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; SNARE called is probably essential to Golgi-vacuole trafficking. This is still a wide open field and plant SNAREs&#x27; role in trafficking remains understudied.

===DNA repair===

The DNA of plants is vulnerable to ultraviolet light, and DNA repair mechanisms have evolved to avoid or repair genome damage caused by UV. Kaiser et al. showed that in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) induced by UV light can be repaired by expression of CPD photolyase.

===Germination in lunar regolith===
On May 12, 2022, NASA announced that specimens of &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; had been successfully germinated and grown in samples of lunar regolith. While the plants successfully germinated and grew into seedlings, they were not as robust as specimens that had been grown in volcanic ash as a control group, although the experiments also found some variation in the plants grown in regolith based on the location the samples were taken from, as &quot;A. thaliana&quot; grown in regolith gathered during Apollo 12 &amp; Apollo 17 were more robust than those grown in samples taken during Apollo 11.

==Development==

===Flower development===

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; has been extensively studied as a model for flower development. The developing flower has four basic organs - sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels (which go on to form pistils). These organs are arranged in a series of whorls, four sepals on the outer whorl, followed by four petals inside this, six stamens, and a central carpel region. Homeotic mutations in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; result in the change of one organ to another—in the case of the &quot;agamous&quot; mutation, for example, stamens become petals and carpels are replaced with a new flower, resulting in a recursively repeated sepal-petal-petal pattern.
Observations of homeotic mutations led to the formulation of the ABC model of flower development by E. Coen and E. Meyerowitz. According to this model, floral organ identity genes are divided into three classes - class A genes (which affect sepals and petals), class B genes (which affect petals and stamens), and class C genes (which affect stamens and carpels). These genes code for transcription factors that combine to cause tissue specification in their respective regions during development. Although developed through study of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; flowers, this model is generally applicable to other flowering plants.

===Leaf development===
Studies of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; have provided considerable insights with regards to the genetics of leaf morphogenesis, particularly in dicotyledon-type plants. Much of the understanding has come from analyzing mutants in leaf development, some of which were identified in the 1960s, but were not analysed with genetic and molecular techniques until the mid-1990s. &quot;A. thaliana&quot; leaves are well suited to studies of leaf development because they are relatively simple and stable.

Using &quot;A. thaliana&quot;, the genetics behind leaf shape development have become more clear and have been broken down into three stages: The initiation of the leaf primordium, the establishment of dorsiventrality, and the development of a marginal meristem. Leaf primordia are initiated by the suppression of the genes and proteins of class I &quot;KNOX&quot; family (such as &quot;SHOOT APICAL MERISTEMLESS&quot;). These class I KNOX proteins directly suppress gibberellin biosynthesis in the leaf primordium. Many genetic factors were found to be involved in the suppression of these class I &quot;KNOX&quot; genes in leaf primordia (such as &quot;ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1,&quot; &quot;BLADE-ON-PETIOLE1&quot;, &quot;SAWTOOTH1&quot;, etc.). Thus, with this suppression, the levels of gibberellin increase and leaf primordium initiate growth.

The establishment of leaf dorsiventrality is important since the dorsal (adaxial) surface of the leaf is different from the ventral (abaxial) surface.

===Microscopy===
&quot;A. thaliana&quot; is well suited for light microscopy analysis. Young seedlings on the whole, and their roots in particular, are relatively translucent. This, together with their small size, facilitates live cell imaging using both fluorescence and confocal laser scanning microscopy. By wet-mounting seedlings in water or in culture media, plants may be imaged uninvasively, obviating the need for fixation and sectioning and allowing time-lapse measurements. Fluorescent protein constructs can be introduced through transformation. The developmental stage of each cell can be inferred from its location in the plant or by using fluorescent protein markers, allowing detailed developmental analysis.

==Physiology==

===Light sensing, light emission, and circadian biology===
The photoreceptors phytochromes A, B, C, D, and E mediate red light-based phototropic response. Understanding the function of these receptors has helped plant biologists understand the signaling cascades that regulate photoperiodism, germination, de-etiolation, and shade avoidance in plants. The genes &quot;FCA&quot;, &quot;fy&quot;, &quot;fpa&quot;, &quot;LUMINIDEPENDENS&quot; (&quot;ld&quot;), &quot;fly&quot;, &quot;fve&quot; and &quot;FLOWERING LOCUS C&quot; (&quot;FLC&quot;) are involved in photoperiod triggering of flowering and vernalization. Specifically Lee et al 1994 find &quot;ld&quot; produces a homeodomain and Blazquez et al 2001 that &quot;fve&quot; produces a WD40 repeat.

The UVR8 protein detects UV-B light and mediates the response to this DNA-damaging wavelength.

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; was used extensively in the study of the genetic basis of phototropism, chloroplast alignment, and stomal aperture and other blue light-influenced processes. These traits respond to blue light, which is perceived by the phototropin light receptors. &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; has also been important in understanding the functions of another blue light receptor, cryptochrome, which is especially important for light entrainment to control the plants&#x27; circadian rhythms. When the onset of darkness is unusually early, &quot;A. thaliana&quot; reduces its metabolism of starch by an amount that effectively requires division.

Light responses were even found in roots, previously thought to be largely insensitive to light. While the gravitropic response of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; root organs is their predominant tropic response, specimens treated with mutagens and selected for the absence of gravitropic action showed negative phototropic response to blue or white light, and positive response to red light, indicating that the roots also show positive phototropism.

In 2000, Dr. Janet Braam of Rice University genetically engineered &quot;A. thaliana&quot; to glow in the dark when touched. The effect was visible to ultrasensitive cameras.

Multiple efforts, including the Glowing Plant project, have sought to use &quot;A. thaliana&quot; to increase plant luminescence intensity towards commercially viable levels.

=== Thigmomorphogenesis (Touch response) ===
In 1990, Janet Braam and Ronald W. Davis determined that &quot;A. thaliana&quot; exhibits thigmomorphogenesis in response to wind, rain and touch. Four or more touch induced genes in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; were found to be regulated by such stimuli. In 2002, Massimo Pigliucci found that &quot;A. thaliana&quot; developed different patterns of branching in response to sustained exposure to wind, a display of phenotypic plasticity.

===On the Moon===
On January 2, 2019, China&#x27;s Chang&#x27;e-4 lander brought &quot;A. thaliana&quot; to the moon. A small microcosm &#x27;tin&#x27; in the lander contained &quot;A. thaliana&quot;, seeds of potatoes, and silkworm eggs. As plants would support the silkworms with oxygen, and the silkworms would in turn provide the plants with necessary carbon dioxide and nutrients through their waste, researchers will evaluate whether plants successfully perform photosynthesis, and grow and bloom in the lunar environment.

===Secondary metabolites===
 is an &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; root triterpene. Potter &quot;et al.&quot;, 2018 finds synthesis is induced by a combination of at least 2 facts, cell-specific transcription factors (TFs) and the accessibility of the chromatin.

==Plant–pathogen interactions==

Understanding how plants achieve resistance is important to protect the world&#x27;s food production, and the agriculture industry. Many model systems have been developed to better understand interactions between plants and bacterial, fungal, oomycete, viral, and nematode pathogens. &quot;A. thaliana&quot; has been a powerful tool for the study of the subdiscipline of plant pathology, that is, the interaction between plants and disease-causing pathogens.

The use of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; has led to many breakthroughs in the advancement of knowledge of how plants manifest plant disease resistance. The reason most plants are resistant to most pathogens is through nonhost resistance - not all pathogens will infect all plants. An example where &quot;A. thaliana&quot; was used to determine the genes responsible for nonhost resistance is &quot;Blumeria graminis&quot;, the causal agent of powdery mildew of grasses. &quot;A. thaliana&quot; mutants were developed using the mutagen ethyl methanesulfonate and screened to identify mutants with increased infection by &quot;B. graminis&quot;. The mutants with higher infection rates are referred to as&quot; PEN &quot;mutants due to the ability of &quot;B. graminis&quot; to penetrate &quot;A. thaliana&quot; to begin the disease process. The &quot;PEN&quot; genes were later mapped to identify the genes responsible for nonhost resistance to &quot;B. graminis&quot;.

In general, when a plant is exposed to a pathogen, or nonpathogenic microbe, an initial response, known as PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI), occurs because the plant detects conserved motifs known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). These PAMPs are detected by specialized receptors in the host known as pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) on the plant cell surface.

The best-characterized PRR in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is FLS2 (Flagellin-Sensing2), which recognizes bacterial flagellin, a specialized organelle used by microorganisms for the purpose of motility, as well as the ligand flg22, which comprises the 22 amino acids recognized by FLS2. Discovery of FLS2 was facilitated by the identification of an &quot;A. thaliana&quot; ecotype, Ws-0, that was unable to detect flg22, leading to the identification of the gene encoding FLS2. FLS2 shows striking similarity to rice XA21, the first PRR isolated in 1995. Both flagellin and UV-C act similarly to increase homologous recombination in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;, as demonstrated by Molinier et al. 2006. Beyond this somatic effect, they found this to extend to subsequent generations of the plant.

A second PRR, EF-Tu receptor (EFR), identified in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;, recognizes the bacterial EF-Tu protein, the prokaryotic elongation factor used in protein synthesis, as well as the laboratory-used ligand elf18. Using &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;-mediated transformation, a technique that takes advantage of the natural process by which &quot;Agrobacterium&quot; transfers genes into host plants, the EFR gene was transformed into &quot;Nicotiana benthamiana&quot;, tobacco plant that does not recognize EF-Tu, thereby permitting recognition of bacterial EF-Tu thereby confirming EFR as the receptor of EF-Tu.

Both FLS2 and EFR use similar signal transduction pathways to initiate PTI. &quot;A. thaliana&quot; has been instrumental in dissecting these pathways to better understand the regulation of immune responses, the most notable one being the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) cascade. Downstream responses of PTI include callose deposition, the oxidative burst, and transcription of defense-related genes.

PTI is able to combat pathogens in a nonspecific manner. A stronger and more specific response in plants is that of effector-triggered immunity (ETI), which is dependent upon the recognition of pathogen effectors, proteins secreted by the pathogen that alter functions in the host, by plant resistance genes (R-genes), often described as a gene-for-gene relationship. This recognition may occur directly or indirectly via a guardee protein in a hypothesis known as the guard hypothesis. The first R-gene cloned in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; was &quot;RPS2&quot; (resistance to &quot;Pseudomonas syringae&quot; 2), which is responsible for recognition of the effector avrRpt2. The bacterial effector avrRpt2 is delivered into &quot;A. thaliana&quot; via the Type III secretion system of &quot;P. syringae&quot; pv. &quot;tomato&quot; strain DC3000. Recognition of avrRpt2 by RPS2 occurs via the guardee protein RIN4, which is cleaved. Recognition of a pathogen effector leads to a dramatic immune response known as the hypersensitive response, in which the infected plant cells undergo cell death to prevent the spread of the pathogen.

Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is another example of resistance that is better understood in plants because of research done in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;. Benzothiadiazol (BTH), a salicylic acid (SA) analog, has been used historically as an antifungal compound in crop plants. BTH, as well as SA, has been shown to induce SAR in plants. The initiation of the SAR pathway was first demonstrated in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; in which increased SA levels are recognized by nonexpresser of PR genes 1 (&quot;NPR1&quot;) due to redox change in the cytosol, resulting in the reduction of &quot;NPR1. NPR1&quot;, which usually exists in a multiplex (oligomeric) state, becomes monomeric (a single unit) upon reduction. When NPR1 becomes monomeric, it translocates to the nucleus, where it interacts with many TGA transcription factors, and is able to induce pathogen-related genes such as &quot;PR1&quot;. Another example of SAR would be the research done with transgenic tobacco plants, which express bacterial salicylate hydroxylase, nahG gene, requires the accumulation of SA for its expression

Although not directly immunological, intracellular transport affects susceptibility by incorporating - or being tricked into incorporating - pathogen particles. For example, the &quot;Dynamin-related protein 2b/drp2b&quot; gene helps to move invaginated material into cells, with some mutants increasing &quot;PstDC3000&quot; virulence even further.

===Evolutionary aspect of plant-pathogen resistance===
Plants are affected by multiple pathogens throughout their lifetimes. In response to the presence of pathogens, plants have evolved receptors on their cell surfaces to detect and respond to pathogens. &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; is a model organism used to determine specific defense mechanisms of plant-pathogen resistance. These plants have special receptors on their cell surfaces that allow for detection of pathogens and initiate mechanisms to inhibit pathogen growth. They contain two receptors, FLS2 (bacterial flagellin receptor) and EF-Tu (bacterial EF-Tu protein), which use signal transduction pathways to initiate the disease response pathway. The pathway leads to the recognition of the pathogen causing the infected cells to undergo cell death to stop the spread of the pathogen. Plants with FLS2 and EF-Tu receptors have shown to have increased fitness in the population. This has led to the belief that plant-pathogen resistance is an evolutionary mechanism that has built up over generations to respond to dynamic environments, such as increased predation and extreme temperatures.

&quot;A. thaliana&quot; has also been used to study SAR.
This pathway uses benzothiadiazol, a chemical inducer, to induce transcription factors, mRNA, of SAR genes. This accumulation of transcription factors leads to inhibition of pathogen-related genes.

Plant-pathogen interactions are important for an understanding of how plants have evolved to combat different types of pathogens that may affect them. Variation in resistance of plants across populations is due to variation in environmental factors. Plants that have evolved resistance, whether it be the general variation or the SAR variation, have been able to live longer and hold off necrosis of their tissue (premature death of cells), which leads to better adaptation and fitness for populations that are in rapidly changing environments. In the future, comparisons of the pathosystems of wild populations + their coevolved pathogens with wild-wild hybrids of known parentage may reveal new mechanisms of balancing selection. In life history theory we may find that &quot;A. thaliana&quot; maintains certain alleles due to pleitropy between plant-pathogen effects and other traits, as in livestock.

Research in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; suggests that the immunity regulator protein family EDS1 in general co-evolved with the CC family of nucleotide-bindingleucine-rich-repeat-receptors (NLRs). Xiao et al. 2005 have shown that the powdery mildew immunity mediated by &quot;A. thaliana&quot;″s RPW8 (which has a CC domain) is dependent on two members of this family: &quot;EDS1&quot; itself and &quot;PAD4&quot;.

&quot;RESISTANCE TO PSEUDOMONAS SYRINGAE 5/RPS5&quot; is a disease resistance protein which guards &quot;AvrPphB SUSCEPTIBLE 1/PBS1&quot;. &quot;PBS1&quot;, as the name would suggest, is the target of &quot;AvrPphB&quot;, an effector produced by &quot;Pseudomonas syringae&quot; pv. &quot;phaseolicola&quot;.

==Other research==
Ongoing research on &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is being performed on the International Space Station by the European Space Agency. The goals are to study the growth and reproduction of plants from seed to seed in microgravity.

Plant-on-a-chip devices in which &quot;A. thaliana&quot; tissues can be cultured in semi-&quot;in vitro&quot; conditions have been described. Use of these devices may aid understanding of pollen-tube guidance and the mechanism of sexual reproduction in &quot;A. thaliana.&quot;

Researchers at the University of Florida were able to grow the plant in lunar soil originating from the Sea of Tranquillity.

===Self-pollination===
&quot;A. thaliana&quot; is a predominantly self-pollinating plant with an outcrossing rate estimated at less than 0.3%. An analysis of the genome-wide pattern of linkage disequilibrium suggested that self-pollination evolved roughly a million years ago or more. Meioses that lead to self-pollination are unlikely to produce significant beneficial genetic variability. However, these meioses can provide the adaptive benefit of recombinational repair of DNA damages during formation of germ cells at each generation. Such a benefit may have been sufficient to allow the long-term persistence of meioses even when followed by self-fertilization. A physical mechanism for self-pollination in &quot;A. thaliana&quot; is through pre-anthesis autogamy, such that fertilisation takes place largely before flower opening.

==Databases and other resources==
*TAIR and NASC: curated sources for diverse genetic and molecular biology information, links to gene expression databases etc.
*Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (seed and DNA stocks)
*Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (seed and DNA stocks)
*Artade database
* AraDiv: a dataset of functional traits and leaf hyperspectral reflectance of Arabidopsis thaliana: see data repository

==See also==
*Sexual selection in Arabidopsis thaliana
*&quot;A. thaliana&quot; responses to salinity
*BZIP intron plant
*The Thaliana Bridge, installed in 2021 at Harlow Carr was inspired by the work of the botanical scientist Rachel Leech and represents the sequence of an &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; chromosome.
* Novosphingobium arabidopsis, isolated from the rhizosphere of the plant

==References==
==External links==

* Arabidopsis transcriptional regulatory map
* The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR)
* Salk Institute Genomic Analysis Laboratory 
* What Makes Plants Grow? The Arabidopsis genome knows Featured article in Genome News Network
* The Arabidopsis book - A comprehensive review published yearly related to research in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot;
* A. thaliana protein abundance
* The Arabidopsis Information Portal (Araport)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="26" end="37" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="thale cress"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="39" end="54" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="mouse-ear cress"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="58" end="69" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="arabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="113" end="125" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="263" end="276" title="winter annual" label="winter annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="349" end="363" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="367" end="380" title="plant biology" label="plant biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="423" end="432" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="481" end="487" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="502" end="516" title="Base pair#Length measurements" label="megabase pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="618" end="635" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q863119" start="691" end="704" title="phototropism" label="light sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="762" end="768" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189774" start="777" end="785" title="biennial plant" label="biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="832" end="838" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="920" end="924" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="1192" end="1200" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1207" end="1213" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1251" end="1257" title="Inflorescence#Simple inflorescences" label="corymb"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="1298" end="1310" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148529" start="1327" end="1334" title="silique" label="silique"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1366" end="1370" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124578" start="1537" end="1548" title="Rhizosphere (ecology)" label="rhizosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q148703" start="1572" end="1591" title="Bacillus megaterium" label="Bacillus megaterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="1972" end="1986" title="Harz Mountains" label="Harz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033" start="2020" end="2030" title="Nordhausen, Thuringia" label="Nordhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="2032" end="2041" title="Thüringen" label="Thüringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2108" end="2121" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081109" start="2211" end="2226" title="Gustav Heynhold" label="Gustav Heynhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2313" end="2320" title="genus" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2352" end="2357" title="Greek (language)" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q157396" start="2390" end="2396" title="Arabis" label="Arabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2914" end="2927" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2931" end="2942" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2956" end="2962" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="3920" end="3934" title="plant sciences" label="plant sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="3946" end="3954" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="3956" end="3965" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q62855" start="4321" end="4336" title="Alexander Braun" label="Alexander Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q63825" start="4351" end="4364" title="double flower" label="double flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691180" start="4410" end="4417" title="Agamous" label="Agamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q96934" start="4460" end="4477" title="Friedrich Laibach" label="Friedrich Laibach"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="4787" end="4792" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="4793" end="4804" title="mutagenesis" label="mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q296519" start="4972" end="4979" title="ecotype" label="ecotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q289454" start="5185" end="5197" title="George Rédei" label="George Rédei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="5663" end="5672" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161103" start="5855" end="5862" title="petunia" label="petunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74081" start="6136" end="6141" title="Transfer DNA" label="T-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6151" end="6165" title="Transformation (genetics)#Plants" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408351" start="6180" end="6185" title="clone (genetics)" label="clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="6302" end="6308" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="6328" end="6335" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764062" start="6404" end="6414" title="sequencing" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="6456" end="6466" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q596158" start="6684" end="6692" title="Genlisea" label="Genlisea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="6706" end="6714" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17713072" start="6727" end="6744" title="Genlisea tuberosa" label="Genlisea tuberosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7084" end="7091" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="7099" end="7103" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7815" end="7842" title="List of sequenced plastomes#Flowering plants" label="list of sequenced plastomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="8498" end="8507" title="Genetic recombination" label="recombine"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="8747" end="8769" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Genetic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131472" start="8821" end="8846" title="Agrobacterium tumefaciens" label="Agrobacterium tumefaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="8865" end="8868" title="deoxyribonucleic acid" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287622" start="9110" end="9124" title="tissue culture" label="tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="10536" end="10558" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="10559" end="10567" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133550" start="11044" end="11053" title="Gene knockout" label="Knockouts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11088" end="11096" title="Glossary of botanical terms#glabrous" label="glabrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="11110" end="11119" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533489" start="11145" end="11157" title="genome editing" label="gene editing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11271" end="11283" title="CRISPR#Genome engineering" label="CRISPR/Cas9."/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="11354" end="11371" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="11469" end="11479" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="11513" end="11524" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635486" start="11595" end="11602" title="HOTHEAD (gene)" label="HOTHEAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q927110" start="11868" end="11884" title="spring ephemeral" label="spring ephemeral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12418" end="12434" title="SNARE (protein)#In plants" label="SNAREs in plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="12484" end="12503" title="vesicle trafficking" label="vesicle trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="12594" end="12599" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127702" start="12600" end="12607" title="vacuole" label="vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12741" end="12744" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12772" end="12783" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="12795" end="12805" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q424241" start="13024" end="13034" title="photolyase" label="photolyase"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="13090" end="13094" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037499" start="13213" end="13227" title="lunar regolith" label="lunar regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="13355" end="13367" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="13583" end="13592" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="13599" end="13608" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="13667" end="13676" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="13856" end="13861" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="13864" end="13869" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="13872" end="13878" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="13885" end="13891" title="Gynoecium" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="13914" end="13920" title="Gynoecium" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496306" start="14084" end="14092" title="Homeotic" label="Homeotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528776" start="14431" end="14462" title="ABC model" label="ABC model of flower development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087937" start="14466" end="14473" title="Enrico Coen" label="E. Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365528" start="14478" end="14491" title="Elliot Meyerowitz" label="E. Meyerowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="14751" end="14771" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="15158" end="15174" title="Dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon-type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15677" end="15692" title="leaf primordium" label="leaf primordium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15715" end="15730" title="dorsiventrality" label="dorsiventrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="15766" end="15774" title="meristem" label="meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369634" start="15867" end="15871" title="Evolutionary history of plants" label="KNOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q331818" start="15980" end="15991" title="gibberellin" label="gibberellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="16422" end="16428" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="dorsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="16569" end="16585" title="light microscopy" label="light microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385709" start="16602" end="16611" title="seedlings" label="seedlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q840211" start="16764" end="16776" title="fluorescence microscopy" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q902045" start="16781" end="16815" title="confocal laser scanning microscopy" label="confocal laser scanning microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422013" start="16931" end="16939" title="Fixation (histology)" label="fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="16944" end="16954" title="dissection" label="sectioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q186563" start="16968" end="16978" title="time-lapse" label="time-lapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="17050" end="17064" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="17070" end="17083" title="plant morphology" label="developmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q272983" start="17162" end="17181" title="green fluorescent protein" label="fluorescent protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="17182" end="17189" title="biomarker" label="markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="17209" end="17231" title="developmental biology" label="developmental analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="17328" end="17339" title="phytochrome" label="phytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q863119" start="17383" end="17394" title="phototropism" label="phototropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="17527" end="17541" title="photoperiodism" label="photoperiodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="17543" end="17554" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754218" start="17556" end="17569" title="de-etiolation" label="de-etiolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460276" start="17575" end="17590" title="shade avoidance" label="shade avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17618" end="17621" title="FCA (plant gene)" label="FCA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17635" end="17637" title="fy (plant gene)" label="fy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17651" end="17654" title="fpa (plant gene)" label="fpa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17668" end="17683" title="LUMINIDEPENDENS" label="LUMINIDEPENDENS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17714" end="17717" title="fly (plant gene)" label="fly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17731" end="17734" title="fve (plant gene)" label="fve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17751" end="17768" title="FLOWERING LOCUS C" label="FLOWERING LOCUS C"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="17809" end="17820" title="photoperiod" label="photoperiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q654799" start="17849" end="17862" title="vernalization" label="vernalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q898769" start="17923" end="17934" title="homeodomain" label="homeodomain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948257" start="17991" end="18002" title="WD40 repeat" label="WD40 repeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876091" start="18009" end="18013" title="UVR8" label="UVR8"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="18030" end="18034" title="UV-B" label="UV-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q863119" start="18183" end="18195" title="phototropism" label="phototropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="18197" end="18208" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="18224" end="18229" title="stoma" label="stoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q417930" start="18345" end="18356" title="phototropin" label="phototropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754737" start="18485" end="18497" title="cryptochrome" label="cryptochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="18579" end="18595" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868350" start="18741" end="18749" title="Plant arithmetic" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q276985" start="18859" end="18870" title="gravitropism" label="gravitropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221696" start="18980" end="18987" title="mutagen" label="mutagen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19210" end="19221" title="Janet Braam" label="Janet Braam"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="19225" end="19240" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000106" start="19405" end="19426" title="Glowing Plant project" label="Glowing Plant project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165770" start="19619" end="19634" title="Ronald W. Davis" label="Ronald W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784126" start="19684" end="19703" title="thigmomorphogenesis" label="thigmomorphogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="19854" end="19871" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q295130" start="20005" end="20026" title="phenotypic plasticity" label="phenotypic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="20080" end="20094" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e-4" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839395" start="20155" end="20164" title="Microcosm (experimental ecosystem)" label="microcosm"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="20253" end="20261" title="Bombyx mori" label="silkworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="20497" end="20511" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915788" start="20623" end="20633" title="triterpene" label="triterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="20673" end="20682" title="biosynthesis" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="20746" end="20766" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="20803" end="20812" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="21072" end="21081" title="bacterial" label="bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="21083" end="21089" title="fungi" label="fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223597" start="21091" end="21099" title="oomycete" label="oomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="21101" end="21106" title="virus" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="21112" end="21120" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="21219" end="21234" title="plant pathology" label="plant pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="21296" end="21305" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215946" start="21428" end="21452" title="plant disease resistance" label="plant disease resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q337796" start="21700" end="21717" title="Blumeria graminis" label="Blumeria graminis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221696" start="21829" end="21836" title="mutagenic" label="mutagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q416643" start="21837" end="21859" title="ethyl methanesulfonate" label="ethyl methanesulfonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="22326" end="22339" title="commensalism" label="nonpathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483180" start="22469" end="22506" title="pathogen-associated molecular pattern" label="pathogen-associated molecular pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="22557" end="22566" title="Receptor (biochemistry)" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q418772" start="22588" end="22617" title="pattern recognition receptors" label="pattern recognition receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q24788421" start="22764" end="22773" title="flagellin" label="flagellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="22866" end="22872" title="ligand (biochemistry)" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23126" end="23201" title="Pamela Ronald#Xa21: Pattern recognition receptor-mediated immunity" label="FLS2 shows striking similarity to rice XA21, the first PRR isolated in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="23222" end="23226" title="UV-C" label="UV-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="23253" end="23277" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q183001" start="23359" end="23366" title="somatic (biology)" label="somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834236" start="23394" end="23439" title="epigenetic trait" label="extend to subsequent generations of the plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726678" start="23542" end="23547" title="EF-Tu" label="EF-Tu"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="23599" end="23616" title="protein synthesis" label="protein synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23669" end="23718" title="Agrobacterium#Uses in biotechnology" label="&amp;quot;Agrobacterium&amp;quot;-mediated transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024956" start="23885" end="23906" title="Nicotiana benthamiana" label="Nicotiana benthamiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="24089" end="24108" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q899651" start="24298" end="24330" title="mitogen-activated protein kinase" label="mitogen-activated protein kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q425282" start="24389" end="24396" title="callose" label="callose"/>
<link wikidata="Q838181" start="24413" end="24428" title="oxidative burst" label="oxidative burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278228" start="24766" end="24792" title="R gene" label="resistance genes (R-genes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531045" start="24813" end="24841" title="Gene-for-gene relationship" label="a gene-for-gene relationship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24940" end="24960" title="Gene-for-gene relationship#The guard hypothesis" label="the guard hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199165" start="25229" end="25254" title="Type III secretion system" label="Type III secretion system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25258" end="25318" title="Pseudomonas syringae#Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato strain DC3000 and Arabidopsis thaliana" label="&amp;quot;P. syringae&amp;quot; pv. &amp;quot;tomato&amp;quot; strain DC3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958568" start="25490" end="25513" title="hypersensitive response" label="hypersensitive response"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655787" start="25608" end="25636" title="Systemic acquired resistance" label="Systemic acquired resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="25790" end="25804" title="salicylic acid" label="salicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="26177" end="26186" title="redox" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26352" end="26364" title="Protein targeting#Protein translocation" label="translocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="26414" end="26434" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890439" start="26737" end="26760" title="intracellular transport" label="intracellular transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624927" start="26769" end="26783" title="Susceptible individual" label="susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26884" end="26910" title="Dynamin-related protein 2b" label="Dynamin-related protein 2b"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26911" end="26916" title="drp2b" label="drp2b"/>
<link wikidata="Q311202" start="27010" end="27019" title="PstDC3000" label="PstDC3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="27138" end="27147" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368724" start="29046" end="29057" title="pathosystem" label="pathosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="29087" end="29096" title="coevolution" label="coevolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q804635" start="29178" end="29197" title="balancing selection" label="balancing selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="29202" end="29221" title="life history theory" label="life history theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134884" start="29296" end="29305" title="pleitropy" label="pleitropy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29427" end="29465" title="EDS1 family" label="immunity regulator protein family EDS1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29497" end="29499" title="CCHELO" label="CC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454529" start="29510" end="29564" title="NOD-like receptor" label="nucleotide-bindingleucine-rich-repeat-receptors (NLRs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045958" start="29603" end="29617" title="powdery mildew" label="powdery mildew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29665" end="29669" title="RPW8" label="RPW8"/>
<link wikidata="Q898273" start="29686" end="29692" title="protein domain" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29744" end="29748" title="EDS1" label="EDS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037287" start="29772" end="29776" title="PAD4" label="PAD4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29791" end="29827" title="RESISTANCE TO PSEUDOMONAS SYRINGAE 5" label="RESISTANCE TO PSEUDOMONAS SYRINGAE 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278228" start="29844" end="29870" title="plant disease resistance protein" label="disease resistance protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q108933949" start="29890" end="29911" title="AvrPphB SUSCEPTIBLE 1" label="AvrPphB SUSCEPTIBLE 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29992" end="29999" title="AvrPphB" label="AvrPphB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627568" start="30010" end="30018" title="effector (biology)" label="effector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643336" start="30031" end="30092" title="Pseudomonas syringae pv. phaseolicola" label="&amp;quot;Pseudomonas syringae&amp;quot; pv. &amp;quot;phaseolicola&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="30184" end="30211" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="30219" end="30240" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="30324" end="30336" title="microgravity" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="30637" end="30658" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037499" start="30690" end="30700" title="lunar soil" label="lunar soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="30722" end="30741" title="Mare Tranquillitatis" label="Sea of Tranquillity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519804" start="31617" end="31621" title="The Arabidopsis Information Resource" label="TAIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783451" start="31744" end="31782" title="Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center" label="Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063591" start="31806" end="31841" title="Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre" label="Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797313" start="31865" end="31871" title="Artade" label="Artade"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091658" start="32017" end="32057" title="Sexual selection in Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Sexual selection in Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604122" start="32059" end="32104" title="Arabidopsis thaliana responses to salinity" label="&amp;quot;A. thaliana&amp;quot; responses to salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744686" start="32106" end="32123" title="BZIP intron plant" label="BZIP intron plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617946" start="32167" end="32178" title="RHS Garden Harlow Carr" label="Harlow Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q108353725" start="32231" end="32243" title="Rachel Leech" label="Rachel Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406780" start="32325" end="32352" title="Novosphingobium arabidopsis" label="Novosphingobium arabidopsis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37139" wikidata="Q125943" url="?curid=37139" title="Long Island Rail Road">
<text>The Long Island Rail Road , or LIRR, is a railroad in the southeastern part of the U.S. state of New York, stretching from Manhattan to the eastern tip of Suffolk County on Long Island. The railroad currently operates a public commuter rail service, with its freight operations contracted to the New York and Atlantic Railway. With an average weekday ridership of 354,800 passengers in 2016, it is the busiest commuter railroad in North America. It is also one of the world&#x27;s few commuter systems that runs 24/7 year-round. It is publicly owned by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which refers to it as MTA Long Island Rail Road. In , the system had a ridership of , or about per weekday as of .

The LIRR logo combines the circular MTA logo with the text &quot;Long Island Rail Road&quot;, and appears on the sides of trains. The LIRR is one of two commuter rail systems owned by the MTA, the other being the Metro-North Railroad in the northern suburbs of the New York area. Established in 1834 (the first section between the Brooklyn waterfront and Jamaica opened on April 18, 1836) and having operated continuously since then, it is the oldest railroad in the United States still operating under its original name and charter.

There are 126 stations and more than of track on its two main lines running the full length of the island and eight major branches, with the passenger railroad system totaling . , the LIRR&#x27;s budget for expenditures was $1.6 billion plus $450 million for debt service, which it supports through the collection of fares (which cover 43% of total expenses) along with dedicated taxes and other MTA revenue.

== History ==

The Long Island Rail Road Company was chartered in 1834 to provide a daily service between New York City and Boston via a ferry connection between its Greenport, New York, terminal on Long Island&#x27;s North Fork and Stonington, Connecticut. This service was superseded in 1849 by the land route through Connecticut that became part of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad. The LIRR refocused its attentions towards serving Long Island, in competition with other railroads on the island. In the 1870s, railroad president Conrad Poppenhusen and his successor, Austin Corbin acquired all the railroads and consolidated them into the LIRR.

The LIRR was unprofitable for much of its history. In 1900, the Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR) bought a controlling interest as part of its plan for direct access to Manhattan which began on September 8, 1910. The wealthy PRR subsidized the LIRR during the first half of the new century, allowing expansion and modernization. Electric operation began in 1905.

After World War II, the railroad industry&#x27;s downturn and dwindling profits caused the PRR to stop subsidizing the LIRR, and the LIRR went into receivership in 1949. The State of New York, realizing how important the railroad was to Long Island&#x27;s future, began to subsidize the railroad in the 1950s and 1960s. In June 1965, the state finalized an agreement to buy the LIRR from the PRR for $65 million. The LIRR was placed under the control of a new Metropolitan Commuter Transit Authority. The MCTA was rebranded the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in 1968 when it incorporated several other New York City-area transit agencies. With MTA subsidies the LIRR modernized further, continuing to be the busiest commuter railroad in the United States.

The LIRR is one of the few railroads that has survived as an intact company from its original charter to the present.

=== 21st century expansions ===

==== East Side Access ====

The East Side Access project built a LIRR spur to Grand Central Terminal that will run in part via the lower level of the existing 63rd Street Tunnel. The East Side Access project added a new eight-track terminal called Grand Central Madison underneath the existing Grand Central Terminal. The project was first proposed in the 1968 Program for Action, but due to various funding shortfalls, construction did not start until 2007. , the project was expected to cost $11.1 billion and was tentatively scheduled to start service in December 2022. It opened on January 25, 2023, with limited shuttle service between Jamaica and Grand Central. Full service to Grand Central began on February 27, 2023.

Several &quot;readiness projects&quot; were also completed to increase peak-hour capacity across the LIRR system in preparation for expanded peak-hour service after the completion of East Side Access. The LIRR constructed a new platform for Atlantic Terminal-bound trains at Jamaica station, converting most Atlantic Branch service between these two stations into a high-frequency shuttle. The LIRR also installed a new storage track east of Massapequa and extended one east of Great Neck station, in addition to expanding the train yard at Ronkonkoma. An expansion of the yard at Port Washington was also proposed, but , the MTA has not come to an agreement with the Town of North Hempstead, resulting in the project being postponed indefinitely.

There are also plans to build a new station in the Queens neighborhood of Sunnyside, in between the New York terminals and the Woodside station, serving as a rail hub for all LIRR branches and potentially some Amtrak and New Jersey Transit trains, as well. The Sunnyside station is to be built after the completion of East Side Access, due to current capacity constraints.

==== Main Line projects ====

In 2012, the LIRR started adding a second track along the formerly single-tracked section of the Main Line between Farmingdale and Ronkonkoma stations to increase track capacity and allow for enhanced service options. The project was completed in September 2018.

As part of the preparations for East Side Access&#x27;s opening, the LIRR also widened the two-track sections of the Main Line between Floral Park and Hicksville stations to three tracks, in addition to eliminating each of the grade crossings and rebuilding all of the stations along this stretch of the Main Line. Work on the third-track project started in September 2018. The project was completed in 2022, in time for the opening of East Side Access.

The larger Belmont Park Redevelopment Project called for a new Elmont station between the Queens Village and Bellerose stations on the Main Line, to better serve the new UBS Arena in the Nassau County neighborhood of Elmont. It is the first new station built by the LIRR in nearly 50 years; the last new station added was the former Southampton College station on the Montauk Branch, which opened in 1976 and closed in 1998, due to low ridership and the high cost of installing high-level platforms for the then-new C3 railcars. The eastbound platform of the Elmont station officially opened in November 2021, while the westbound platform opened in October 2022.

== Major stations ==

The LIRR operates out of four western terminals in New York City. These terminals are:
* Pennsylvania Station, in Midtown Manhattan, is the busiest of the western terminals, serving almost 500 daily trains. It is reached via the Amtrak-owned East River Tunnels (the only LIRR-used trackage not owned by the LIRR) from the Main Line at Harold Interlocking in Long Island City. The New York City Subway&#x27;s 34th Street–Penn Station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line) () and 34th Street–Penn Station (IND Eighth Avenue Line) () stations are adjacent to the terminal. It also connects LIRR with Amtrak and NJ Transit trains.
* is located under Grand Central Terminal and was built as part of the East Side Access project. Service to the new terminal began on January 25, 2023. Provision was made for this route on the lower level of the 63rd Street Tunnel under the East River, which carries the New York City Subway&#x27;s IND 63rd Street Line () on its upper level. The East Side Access project is expected to reduce congestion while increasing the number of trains during peak hours. It serves as the primary terminal for the Hempstead Branch and serves all other electrified branches (as the LIRR&#x27;s diesel fleet has a loading gauge too large for the 63rd Street Tunnel).
* Atlantic Terminal, formerly known as Flatbush Avenue, in Downtown Brooklyn serves the West Hempstead Branch, with limited service on other branches during the weekday peak. Other trains run as shuttles to Jamaica. It is next to the New York City Subway&#x27;s Atlantic Avenue–Barclays Center station complex (), providing easy access to Lower Manhattan. With the opening of East Side Access, service between Atlantic Terminal and Jamaica is served mostly by shuttles.
* - certain rush-hour trains run to one of two stations in Long Island City, Queens: the Long Island City station on the East River, which is the oldest western terminal of the LIRR, or the station, which is 0.6 miles to the east. From Hunterspoint Avenue, the Hunters Point Avenue subway station () can be reached. The Long Island City station is near the Vernon Boulevard–Jackson Avenue subway station, also served by the , and the Long Island City station also connects to the NYC Ferry&#x27;s East River Ferry to Midtown or Lower Manhattan.

In addition, the Jamaica station is a major hub station and transfer point in Jamaica, Queens. It has ten tracks and six platforms, plus yard and bypass tracks. Passengers can transfer between trains on all LIRR lines except the Port Washington Branch. The sixth platform opened in February 2020, and exclusively serves Atlantic Branch shuttle trains to Brooklyn. Transfer is also made to separate facilities for three subway services at the Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport station (), a number of bus routes, and the AirTrain automated people mover to JFK Airport. The railroad&#x27;s headquarters are next to the station.

== Passenger lines and services ==


The Long Island Rail Road system has eleven passenger branches, three of which are main trunk lines:
* Main Line, running along the middle of the island, between Long Island City and Greenport, via Jamaica.
* Montauk Branch, running along the southern edge of the island, between Long Island City and Montauk, via Jamaica.
* Atlantic Branch, running mostly in New York City to the south of both the Main Line and Montauk Branch, between Atlantic Terminal and Valley Stream, via Jamaica.

There are eight minor branches. For scheduling and advertising purposes some of these branches are divided into sections; this is the case with the Montauk Branch, which is known as the Babylon Branch service in the electrified portion of the line between Jamaica and Babylon, while the diesel service beyond Babylon to Montauk is referred to as Montauk Branch service. All branches except the Port Washington Branch pass through Jamaica; the trackage west of Jamaica (except the Port Washington Branch) is known as the City Terminal Zone. The City Terminal Zone includes portions of the Main Line, Atlantic, and Montauk Branches, as well as the Amtrak-owned East River Tunnels to Penn Station.

=== Current branches ===

* The Main Line runs from Long Island City east to Greenport. It is electrified west of the Ronkonkoma station; limited diesel train service runs from this point to the Yaphank, Riverhead, or Greenport stations. Trains using the East River Tunnels from Penn Station join the line at Sunnyside Yard. The services that run along this line are named after the branches they use; trains beyond Hicksville, where the Port Jefferson Branch diverges, are known as Ronkonkoma Branch and Greenport Branch trains.
* The Montauk Branch runs from Long Island City east to the Montauk station, with junctions with the Main Line at Long Island City and Jamaica. It is electrified from Jamaica east to Babylon. Trains operating east of Babylon are listed as Montauk Branch service and are hauled by diesel locomotives, while trains using the line from Jamaica to Babylon are labeled as Babylon Branch trains. The portion of the line between Long Island City and Jamaica, known as the Lower Montauk Branch, no longer carries passenger trains and is used only for freight service.
* The electrified Atlantic Branch runs from Atlantic Terminal in Downtown Brooklyn east to Jamaica, where it meets the Main Line and the Montauk Branch, and then heads southeast to become the Long Beach Branch east of Valley Stream. East of Valley Stream, the Far Rockaway Branch turns south, while the West Hempstead Branch turns northward.
* The electrified Port Washington Branch, the only one that does not serve Jamaica, branches from the Main Line west of Woodside (running parallel to the Main Line until Winfield Junction, which is east of that station) and runs east to Port Washington. It only serves four stations in Nassau County. It includes the Manhasset Viaduct, which is the highest bridge on the LIRR network.
* The Port Jefferson Branch splits from the Main Line east of Hicksville, with electric service to Huntington. The section from Huntington to Port Jefferson is served only by diesel trains. Until 1938, it continued east to Wading River.
* The electrified Hempstead Branch splits from the Main Line east of Elmont (running parallel to the Main Line until just after Floral Park) and runs east to Hempstead. At Garden City, the Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary curves off and goes to Mitchel Field.
* The electrified West Hempstead Branch splits from the Montauk Branch east of the Valley Stream station and runs northeast to West Hempstead, originally continuing to junctions with the Hempstead Branch and the Oyster Bay Branch at the Main Line.
* The Oyster Bay Branch splits from the Main Line east of Mineola and heads north and east to Oyster Bay. The first section to East Williston is electrified; only diesel trains run along the majority of the line to Oyster Bay.
* The diesel-only Central Branch runs southeast from the Main Line east of Bethpage to the Montauk Branch west of the Babylon station, giving an alternate route to the Montauk Branch east of Babylon. The Central Branch used to continue west from Bethpage to include what is now the Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary. It was proposed to be electrified as part of the 2020–2024 MTA Capital Program.
* The electrified Far Rockaway Branch splits from the Atlantic Branch east of the Valley Stream station and runs south and southwest to Far Rockaway. It used to connect westward to what is now the New York City Subway&#x27;s IND Rockaway Line to the Hammels and Rockaway Park neighborhoods of Queens.
* The electrified Long Beach Branch begins where the Atlantic Branch ends east of the Valley Stream station (running parallel to the Montauk Branch until just after Lynbrook) where it turns south to end at Long Beach.

=== Former branches ===
The railroad has dropped a number of branches due to lack of ridership over the years. Part of the Rockaway Beach Branch became part of the IND Rockaway Line of the New York City Subway, while others were downgraded to freight branches, and the rest abandoned entirely. Additionally, the Long Island Rail Road operated trains over portions of the Brooklyn Rapid Transit (BRT) elevated and subway lines until 1917.
*The Bethpage Branch ran north from the Main Line and Central Branch at Bethpage.
*The Bushwick Branch, also called the Bushwick Lead Track, is a freight railroad branch that runs from Bushwick, Brooklyn, to Fresh Pond Junction in Queens, where it connects with the Montauk Branch.
*The Camp Upton Branch was a short branch north from the Main Line to Camp Upton.
*The Cedarhurst Cut-off, officially known as the New York and Rockaway Railroad, was an extension of the Montauk Branch from its merger with the Atlantic Branch at Springfield Junction to Cedarhurst, where it would turn west and run parallel to the Far Rockaway Branch until reaching Mott Avenue in Far Rockaway.
*The Central Extension ran from Garden City eastward to Central Park (¾ mile south of current Bethpage station) and as far east as Bethpage Junction. The line was cut back to the point where it stopped at Island Trees. Today the western part of track still in use for freight and storage, and is officially known today as the Garden City Secondary.
*The Chestnut Street Incline (Brooklyn) between Atlantic Avenue and Fulton Street was opened in 1898 to allow for thru-operation over the Jamaica/Broadway Elevated Line to the East River ferry terminal. In 1909 thru passenger service to Manhattan via the Williamsburg Bridge was established in coordination with the Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company (BRT). LIRR Passenger service operated to Chambers Street between May 1909 and September 1917.
*The Creedmoor Branch, a remnant of the Central Railroad of Long Island (CRRLI) of Alexander Turney Stewart, was a short branch from the Main Line at Floral Park northwest through Creedmoor. It once went as far northwest as Flushing.
*The Evergreen Branch connected the Bushwick Branch east of Bushwick Terminal with the Bay Ridge Branch north of East New York.
*The Flushing Bay Freight Spur extended north from the Whitestone Branch, then across the Woodside Branch and then the connecting line between both branches before terminating along the south coast of Flushing Bay.
*The Glendale Cut-off ran south from the Main Line at Rego Park to the Montauk Branch at Glendale. There it became the Rockaway Beach Branch, running south across Jamaica Bay to Hammels and west to Rockaway Park. The Rockaway Beach Branch south of Ozone Park is now the IND Rockaway Line of the New York City Subway.
*The Manhattan Beach Branch ran south from the Bay Ridge Branch at Flatbush to Manhattan Beach.
*The Manorville Branch or Manor Branch ran from the Main Line at Manorville southeast to the Montauk Branch at Eastport. It was originally part of the Sag Harbor Branch (&quot;See below&quot;).
*The Mineola-West Hempstead Branch ran north of the terminus of the West Hempstead Branch across NY 24 to Country Life Press Station where it briefly joined the Hempstead Branch then ran north of the Garden City Secondary towards a wye at Mineola Station with one branch that terminated at the station and another that crossed the main line and ended near the southern terminus of the Oyster Bay Branch.
*The Montauk Cut-off was a short connecting track between the Lower Montauk Branch and the Main Line in Long Island City that allowed trains to change direction without entering the Long Island City station.
*The Northport Branch ran northeast of the current Port Jefferson Branch between Greenlawn and Northport Village.
*The North Shore Freight Branch ran from the Main Line at Sunnyside Yard west to the East River where Gantry Plaza State Park is now. Originally built by the Flushing and North Side Railroad, some of the surviving right-of-way can be found at the Arch Street Shops within the Sunnyside Yard.
*The Roosevelt Field Spur branched off northward from the current Garden City Secondary just north of Commercial Avenue. From there, it crossed Stewart Avenue just west of present-day South Street before turning slightly northeast, crossing over the Meadowbrook Parkway. The overpass, as well as sections along the sidewalk on South Street, can still be seen today. From there, it continued north before curving east and coming to an end near Zeckendorf Boulevard. The line was used for freight only. 
*The Sag Harbor Branch ran north from the Montauk Branch at Bridgehampton to Sag Harbor.
*The Wading River Branch ran east from Port Jefferson to Wading River, serving the towns of Mount Sinai, Miller Place, Rocky Point, and Shoreham.
*The White Line, which was built by the LIRR subsidiary Newtown and Flushing Railroad ran south of the Port Washington Branch between Winfield Junction and Flushing between 1873 and 1876.
*The Whitestone Branch, which was originally built by the Flushing and North Side Railroad (F&amp;NS), split from the Port Washington Branch near Mets–Willets Point station and ran north and east to Whitestone.
*The Woodside Branch ran north of the current Port Washington Branch between Woodside and east of the present Corona Yard west of the Flushing River. It also had a connecting spur to the Whitestone Branch.

=== Additional services ===

In addition to its daily commuter patronage, the LIRR also offers the following services:
*The railroad operates extra trains during the summer season that cater to the Long Island beach trade. Special package ticket deals are offered to places like Long Beach, Jones Beach, the Hamptons, Montauk, and Greenport. Some of these packages require bus and ferry connections.
*The railroad operates extra trains to and from Atlantic Terminal for Brooklyn Nets home games at Barclays Center.
*From May through October, the railroad runs four daily trains to Belmont Park (two in each direction) during the racetrack&#x27;s summer meets. Additionally, on the day of the Belmont Stakes horse race the railroad runs extra trains to accommodate the large number of spectators attending the event.
*One special non-passenger service offered by the railroad was the yearly operation of the Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey Circus train between Long Island City and Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale. Highly publicized by the LIRR, this event drew large crowds of spectators. With Ringling Bros. Barnum and Bailey&#x27;s closure, this was discontinued in May 2017.

=== Intermodal connections ===

Penn Station offers connections with Amtrak intercity trains and NJ Transit commuter trains, as well as the PATH, New York City Subway, and New York City Bus systems. Grand Central offers connections with Metro-North Railroad, as well as the subway and bus systems. Additionally, almost all stations in Brooklyn and Queens offer connections with the New York City Bus system, and several stations also have transfers to New York City Subway stations. Transfers to Nassau Inter-County Express and Suffolk County Transit buses are available at many stations in Nassau and Suffolk counties, respectively.

== Fare structure ==
Like Metro-North Railroad and NJ Transit, the Long Island Rail Road fare system is based on the distance a passenger travels, as opposed to the New York City Subway and the area&#x27;s bus systems, which charge a flat rate. The railroad is broken up into eight non-consecutively numbered fare zones. Zone 1, the City Terminal Zone, includes Penn Station, Grand Central, all stations in Brooklyn, all stations in Queens west of Jamaica on the Main Line, and Mets–Willets Point.

Zone 3 includes Jamaica as well as all other stations in eastern Queens except Far Rockaway. Zones 4 and 7 include all stations in Nassau County, plus Far Rockaway and Belmont Park in Queens. Zones 9, 10, 12 and 14 include all stations in Suffolk County. Each zone contains many stations, and the same fare applies for travel between any station in the origin zone and any station in the destination zone.
=== Peak and off-peak fares ===
Peak fares are charged during the week on trains that arrive at western terminals between 6 AM and 10 AM, and for trains that depart from western terminals between 4 PM and 8 PM. Any passenger holding an off-peak ticket on a peak train is required to pay a step up fee. Passengers can buy tickets from ticket agents or ticket vending machines (TVMs) or on the train from conductors, but will incur an on-board penalty fee for doing so. This fee is waived for customers boarding at a station without a ticket office or ticket machine, senior citizens, people with disabilities or Medicare customers.

There are several types of tickets: one way, round trip, peak, off-peak, AM peak or off-peak senior/disabled, peak child, and off-peak child. On off-peak trains, passengers can buy a family ticket for children who are accompanied by an 18-year-old for $0.75 if bought from the station agent or TVM, $1.00 on the train. Senior citizen/disabled passengers traveling during the morning peak hours are required to pay the AM peak senior citizen/disabled rate. This rate is not charged during PM peak hours.

Commuters can also buy a peak or off-peak ten trip ride, a weekly unlimited or an unlimited monthly pass. Monthly passes are good on any train regardless of the time of day, within the fare zones specified on the pass.

The LIRR charged off-peak fares at all times during the COVID-19 pandemic. Peak fares were reinstated on March 1, 2022, and several new discounts and ticket options were introduced at the same time.

=== Special fares ===
During the summer the railroad offers special summer package ticket deals to places such as Long Beach, Jones Beach, the Hamptons, Montauk, and Greenport. Passengers traveling to the Hamptons and Montauk on the &quot;Cannonball&quot; can reserve a seat in the all-reserved Parlor Cars.

Prior to November 2021, passengers going to Belmont Park had to buy a special ticket to go from Jamaica to Belmont Park (or vice versa). Weekly and monthly passes were not accepted at Belmont Park. With the opening of Elmont station in November 2021, Belmont Park and Elmont were placed into fare zone 4.

=== CityTicket ===
In 2003, the LIRR and Metro-North started a pilot program in which passengers traveling within New York City were allowed to buy one-way tickets for $2.50. The special reduced-fare CityTicket, proposed by the New York City Transit Riders Council, was formally introduced in 2004. The discounted fares were initially only available for travel on Saturdays and Sundays. In March 2022, it was expanded to include all off-peak trains throughout the week for $5. The MTA announced plans in December 2022 to allow CityTickets to be used on peak trains as well; governor Kathy Hochul confirmed these plans the next month. The peak CityTickets, as announced in July 2023, would cost $7 each. As part of a one-year pilot program starting in July 2024, monthly tickets for LIRR trips entirely within New York City would also receive a 10% discount.

CityTicket is valid for travel within Zones 1 and 3 on the Long Island Rail Road. CityTickets can only be bought before boarding – except at Mets–Willets Point, where they can be purchased on board; they must be used on the day of purchase. 

CityTicket is not valid for travel to the Elmont station (located in Nassau County, just east of the Queens-Nassau border) – or the Far Rockaway or special event-only Belmont Park station (located in Queens, just west of the Queens-Nassau border) – and are all within Zone 4. 
=== Freedom Ticket ===
In late 2017, the MTA was slated to launch a pilot that will allow LIRR, bus and subway service to use one ticket. The proposal for the ticket, called the &quot;Freedom Ticket,&quot; was initially put forth by the New York City Transit Riders Council (NYCTRC) in 2007. The NYCTRC wrote a proof of concept report in 2015. At the time of the report, express bus riders from Southeast Queens had some of the longest commutes in the city, with their commutes being 96 minutes long, yet they paid a premium fare of $6.50.

Riders who take the dollar van to the subway paid $4.75 to get to Manhattan in 65 minutes; riders who only took the bus and subway paid $2.75 to get to Manhattan in 86 minutes; and riders who took the LIRR paid $10 to get to Manhattan in 35 minutes. Unlike the CityTicket, the Freedom Ticket would be valid for off-peak and multidirectional travel; have free transfers to the subway and bus system; and be capped at $215 per month. At the time, monthly CityTickets cost $330 per month.

The Freedom Ticket will initially be available for sale at the Atlantic Terminal, Nostrand Avenue, and East New York stations in Brooklyn and at the Laurelton, Locust Manor, Rosedale, and St. Albans stations in Queens. Riders, under the pilot, would be able to purchase one-way, weekly, or monthly passes that will be valid on the LIRR, on buses, and the subway. The fare will be higher than the price of a ride on the MetroCard, but it will be lower than the combined price of an LIRR ticket and a MetroCard, and it will allow unlimited free transfers between the LIRR, buses, and subway.

The former head of the MTA, Thomas Prendergast, announced at the January 2017 board meeting that the plan would be explored in a field study to determine fares and the impact on existing service. The plan is intended to fill approximately 20,000 unused seats of existing trains to Atlantic Terminal and Penn Station (or about 50% to 60% of peak trains in each direction), while at the same time providing affordable service to people with long commutes. The details were to be announced in spring 2017, and the pilot would last six months.

The MTA Board voted to approve a six-month pilot for a similar concept, the Atlantic Ticket, in May 2018. The Atlantic Ticket is similar in that it would allow LIRR riders in southeast Queens to purchase a one-way ticket to or from Atlantic Terminal for $5. The Atlantic Ticket would start in June 2018. The success of the pilot program has led the MTA to extend the program up to the summer of 2020 and renewed calls for the program to be implemented within New York City, where the fare for the Freedom Ticket—if approved—would cost US$2.75 and include free transfers between the LIRR &amp; Metro-North, bus, and subway.

=== Far Rockaway Ticket ===
In May 2023, the MTA announced that, as part of wider fare changes and in response to requests from Far Rockaway residents, a discounted ticket option – the Far Rockaway Ticket – would be introduced for travelers traveling on the Far Rockaway Branch between Far Rockaway and other stations within New York City (excluding Belmont Park). This new ticket would provide the same discounts as a regular CityTicket, while also having protections against fare evasion, given the unique nature of the Far Rockaway Branch&#x27;s route. Tickets can only be purchased at the Far Rockaway station or on the MTA&#x27;s TrainTime app in the station&#x27;s vicinity; geolocation restrictions on the TrainTime app only allow purchase of discounted tickets within the vicinity of the Far Rockaway station.

The Far Rockaway Ticket became available for purchase on August 20, 2023.

=== OMNY ===
In 2017, it was announced that the MetroCard fare payment system, used on New York City-area rapid transit and bus systems, would be phased out and replaced by OMNY, a contactless fare payment system. Fare payment would be made using Apple Pay, Google Pay, debit/credit cards with near-field communication enabled, or radio-frequency identification cards. As part of the implementation of OMNY, the MTA also plans to use the system in the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Railroad.

=== Combo Ticket ===
In December 2022, the MTA announced the launch of an additional fare for use on journeys that utilize both of its railroad systems via Grand Central. The fare is priced as $8 more than an adult off-peak ticket from an origin station on one system to Grand Central. It is valid on both peak and off-peak trains.

== Train operations ==

The LIRR is relatively isolated from the rest of the national rail system despite operating out of Penn Station, the nation&#x27;s busiest rail terminal. It connects with other railroads in just two locations:
*West of Harold Interlocking in Sunnyside, Queens, LIRR trains enter the Amtrak-operated Northeast Corridor leading to the East River Tunnels. When this track was owned by the Pennsylvania Railroad, trains of the PRR connected to the LIRR at Penn Station. During the 1920s and 1930s a through sleeper was carried by PRR and LIRR trains from Pittsburgh to Montauk, called the &#x27;Sunrise Special&#x27;.
*In Glendale, Queens, the LIRR connects with CSX&#x27;s Fremont Secondary, which leads to the Hell Gate Bridge and New England; however, once trains leave the secondary, they enter LIRR trackage.

All LIRR trains have an engineer (driver in non-US English) who operates the train, and a conductor who is responsible for the safe movement of the train, fare collection and on-board customer service. In addition, trains may have one or more assistant conductors to assist with fare collection and other duties. The LIRR is one of the last railroads in the United States to use mechanical interlocking control towers to regulate rail traffic.

, the LIRR has 8 active control towers. All movements on the LIRR are under the control of the Movement Bureau in Jamaica, which gives orders to the towers that control a specific portion of the railroad. Movements in Amtrak territory are controlled by Penn Station Control Center or PSCC, run jointly by the LIRR and Amtrak. The PSCC controls as far east as Harold Interlocking, in Sunnyside, Queens. The PSCC replaced several towers.

The Jamaica Control Center, operational since the third quarter of 2010, controls the area around Jamaica terminal by direct control of interlockings. This replaced several towers in Jamaica including Jay and Hall towers at the west and east ends of Jamaica station respectively. At additional locations, line side towers control the various switches and signals in accordance with the timetable and under the direction of the Movement Bureau in Jamaica.

=== Signal and safety systems ===
Today&#x27;s LIRR signal system has evolved from its legacy Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR)-based system, and the railroad utilizes a variety of wayside railroad signals including position light, color light and dwarf signals. In addition, much of the LIRR is equipped with a bi-directional Pulse code cab signaling called automatic speed control (ASC), though portions of the railway still retain single direction, wayside-only signaling. Unlike other railroads, which began using color-light signals in the 20th century, the LIRR did not begin using signals with color lights on its above ground sections until 2006.

Some portions of the railway lack automatic signals and cab signals completely, instead train and track car movements are governed only by timetable and verbal/written train orders, although these areas are gradually receiving modern signals. Many other signals and switching systems on the LIRR are being modernized and upgraded as part of the Main Line&#x27;s Third Track Project, most notably at Mineola, where the system is being completely redone and modernized.

On portions of the railroad equipped with ASC, engineers consult the speed display unit, which is capable of displaying seven speed indications. As a result of a December 1, 2013, train derailment in the Bronx on the Metro-North Railroad, railroads with similar cab signal systems to Metro-North, such as the LIRR, were ordered to modify the systems to enforce certain speed limit changes, which has resulted in lower average speeds and actual speed limits across the LIRR.

=== Power transmission ===
The LIRR&#x27;s electrified lines are powered via a third rail at 750 volts DC.

== Rolling stock ==

=== Electric fleet ===
The LIRR&#x27;s electric fleet consists of 836 M7 and 170 M3 electric multiple unit cars in married pairs, meaning each car needs the other one to operate, with each car containing its own engineer&#x27;s cab. The trainsets typically range from 6 to 12 cars long.

In September 2013, MTA announced that the LIRR would procure new M9 railcars from Kawasaki. A 2014 MTA forecast indicated that the LIRR would need 416 M9 railcars; 180 to replace the outdated M3 railcars and an additional 236 railcars for the additional passengers expected once the East Side Access project is complete. The first M9s entered revenue service on September 11, 2019.

=== Diesel and dual-mode fleets ===
The LIRR also uses 134 C3 bilevel coaches powered by 24 DE30AC diesel-electric locomotives and 20 DM30AC dual-mode locomotives. They are used mostly on non-electrified branches, including the Port Jefferson, Oyster Bay, Montauk, Central, and Greenport Branches. There are also 23 MP15AC locomotives in use as work trains and yard switchers.

== Named trains ==
For most of its history LIRR has served commuters, but it had many named trains, some with all-first class seating, parlor cars, and full bar service. Few of them lasted past World War II, but some names were revived during the 1950s and 1960s, as the railroad expanded its east end parlor car service with luxury coaches and Pullman cars from railroads that were discontinuing their passenger trains.

=== Current ===
*Cannonball, a Friday-only 12-car train to Montauk running May through October, with two all-reserved parlor cars with full bar service. Since May 24, 2013, it has originated at Penn Station with a Sunday evening return from Montauk; only the westward train stops at Jamaica. The name is a nod to the &quot;Cannon Ball&quot;, the all-year train to Montauk that had operated since 1899. It carried parlor cars and standard-fare coaches and ran weekday afternoons from Long Island City, then from Penn Station until 1951, when DD1 operation, and changing engines at Jamaica, ceased.

=== Former ===
*Fisherman&#x27;s Special (1932–1950s) from Long Island City to Canoe Place Station and Montauk via Jamaica, April through October, terminating at Canoe Place in April, extended to Montauk in May. Served Long Island&#x27;s fishing trade.
*Peconic Bay Express / Shinnecock Bay Express (1926–1950) from Long Island City to Greenport and Montauk, Saturday only, express to Greenport and Montauk. Discontinued during World War II though revived for a few seasons afterwards.
*Shelter Island Express (1901–1903, 1923–1942) from Long Island City to Greenport, Friday-only summer express that connected to Shelter Island ferries.
*Sunrise Special (1922–1942) ran during the summer, NY Penn to Montauk on Fridays and westbound Mondays. In summer 1926 it ran daily. All parlor car (no coaches) from 1932 to 1937.

== Freight service ==

The LIRR and other railroads that became part of the system have always had freight service, though this has diminished. The process of shedding freight service accelerated with the acquisition of the railroad by New York State. In the 21st century, there has been some appreciation of the need for better railroad freight service in New York City and on Long Island. Both areas are primarily served by trucking for freight haulage, an irony in a region with the most extensive rail transit service in the Americas, as well as the worst traffic conditions. 

Proposals for a Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel for freight have existed for years to alleviate these issues, and, in recent years, there have been many new pushes for its construction by officials. Financial issues, as well as bureaucracy, remain major hurdles in constructing it.
In May 1997, freight service was franchised on a 20-year term to the New York and Atlantic Railway (NYAR), a short line railroad owned by the Anacostia and Pacific Company. 

It has its own equipment and crews, but uses the rail facilities of the LIRR. To the east, freight service operates to the end of the West Hempstead Branch, to Huntington on the Port Jefferson Branch, to Bridgehampton on the Montauk Branch, and to Riverhead on the Main Line. On the western end it provides service on the surviving freight-only tracks of the LIRR: the Bay Ridge and Bushwick branches; the &quot;Lower Montauk&quot; between Jamaica and Long Island City; and to an interchange connection at Fresh Pond Junction in Queens with the CSX, Canadian Pacific, and Providence and Worcester railroads.

=== Freight branches ===

Some non-electrified lines are used only for freight:

* The Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary is a short remnant of the Central Branch that splits from the Hempstead Branch at Garden City, running to Uniondale near Hofstra University and Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum. This branch does not host any NYAR service. This branch was used by the Ringling Bros. Circus to transport animals, staff and equipment to the Nassau Coliseum until their final shows there in May 2017.
* The Bushwick Branch runs west from the Montauk Branch at Maspeth to Bushwick Terminal. This was a passenger branch until 1924.
* The Bay Ridge Branch runs south and west from the Montauk Branch at Fresh Pond to Bay Ridge. At Fresh Pond, it meets CSX&#x27;s Fremont Secondary, which goes over the Hell Gate Bridge towards Upstate New York and New England. At its southern end it interchanges with the New York New Jersey Rail cross-harbor rail-barge service to New Jersey. This branch had a passenger service until 1924. The entire line was electrified with overhead wire in 1927, and the overhead wires were dismantled in 1969.

== Planned service expansions ==
=== Electrification projects ===
As part of the 2020–2024 MTA Capital Program, the MTA proposed electrifying the LIRR&#x27;s Central Branch, which would for enhanced service options and capacity, and to mitigate service disruptions, should one arise. Although funding was initially allocated through the 2020–2024 MTA Capital Program, the project was ultimately put on hold.

There have also been many pushes by residents and politicians over the past several decades – most recently by former New York State Senator Jim Gaughran – to electrify the remainder of the Port Jefferson Branch between the Huntington and Port Jefferson stations, in addition to the remainder of the Oyster Bay Branch between the East Williston and Oyster Bay, to enhance service in the served areas and to upgrade service capacities along the lines; electrifying these lines could lead to more frequent direct service to and from Manhattan, as diesel trains are not allowed in Penn Station and dual-mode trains exceed the height clearance for the 63rd Street Tunnel into Grand Central Madison.

== Law enforcement ==

The Long Island Rail Road Police Department, founded in 1868, was absorbed along with the Metro-North Railroad Police Department to form the Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police Department (MTA Police) in 1998.

== Criticism and controversy ==
=== Passenger issues ===
The LIRR has a long history of tense relations with its passengers. Daily commuters have long had complaints about the LIRR&#x27;s service. According to a 1999 article in &quot;The New York Times,&quot; the LIRR&#x27;s service woes were long considered part of the &quot;unholy trinity of life on Long Island,&quot; along with the Long Island Lighting Company&#x27;s high rates and the Long Island Expressway&#x27;s traffic snarls. Various commuter advocacy groups have been formed to try to represent those interests, in addition to the state mandated LIRR Commuters Council.

The LIRR has been criticized for not providing additional service to the East End of Long Island as the twin forks continue to grow in popularity as a year-round tourist and residential destination. Demand is evidenced by flourishing for-profit bus services such as the Hampton Jitney and the Hampton Luxury Liner and the early formative stages of a new East End Transportation Authority. Local politicians have joined the public outcry for the LIRR to either improve the frequency of east end services, or turn the operation over to a local transportation authority.

Critics claim that the on-time performance (OTP) calculated by the LIRR is manipulated to be artificially high. Because the LIRR does not release any raw timing data nor does it have independent (non-MTA) audits it is impossible to verify this claim, or the accuracy of the current On Time Performance measurement. The percentage measure is used by many other US passenger railroads but the criticism over accuracy is specific to the LIRR. As defined by the LIRR, a train is &quot;on time&quot; if it arrives at a station within 5 minutes and 59 seconds of the scheduled time. The criterion was 4 minutes and 59 seconds until the LIRR changed it because of a bug in their computer systems.

Critics believe the OTP measure does not reflect what commuters experience on a daily basis. The LIRR publishes the current OTP in a monthly booklet called TrainTalk. TrainTalk was previously known as &quot;Keeping Track.&quot; A more accurate way to measure delays and OTP has been proposed. Called the &quot;Passenger Hours Delayed&quot; index it can measure total person-hours of a specific delay. This would be useful in comparing performance of specific days or incidents, day-to-day (or week-to-week) periods, but has not been adopted.

Ridership has increased from 81 million passengers in 2011 to 89.3 million passengers in 2016, which is the railroad&#x27;s highest ridership since 1949. The all-time highest ridership was in 1929, when 119 million passengers rode 1.89 billion passenger miles. This increase in ridership has been attributed to the increased usage of the LIRR by millennials, and the increase of reverse-peak travel.

=== Pension and disability fraud scandal ===
A &quot;New York Times&quot; investigation in 2008 showed that 25% of LIRR employees who had retired since 2000 filed for disability payments from the federal Railroad Retirement Board and 97% of them were approved to receive disability pension. The total collected was more than $250,000,000 over eight years. As a result, Railroad Retirement agents from Chicago inspected the Long Island office of the Railroad Retirement Board on September 23, 2008. New York Governor David Paterson issued a statement calling for Congress to conduct a full review of the board&#x27;s mission and daily activities. Officials at the board&#x27;s headquarters responded to the investigation stating that all occupational disability annuities were issued in accordance with applicable laws.

On November 17, 2008, a former LIRR pension manager was arrested and charged with official misconduct for performing outside work without permission. However, these charges were all dismissed for &quot;no merit&quot; by Supreme Court Judge Kase on December 11, 2009, on the grounds that the prosecution had misled the grand jury in the indictment.

A report produced in September 2009 by the Government Accountability Office stated that the rate at which retirees were rewarded disability claims was above the norm for the industry in general and indicated &quot;troubling&quot; practices that may indicate fraud, such as the use of a very small group of physicians in making diagnoses.

Another series of arrests on October 27, 2011, included two doctors and a former union official.

According to court documents, from 1998 through 2011, 79% of LIRR retirees obtained federal disability when they retired. On August 6, 2013, a doctor and two consultants were found guilty in connection with the accusations and sentenced to prison.

=== Overtime fraud scandals ===

In 2018, LIRR foreman Raymond Murphy was discovered at or near his home on 10 separate occasions whilst claiming overtime pay. Murphy earned $405,021 in 2017, of which $295,490 was overtime. According to reports, he was allowed to retire with a full public pension before being reprimanded or punished.

In 2021, LIRR employee and track inspector Thomas Caputo and co-conspirators John Nugent and Joseph Balestra were federally convicted for large-scale overtime fraud. Caputo was paid approximately $461,000 in 2018, of which $344,000 was supposed overtime. He claimed to have worked 3,864 overtime hours, an average of more than 10 hours of overtime for all 365 days the year. Phone, bank, email, and other records revealed many of these hours were fraudulent: Caputo was clocked in during vacation and while attending outside social events such as a bowling league.

== Accidents and incidents ==

* On August 26, 1893, two trains collided in Maspeth, Queens, killing 16 people and injuring over 40.
* On August 13, 1926, the Shelter Island Express derailed on a switch in Calverton, Suffolk County, and crashed into the Golden Pickle Works factory. The crash claimed six lives and injured 15. 
* On August 3, 1946, a head-on train crash occurred at the Port Washington station in Port Washington. The collision resulted in two deaths and 27 injuries. 
* On February 17, 1950, two trains collided head-on after an engineer on train 192 ignored an approach signal and the following red signals at Rockville Centre station, leaving 32 dead and more than 100 injured. At the time, it was the worst rail disaster in LIRR history.
* On November 22, 1950, two trains collided after one of the trains passed a red signal in Kew Gardens, killing 78 and injuring 363 in the worst rail disaster in LIRR history.
* On March 14, 1982, a train hit a van at a level crossing on Herricks Road in Mineola after the driver of the van went around the gate. Nine people were killed and one was injured.
* On December 7, 1993, a mass shooting occurred onboard a train at Merillon Avenue station in Garden City Park. Six people were killed and nineteen others were wounded.
* On October 23, 2000, the lead locomotive (DM30AC #503) of a dual-mode commuter train caught fire west of Huntington station. The fire was blamed on a defective shoe beam that caused a 750-volt short circuit with the locomotive&#x27;s third rail contact shoe. The train was evacuated and nobody was injured, though locomotive #503 was irreparably damaged. This incident was the most severe out of several electrical fires involving the then-new DM30AC locomotives, which prompted a full-scale investigation into their reliability and safety. The entire fleet—two locomotives at a time—would be sent to General Motors for repairs beginning in fall 2001.
* On May 17, 2011, a commuter train in Deer Park obliterated a baked goods truck that attempted to drive around the crossing gate. The truck driver was killed and two train passengers were injured.
* On October 8, 2016, a commuter LIRR train side-swiped a maintenance train east of New Hyde Park station. The commuter train cars suffered damage and 33 passengers were injured, four of them seriously injured.
* On January 4, 2017, a Long Island Rail Road commuter train derailed at Atlantic Terminal in Brooklyn. At least 103 people were injured.
* On February 26, 2019, two separate Long Island Rail Road trains hit a pickup truck at the School Street railroad crossing in Westbury on the LIRR Main Line, causing the driver and two passengers to be ejected from the vehicle resulting in their deaths, numerous injuries, and damage to the nearby LIRR station platform.
* On May 25, 2019, a commuter train sideswiped a non-revenue train at the siding east of Speonk station and derailed. The non-revenue train was 14 cars long, whereas the siding could only fit 13 cars. Nobody was injured, though it took two days to restore normal service, and the derailed train&#x27;s front locomotive (DM30AC #511) was damaged beyond repair. The incident was blamed on a track circuit failure; an MTA worker, who resigned following the accident, was later charged and indicted for falsifying an inspection report of the would-be point of failure.
* On August 3, 2023, a Long Island Rail Road commuter train derailed east of Jamaica station; 13 people were injured.

== See also ==

* List of presidents and trustees of the Long Island Rail Road
* History of the Long Island Rail Road
* List of Long Island Rail Road Stations
* Long Island Rail Road Demonstration Farm
* Long Island Rail Road rolling stock
* Palsgraf v. Long Island Rail Road Co.
* 1993 Long Island Rail Road shooting

== References ==
== External links ==
*MTA Long Island Rail Road</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="4" end="25" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="31" end="35" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="LIRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="42" end="50" title="Rail transport" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="83" end="93" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="97" end="105" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="123" end="132" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="155" end="169" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="173" end="184" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014887" start="296" end="325" title="New York and Atlantic Railway" label="New York and Atlantic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602750" start="402" end="427" title="List of United States commuter rail systems by ridership" label="busiest commuter railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="535" end="549" title="Government-owned corporation" label="publicly owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="557" end="594" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="618" end="643" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="MTA Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="925" end="945" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1763" end="1776" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1781" end="1787" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q94652" start="1823" end="1842" title="Greenport, Suffolk County, New York" label="Greenport, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q755748" start="1890" end="1913" title="Stonington, Connecticut" label="Stonington, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472738" start="2013" end="2054" title="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad" label="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162585" start="2203" end="2221" title="Conrad Poppenhusen" label="Conrad Poppenhusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823040" start="2241" end="2254" title="Austin Corbin" label="Austin Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="2384" end="2405" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014787" start="2466" end="2492" title="New York Tunnel Extension" label="direct access to Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2684" end="2696" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="2826" end="2838" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589272" start="2852" end="2869" title="Government of New York (state)" label="State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="3138" end="3177" title="Metropolitan Commuter Transit Authority" label="Metropolitan Commuter Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="3206" end="3243" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641994" start="3753" end="3771" title="63rd Street Tunnel" label="63rd Street Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081891" start="3842" end="3863" title="Grand Central Madison" label="Grand Central Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329628" start="3955" end="3973" title="Program for Action" label="Program for Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="4562" end="4579" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="4596" end="4611" title="Jamaica station" label="Jamaica station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816315" start="4629" end="4644" title="Atlantic Branch" label="Atlantic Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784532" start="4763" end="4773" title="Massapequa station" label="Massapequa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599611" start="4799" end="4817" title="Great Neck station" label="Great Neck station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365733" start="4862" end="4872" title="Ronkonkoma station" label="Ronkonkoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231024" start="4902" end="4917" title="Port Washington station" label="Port Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723817" start="4989" end="5012" title="Town of North Hempstead" label="Town of North Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640869" start="5100" end="5113" title="Sunnyside station (New York City)" label="a new station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523819" start="5144" end="5153" title="Sunnyside, Queens" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033321" start="5197" end="5205" title="Woodside station (LIRR)" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435859" start="5589" end="5600" title="Farmingdale station" label="Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365733" start="5605" end="5623" title="Ronkonkoma station" label="Ronkonkoma station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460475" start="5873" end="5884" title="Floral Park station" label="Floral Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706359" start="5889" end="5907" title="Hicksville station" label="Hicksville station"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759053" start="6256" end="6270" title="Elmont station" label="Elmont station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270830" start="6283" end="6297" title="Queens Village station" label="Queens Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883817" start="6302" end="6311" title="Bellerose station" label="Bellerose"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="6363" end="6372" title="UBS Arena" label="UBS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300920" start="6410" end="6416" title="Elmont, New York" label="Elmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569102" start="6526" end="6545" title="Southampton College (LIRR station)" label="Southampton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q904740" start="6671" end="6690" title="high-level platform" label="high-level platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="6968" end="6988" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)" label="Pennsylvania Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="6993" end="7010" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="7108" end="7114" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329282" start="7121" end="7139" title="East River Tunnels" label="East River Tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204532" start="7214" end="7233" title="Harold Interlocking" label="Harold Interlocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399529" start="7287" end="7346" title="34th Street–Penn Station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="34th Street–Penn Station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613232" start="7354" end="7403" title="34th Street–Penn Station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="34th Street–Penn Station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="7484" end="7494" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11290" start="7522" end="7544" title="Grand Central Terminal" label="Grand Central Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q937694" start="7574" end="7590" title="East Side Access" label="East Side Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641994" start="7715" end="7733" title="63rd Street Tunnel" label="63rd Street Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="7744" end="7754" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296781" start="7802" end="7822" title="IND 63rd Street Line" label="IND 63rd Street Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9392675" start="8105" end="8118" title="loading gauge" label="loading gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="8160" end="8177" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="8217" end="8234" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985342" start="8246" end="8267" title="West Hempstead Branch" label="West Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981950" start="8420" end="8451" title="Atlantic Avenue–Barclays Center (New York City Subway)" label="Atlantic Avenue–Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="8497" end="8512" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190597" start="8687" end="8711" title="Long Island City, Queens" label="Long Island City, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="8749" end="8759" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611930" start="8889" end="8924" title="Hunters Point Avenue (IRT Flushing Line)" label="Hunters Point Avenue subway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611901" start="8985" end="9016" title="Vernon Boulevard–Jackson Avenue (IRT Flushing Line)" label="Vernon Boulevard–Jackson Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q26987418" start="9125" end="9141" title="East River Ferry" label="East River Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="9191" end="9206" title="Jamaica station" label="Jamaica station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298537" start="9218" end="9229" title="transport hub" label="hub station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="9252" end="9267" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563580" start="9311" end="9315" title="rail yard" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231025" start="9403" end="9425" title="Port Washington Branch" label="Port Washington Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816315" start="9494" end="9509" title="Atlantic Branch" label="Atlantic Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q649968" start="9616" end="9667" title="Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport station" label="Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport station"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="9704" end="9712" title="AirTrain JFK" label="AirTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="9723" end="9735" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="9739" end="9750" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736003" start="9951" end="9960" title="Main Line (Long Island Rail Road)" label="Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672667" start="10010" end="10026" title="Long Island City station" label="Long Island City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604401" start="10031" end="10040" title="Greenport station" label="Greenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044495" start="10057" end="10071" title="Montauk Branch" label="Montauk Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044493" start="10149" end="10156" title="Montauk station" label="Montauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816315" start="10173" end="10188" title="Atlantic Branch" label="Atlantic Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912212" start="10307" end="10320" title="Valley Stream station" label="Valley Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838506" start="10522" end="10536" title="Babylon Branch" label="Babylon Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231025" start="10730" end="10752" title="Port Washington Branch" label="Port Washington Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="10766" end="10773" title="Jamaica (LIRR station)" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231025" start="10816" end="10838" title="Port Washington Branch" label="Port Washington Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123460" start="10856" end="10874" title="City Terminal Zone" label="City Terminal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="10982" end="10988" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329282" start="10995" end="11013" title="East River Tunnels" label="East River Tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672667" start="11084" end="11100" title="Long Island City station" label="Long Island City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604401" start="11109" end="11118" title="Greenport station" label="Greenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365733" start="11150" end="11168" title="Ronkonkoma station" label="Ronkonkoma station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049113" start="11227" end="11234" title="Yaphank station" label="Yaphank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338212" start="11236" end="11245" title="Riverhead station" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640905" start="11341" end="11355" title="Sunnyside Yard" label="Sunnyside Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365732" start="11515" end="11532" title="Ronkonkoma Branch" label="Ronkonkoma Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044493" start="11622" end="11637" title="Montauk station" label="Montauk station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="11697" end="11704" title="Jamaica station" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838490" start="11745" end="11752" title="Babylon station" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838506" start="11929" end="11943" title="Babylon Branch" label="Babylon Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="12166" end="12183" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="12187" end="12204" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912212" start="12340" end="12353" title="Valley Stream station" label="Valley Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434607" start="12382" end="12401" title="Far Rockaway Branch" label="Far Rockaway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985342" start="12425" end="12446" title="West Hempstead Branch" label="West Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231025" start="12482" end="12504" title="Port Washington Branch" label="Port Washington Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033321" start="12584" end="12592" title="Woodside station (LIRR)" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025001" start="12634" end="12651" title="Winfield Junction station" label="Winfield Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231024" start="12701" end="12716" title="Port Washington station" label="Port Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="12750" end="12763" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848528" start="12781" end="12798" title="Manhasset Viaduct" label="Manhasset Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230720" start="12855" end="12876" title="Port Jefferson Branch" label="Port Jefferson Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945230" start="12948" end="12958" title="Huntington station (LIRR)" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230719" start="12991" end="13005" title="Port Jefferson station (LIRR)" label="Port Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959280" start="13072" end="13084" title="Wading River station" label="Wading River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712708" start="13104" end="13120" title="Hempstead Branch" label="Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759053" start="13155" end="13161" title="Elmont station" label="Elmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460475" start="13214" end="13225" title="Floral Park station" label="Floral Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367102" start="13244" end="13253" title="Rosa Parks Hempstead Transit Center" label="Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522200" start="13258" end="13269" title="Garden City station (LIRR)" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522195" start="13275" end="13310" title="Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary" label="Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566203" start="13334" end="13347" title="Mitchel Field" label="Mitchel Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985342" start="13367" end="13388" title="West Hempstead Branch" label="West Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985341" start="13476" end="13490" title="West Hempstead station" label="West Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116314" start="13603" end="13620" title="Oyster Bay Branch" label="Oyster Bay Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864198" start="13655" end="13662" title="Mineola station (LIRR)" label="Mineola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116311" start="13691" end="13701" title="Oyster Bay station" label="Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329685" start="13724" end="13738" title="East Williston station" label="East Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060467" start="13842" end="13856" title="Central Branch (Long Island Rail Road)" label="Central Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898094" start="13899" end="13907" title="Bethpage station" label="Bethpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434607" start="14241" end="14260" title="Far Rockaway Branch" label="Far Rockaway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434603" start="14359" end="14371" title="Far Rockaway station (LIRR)" label="Far Rockaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="14420" end="14440" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="14448" end="14465" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q62200" start="14473" end="14480" title="Hammels, Queens" label="Hammels"/>
<link wikidata="Q62296" start="14485" end="14498" title="Rockaway Park, Queens" label="Rockaway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672281" start="14542" end="14559" title="Long Beach Branch" label="Long Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708390" start="14689" end="14697" title="Lynbrook station" label="Lynbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672264" start="14730" end="14740" title="Long Beach station (LIRR)" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="14866" end="14887" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="14907" end="14924" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="14932" end="14952" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q357685" start="15017" end="15026" title="Abandoned railway" label="abandoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926166" start="15114" end="15142" title="Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company" label="Brooklyn Rapid Transit (BRT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898097" start="15186" end="15201" title="Bethpage Branch" label="Bethpage Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144537" start="15253" end="15261" title="Bethpage, New York" label="Bethpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001592" start="15268" end="15283" title="Bushwick Branch" label="Bushwick Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651664" start="15533" end="15543" title="Camp Upton" label="Camp Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056977" start="15550" end="15568" title="Cedarhurst Cut-off" label="Cedarhurst Cut-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044495" start="15650" end="15664" title="Montauk Branch" label="Montauk Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816315" start="15690" end="15705" title="Atlantic Branch" label="Atlantic Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580979" start="15709" end="15729" title="Springfield Junction (Long Island Rail Road)" label="Springfield Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052557" start="15733" end="15743" title="Cedarhurst, New York" label="Cedarhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434607" start="15794" end="15813" title="Far Rockaway Branch" label="Far Rockaway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62460" start="15844" end="15856" title="Far Rockaway, Queens" label="Far Rockaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060467" start="15863" end="15880" title="Central Extension (Long Island Rail Road)" label="Central Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522195" start="16184" end="16205" title="Garden City Secondary" label="Garden City Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q125068" start="16462" end="16481" title="Williamsburg Bridge" label="Williamsburg Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926166" start="16523" end="16553" title="Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company" label="Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183848" start="16654" end="16670" title="Creedmoor Branch" label="Creedmoor Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061739" start="16689" end="16720" title="Central Railroad of Long Island" label="Central Railroad of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720268" start="16732" end="16756" title="Alexander Turney Stewart" label="Alexander Turney Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q991627" start="16799" end="16810" title="Floral Park, NY" label="Floral Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183849" start="16829" end="16838" title="Creedmoor, NY" label="Creedmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058775" start="16873" end="16881" title="Flushing, Queens" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865057" start="16888" end="16904" title="Evergreen Branch" label="Evergreen Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001592" start="16919" end="16934" title="Bushwick Branch" label="Bushwick Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874444" start="16943" end="16960" title="Bushwick Terminal" label="Bushwick Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874075" start="16970" end="16986" title="Bay Ridge Branch" label="Bay Ridge Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="16996" end="17009" title="East New York, Brooklyn" label="East New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996278" start="17016" end="17041" title="Flushing Bay Freight Spur" label="Flushing Bay Freight Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996278" start="17066" end="17083" title="Whitestone Branch" label="Whitestone Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462920" start="17101" end="17116" title="Woodside Branch" label="Woodside Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462910" start="17212" end="17224" title="Flushing Bay" label="Flushing Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="17231" end="17247" title="Glendale Cut-off" label="Glendale Cut-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q391577" start="17280" end="17289" title="Rego Park, Queens" label="Rego Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568334" start="17315" end="17323" title="Glendale, Queens" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="17345" end="17366" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="17389" end="17400" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62200" start="17404" end="17411" title="Hammels, Queens" label="Hammels"/>
<link wikidata="Q62296" start="17424" end="17437" title="Rockaway Park, Queens" label="Rockaway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="17474" end="17484" title="Ozone Park, Queens" label="Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="17496" end="17513" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="17521" end="17541" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749236" start="17548" end="17570" title="Manhattan Beach Branch" label="Manhattan Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="17610" end="17618" title="Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599635" start="17622" end="17637" title="Manhattan Beach, New York" label="Manhattan Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398865" start="17644" end="17661" title="Manorville Branch" label="Manorville Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460208" start="17704" end="17714" title="Manorville, New York" label="Manorville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469016" start="17750" end="17758" title="Eastport, New York" label="Eastport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17838" end="17867" title="Mineola-West Hempstead Branch" label="Mineola-West Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985342" start="17901" end="17922" title="West Hempstead Branch" label="West Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486010" start="17930" end="17935" title="NY 24" label="NY 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177347" start="17939" end="17965" title="Country Life Press (LIRR station)" label="Country Life Press Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712708" start="17994" end="18010" title="Hempstead Branch" label="Hempstead Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522195" start="18033" end="18054" title="Garden City Secondary" label="Garden City Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864198" start="18072" end="18087" title="Mineola (LIRR station)" label="Mineola Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116314" start="18218" end="18235" title="Oyster Bay Branch" label="Oyster Bay Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q112839607" start="18242" end="18257" title="Montauk Cut-off" label="Montauk Cut-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672667" start="18419" end="18443" title="Long Island City station" label="Long Island City station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059621" start="18450" end="18466" title="Northport Branch" label="Northport Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230720" start="18496" end="18517" title="Port Jefferson Branch" label="Port Jefferson Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475569" start="18526" end="18535" title="Greenlawn, New York" label="Greenlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452681" start="18540" end="18557" title="Northport, New York" label="Northport Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462920" start="18564" end="18590" title="North Shore Freight Branch" label="North Shore Freight Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640905" start="18617" end="18631" title="Sunnyside Yard" label="Sunnyside Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="18644" end="18654" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262366" start="18661" end="18684" title="Gantry Plaza State Park" label="Gantry Plaza State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462920" start="18717" end="18749" title="Flushing and North Side Railroad" label="Flushing and North Side Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18856" end="18876" title="Roosevelt Field Spur" label="Roosevelt Field Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522195" start="18917" end="18938" title="Garden City Secondary" label="Garden City Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398865" start="19358" end="19375" title="Sag Harbor Branch" label="Sag Harbor Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925171" start="19413" end="19426" title="Bridgehampton, New York" label="Bridgehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087814" start="19430" end="19440" title="Sag Harbor, New York" label="Sag Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230720" start="19447" end="19466" title="Wading River Branch" label="Wading River Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476417" start="19499" end="19511" title="Wading River, New York" label="Wading River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468969" start="19534" end="19545" title="Mount Sinai, New York" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460277" start="19547" end="19559" title="Miller Place, New York" label="Miller Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459765" start="19561" end="19572" title="Rocky Point, New York" label="Rocky Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453037" start="19578" end="19586" title="Shoreham, New York" label="Shoreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995010" start="19593" end="19603" title="White Line (Long Island Rail Road)" label="White Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025001" start="19722" end="19739" title="Winfield Junction (LIRR station)" label="Winfield Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462925" start="19744" end="19752" title="Flushing Main Street (LIRR station)" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996278" start="19781" end="19798" title="Whitestone Branch" label="Whitestone Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462920" start="19834" end="19866" title="Flushing and North Side Railroad" label="Flushing and North Side Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825413" start="19922" end="19948" title="Mets–Willets Point station (LIRR)" label="Mets–Willets Point station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996274" start="19975" end="19985" title="Whitestone, New York" label="Whitestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462920" start="19992" end="20007" title="Woodside Branch" label="Woodside Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564094" start="20064" end="20072" title="Woodside, Queens" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481369" start="20097" end="20108" title="Corona Yard" label="Corona Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462918" start="20121" end="20135" title="Flushing River" label="Flushing River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40209" start="20473" end="20483" title="Long Beach, New York" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275135" start="20485" end="20496" title="Jones Beach State Park" label="Jones Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574020" start="20498" end="20510" title="the Hamptons" label="the Hamptons"/>
<link wikidata="Q498773" start="20512" end="20519" title="Montauk, New York" label="Montauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q94652" start="20525" end="20534" title="Greenport, Suffolk County, New York" label="Greenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="20642" end="20659" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="20664" end="20677" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="Brooklyn Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="20692" end="20707" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894449" start="20775" end="20787" title="Belmont Park" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q612758" start="20886" end="20900" title="Belmont Stakes" label="Belmont Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="21101" end="21143" title="Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey Circus" label="Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="21179" end="21212" title="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum" label="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="21461" end="21467" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009519" start="21489" end="21499" title="NJ Transit Rail Operations" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="21532" end="21536" title="PATH (rail system)" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="21538" end="21558" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="21564" end="21581" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="New York City Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="21888" end="21915" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="Nassau Inter-County Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634561" start="21920" end="21942" title="Suffolk County Transit" label="Suffolk County Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="22053" end="22073" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123460" start="22360" end="22378" title="City Terminal Zone" label="City Terminal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24344" end="24361" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759053" start="25015" end="25029" title="Elmont station" label="Elmont station"/>
<link wikidata="Q45956" start="25686" end="25698" title="Kathy Hochul" label="Kathy Hochul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825413" start="26103" end="26121" title="Mets–Willets Point station (LIRR)" label="Mets–Willets Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759053" start="26247" end="26253" title="Elmont station" label="Elmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434603" start="26337" end="26349" title="Far Rockaway station (LIRR)" label="Far Rockaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884403" start="26372" end="26384" title="Belmont Park (LIRR station)" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="26793" end="26809" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619127" start="26853" end="26864" title="List of express bus routes in New York City" label="express bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204288" start="27043" end="27053" title="Dollar vans in the New York metropolitan area" label="dollar van"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="27573" end="27590" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061988" start="27592" end="27607" title="Nostrand Avenue (LIRR station)" label="Nostrand Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329034" start="27613" end="27626" title="East New York (LIRR station)" label="East New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500093" start="27659" end="27668" title="Laurelton (LIRR station)" label="Laurelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666141" start="27670" end="27682" title="Locust Manor (LIRR station)" label="Locust Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368158" start="27684" end="27692" title="Rosedale (LIRR station)" label="Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586745" start="27698" end="27708" title="St. Albans (LIRR station)" label="St. Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="27929" end="27938" title="MetroCard (New York City)" label="MetroCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q62460" start="29394" end="29406" title="Far Rockaway" label="Far Rockaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434607" start="29524" end="29543" title="Far Rockaway Branch" label="Far Rockaway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29763" end="29820" title="Far Rockaway Branch#Stations" label="the unique nature of the Far Rockaway Branch&amp;#x27;s route"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="30208" end="30217" title="MetroCard" label="MetroCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="30333" end="30337" title="OMNY" label="OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="30341" end="30365" title="Contactless payment" label="contactless fare payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010990" start="30407" end="30416" title="Apple Pay" label="Apple Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834616" start="30418" end="30428" title="Google Pay (payment method)" label="Google Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="30454" end="30478" title="near-field communication" label="near-field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204532" start="31237" end="31256" title="Harold Interlocking" label="Harold Interlocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523819" start="31260" end="31277" title="Sunnyside, Queens" label="Sunnyside, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="31317" end="31335" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329282" start="31351" end="31369" title="East River Tunnels" label="East River Tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="31404" end="31425" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568334" start="31636" end="31652" title="Glendale, Queens" label="Glendale, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339051" start="31688" end="31705" title="Fremont Secondary" label="Fremont Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035131" start="31726" end="31742" title="Hell Gate Bridge" label="Hell Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="31747" end="31758" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32527" end="32554" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)#Tracks and surrounding infrastructure" label="Penn Station Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204532" start="32633" end="32652" title="Harold Interlocking" label="Harold Interlocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523819" start="32657" end="32674" title="Sunnyside, Queens" label="Sunnyside, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="33261" end="33282" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q862562" start="33350" end="33365" title="railroad signal" label="railroad signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466156" start="33488" end="33512" title="Pulse code cab signaling" label="Pulse code cab signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q433719" start="33520" end="33543" title="Automatic train control" label="automatic speed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392273" start="33985" end="33997" title="Train order operation" label="train orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264138" start="34466" end="34482" title="December 2013 Spuyten Duyvil derailment" label="train derailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="34486" end="34495" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="34840" end="34850" title="third rail" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34854" end="34866" title="List of railway electrification systems#750 V DC conductor" label="750 volts DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713927" start="34960" end="34962" title="M7 (railcar)" label="M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713473" start="34971" end="34973" title="M3 (railcar)" label="M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="34974" end="34996" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713983" start="35243" end="35245" title="M9 (railcar)" label="M9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379763" start="35260" end="35268" title="Kawasaki Heavy Industries Rolling Stock Company" label="Kawasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713473" start="35370" end="35372" title="M3 (railcar)" label="M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008156" start="35620" end="35622" title="C3 (railcar)" label="C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243337" start="35623" end="35638" title="bilevel rail car" label="bilevel coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323397" start="35653" end="35659" title="EMD DE30AC and DM30AC" label="DE30AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="35660" end="35686" title="diesel-electric locomotive" label="diesel-electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323397" start="35695" end="35701" title="EMD DE30AC and DM30AC" label="DM30AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q232962" start="35702" end="35722" title="dual-mode locomotive" label="dual-mode locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323451" start="35877" end="35883" title="MP15AC" label="MP15AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q104903181" start="36378" end="36388" title="Cannonball (LIRR train)" label="Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120476" start="36902" end="36905" title="PRR DD1" label="DD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283933" start="38108" end="38168" title="Rail freight transportation in New York City and Long Island" label="railroad freight service in New York City and on Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188101" start="38377" end="38401" title="Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel" label="Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014887" start="38705" end="38734" title="New York and Atlantic Railway" label="New York and Atlantic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q483597" start="38778" end="38807" title="Anacostia and Pacific Company" label="Anacostia and Pacific Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503007" start="39317" end="39336" title="Fresh Pond Junction" label="Fresh Pond Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="39356" end="39359" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="39361" end="39377" title="Canadian Pacific" label="Canadian Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113906" start="39383" end="39407" title="Providence and Worcester" label="Providence and Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522195" start="39507" end="39542" title="Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary" label="Garden City–Mitchel Field Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="39649" end="39658" title="Uniondale, New York" label="Uniondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="39664" end="39682" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001592" start="39930" end="39945" title="Bushwick Branch" label="Bushwick Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783909" start="39983" end="39990" title="Maspeth, Queens" label="Maspeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874444" start="39994" end="40011" title="Bushwick Terminal" label="Bushwick Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874075" start="40059" end="40075" title="Bay Ridge Branch" label="Bay Ridge Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503003" start="40123" end="40133" title="Fresh Pond, Queens" label="Fresh Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892166" start="40137" end="40146" title="Bay Ridge, Brooklyn" label="Bay Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339051" start="40183" end="40200" title="Fremont Secondary" label="Fremont Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035131" start="40222" end="40238" title="Hell Gate Bridge" label="Hell Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="40247" end="40263" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="40268" end="40279" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5800617" start="40326" end="40350" title="New York New Jersey Rail" label="New York New Jersey Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="40466" end="40477" title="railway electrification" label="electrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060467" start="40713" end="40727" title="Central Branch (Long Island Rail Road)" label="Central Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q58897898" start="41105" end="41117" title="Jim Gaughran" label="Jim Gaughran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945230" start="41188" end="41198" title="Huntington station (LIRR)" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230719" start="41203" end="41217" title="Port Jefferson station (LIRR)" label="Port Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329685" start="41294" end="41308" title="East Williston station" label="East Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116311" start="41313" end="41323" title="Oyster Bay station" label="Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641994" start="41612" end="41630" title="63rd Street Tunnel" label="63rd Street Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081891" start="41636" end="41657" title="Grand Central Madison" label="Grand Central Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="41773" end="41793" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825288" start="41824" end="41892" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police Department" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police Department (MTA Police)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="42137" end="42155" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672702" start="42291" end="42319" title="Long Island Lighting Company" label="Long Island Lighting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451739" start="42346" end="42368" title="Long Island Expressway" label="Long Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328292" start="42611" end="42634" title="East End (Long Island)" label="East End of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646239" start="42808" end="42822" title="Hampton Jitney" label="Hampton Jitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646245" start="42831" end="42851" title="Hampton Luxury Liner" label="Hampton Luxury Liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090845" start="43130" end="43149" title="on-time performance" label="on-time performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44795" end="44809" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="45165" end="45176" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284074" start="45191" end="45216" title="Railroad Retirement Board" label="Railroad Retirement Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q845547" start="45249" end="45257" title="List of Governors of New York" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674" start="45258" end="45272" title="David Paterson" label="David Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="45304" end="45312" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="45954" end="45986" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783909" start="47576" end="47591" title="Maspeth, Queens" label="Maspeth, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877571" start="47706" end="47715" title="Calverton, New York" label="Calverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="47717" end="47731" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231024" start="47887" end="47910" title="Port Washington station" label="Port Washington station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399190" start="47914" end="47929" title="Port Washington, New York" label="Port Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836450" start="47991" end="48008" title="Rockville Centre train crash" label="February 17, 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355632" start="48129" end="48153" title="Rockville Centre station" label="Rockville Centre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312302" start="48264" end="48281" title="Kew Gardens train crash" label="November 22, 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982599" start="48622" end="48638" title="1993 Long Island Rail Road shooting" label="December 7, 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480300" start="48642" end="48655" title="mass shooting" label="mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819441" start="48684" end="48707" title="Merillon Avenue station" label="Merillon Avenue station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452339" start="48711" end="48727" title="Garden City Park, New York" label="Garden City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323397" start="48830" end="48836" title="EMD DE30AC and DM30AC" label="DM30AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945230" start="48893" end="48911" title="Huntington station (LIRR)" label="Huntington station"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="48981" end="48994" title="short circuit" label="short circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="49389" end="49403" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008901" start="49722" end="49743" title="New Hyde Park station" label="New Hyde Park station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="49854" end="49869" title="2017 Brooklyn train crash" label="January 4, 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="49922" end="49939" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048577" start="50358" end="50375" title="dead mileage" label="non-revenue train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576331" start="50398" end="50412" title="Speonk station" label="Speonk station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634801" start="51011" end="51071" title="List of presidents and trustees of the Long Island Rail Road" label="List of presidents and trustees of the Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869907" start="51074" end="51110" title="History of the Long Island Rail Road" label="History of the Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577009" start="51113" end="51151" title="List of Long Island Rail Road stations" label="List of Long Island Rail Road Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q130500004" start="51154" end="51194" title="Long Island Rail Road Demonstration Farm" label="Long Island Rail Road Demonstration Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672721" start="51197" end="51232" title="Long Island Rail Road rolling stock" label="Long Island Rail Road rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128740" start="51235" end="51272" title="Palsgraf v. Long Island Rail Road Co." label="Palsgraf v. Long Island Rail Road Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2982599" start="51275" end="51310" title="1993 Long Island Rail Road shooting" label="1993 Long Island Rail Road shooting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37141" wikidata="Q13" url="?curid=37141" title="Triskaidekaphobia">
<text>Triskaidekaphobia ( , ; ) is fear or avoidance of the number . It is also a reason for the fear of Friday the 13th, called &quot;paraskevidekatriaphobia&quot; () or &quot;friggatriskaidekaphobia&quot; ().

The term was used as early as in 1910 by Isador Coriat in &quot;Abnormal Psychology&quot;.

==Origins==

The supposed unlucky nature of the number 13 has several theories of origin. Although several authors claim it is an older belief, no such evidence has been documented so far. In fact, the earliest attestation of 13 being unlucky is first found after the Middle Ages in Europe.

===Playing cards===

Tarot card games have been attested since at least around 1450 with the Visconti-Sforza Tarot. One of the trump cards in tarot represents Death, and is numbered 13 in several variants.

In 1781, Antoine Court de Gébelin writes of this card&#x27;s presence in the Tarot of Marseilles that the number thirteen was &quot;toujours regarde comme malheureux&quot; (&quot;always considered as unlucky&quot;). In 1784, Johann Gottlob Immanuel Breitkopf cites Gébelin, and reaffirms that the tarot card number 13 is death and misfortune (&quot;Der Tod, Unglück&quot;).

===13 at a table===

Since at least 1774, a superstition of &quot;thirteen at a table&quot; has been documented: if 13 people sit at a table, then one of them must die within a year. The origin of the superstition is unclear and various theories of its source have been presented over the years.

In 1774, Johann August Ephraim Götze speculated:
&quot;Da ich aus der Erfahrung weis, daß der Aberglaube nichts liebers, als Religionssachen, zu seinen Beweisen macht; so glaube ich bey nahe nicht zu irren, wenn ich den Ursprung des Gegenwärtigen mit der Zahl XIII, von der Stelle des Evangelii herleite, wo der Heiland, bey der Ostermahlzeit, mit zwölf Jüngern zu Tische saß.&quot;
Since I know from experience that superstition loves nothing better than religious matters as its proofs, I believe I&#x27;m almost certainly unmistaken when I derive the origin of the matter of the number XIII from the passage of the Gospel where the Savior sat at table with twelve disciples at the Easter meal.
From the 1890s, a number of English-language sources reiterated the idea that at the Last Supper, Judas, the disciple who betrayed Jesus, was the 13th to sit at the table. The Bible says nothing about the order in which the Apostles sat, but there were thirteen people at the table.

In 1968, Douglas Hill in &quot;Magic and Superstitions&quot; recounts a Norse myth about 12 gods having a dinner party in Valhalla. The trickster god Loki, who was not invited, arrived as the 13th guest, and arranged for Höðr to shoot Balder with a mistletoe-tipped arrow. This story was also echoed in &quot;Holiday folklore, phobias, and fun&quot; by folklore historian Donald Dossey, citing Hill. However, in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; by Snorri Sturluson, the story about Loki and Balder does not emphasize that there are 12 gods, nor does it talk about a dinner party or the number 13.

==Events related to &quot;unlucky&quot; 13==

* On Friday, October 13, 1307, the arrest of the Knights Templar was ordered by Philip IV of France. While the number 13 was considered unlucky, Friday the 13th was not considered unlucky at the time. The incorrect idea that their arrest was related to the phobias surrounding Friday the 13th was invented early in the 21st century and popularized by the novel &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;.
* In 1881 an influential group of New Yorkers, led by US Civil War veteran Captain William Fowler, came together to put an end to this and other superstitions. They formed a dinner cabaret club, which they called the Thirteen Club. At the first meeting, on January 13, 1881, at 8:13 p.m., thirteen people sat down to dine in Room 13 of the venue. The guests walked under a ladder to enter the room and were seated among piles of spilled salt. Many &quot;Thirteen Clubs&quot; sprang up all over North America over the next 45 years. Their activities were regularly reported in leading newspapers, and their numbers included five future US presidents, from Chester A. Arthur to Theodore Roosevelt. Thirteen Clubs had various imitators, but they all gradually faded due to a lack of interest.
* The British submarine, , sank on 29 January 1917 while on her trials after diving with a hatch and some vents still open. Although she was raised and 48 men were rescued, 32 sailors and civilian technicians died. When repaired, she was renamed &quot;K22&quot; but was later involved in multiple collisions with other K-class submarines on 1 February 1918 in which a total of 103 men were killed, an event known as the Battle of May Island. In the subsequent British L-class submarine, the number L13 was not used.
* Apollo 13 was launched on April 11, 1970, at 13:13:00 CST and suffered an oxygen tank explosion on April 13 at 21:07:53 CST. It returned safely to Earth on April 17.
* Friday the 13th mini-crash was a stock market crash that occurred on Friday, October 13, 1989.
* Vehicle registration plates in Ireland are such that the first two digits represent the year of registration of the vehicle (i.e., 11 is a 2011 registered car, 12 is 2012, and so on). In 2012, there were concerns among members of the Society of the Irish Motor Industry (SIMI) that the prospect of having &quot;13&quot; registered vehicles might discourage motorists from buying new cars because of superstition surrounding the number thirteen, and that car sales and the motor industry (which was already doing badly) would suffer as a result. The government, in consultation with SIMI, introduced a system whereby 2013 registered vehicles would have their registration plates&#x27; age identifier string modified to read &quot;131&quot; for vehicles registered in the first six months of 2013 and &quot;132&quot; for those registered in the latter six months of the year.

===Effect on US Shuttle program mission naming===
The disaster that occurred on Apollo 13 may have been a factor that led to a renaming that prevented a mission called STS-13. STS-41-G was the name of the thirteenth Space Shuttle flight. However, originally STS-41-C was the mission originally numbered STS-13 STS-41-C was the eleventh orbital flight of the space shuttle program.

The numbering system of the Space Shuttle was changed to a new one after STS-9. The new naming scheme started with STS-41B, the previous mission was STS-9, and the thirteenth mission (what would have been STS-13) would be STS-41C. The new scheme had first number stand for the U.S. fiscal year, the next number was a launch site (1 or 2), and the next was the number of the mission numbered with a letter for that period.

In the case of the actual 13th flight, the crew was apparently not superstitious and made a humorous mission patch that had a black cat on it. Also, that mission re-entered and landed on Friday the 13th which one crew described as being &quot;pretty cool&quot;. Because of the way the designations and launch manifest work, the mission numbered STS-13 might not have actually been the 13th to launch as was common throughout the shuttle program; indeed it turned out to be the eleventh. One of the reasons for this was when a launch had to be scrubbed, which delayed its mission.

NASA said in a 2016 news article it was due to a much higher frequency of planned launches (pre-Challenger disaster). As it was, the Shuttle program did have a disaster on its &quot;one-hundred&quot; and thirteenth mission going by date of launch, which was STS-107. The actual mission STS-113 was successful, and had actually launched earlier due to the nature of the launch manifest.

===Omission of 13th rooms===

Hotels, buildings and elevator manufacturers have also avoided using the number 13 for rooms and floors based on triskaidekaphobia. The 13-room (as of 1946) Boots Court Motel on U.S. Route 66 is one example; its rooms are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14.

Several notable streets in London lack a No. 13, due to “the superstitions of London,” including “Fleet Street, Park Lane, Oxford Street, Praed Street, St. James’s Street, Haymarket and Grosvenor Street.”

==Thirteenth floor==
The thirteenth floor is a designation of a level of a multi-level building that is often omitted in countries where the number is considered unlucky. Omitting the 13th floor may take a variety of forms; the most common include denoting what would otherwise be considered the thirteenth floor as level 14, giving the thirteenth floor an alternative designation such as &quot;12A&quot; or &quot;M&quot; (the thirteenth letter of the Latin alphabet), or closing the 13th floor to public occupancy or access (e.g., by designating it as a mechanical floor).

Reasons for omitting a thirteenth floor include triskaidekaphobia on the part of the building&#x27;s owner or builder, or a desire by the building owner or landlord to prevent problems that may arise with superstitious tenants, occupants, or customers. In 2002, based on an internal review of records, Dilip Rangnekar of Otis Elevators estimated that 85% of the buildings with at least thirteen floors with Otis brand elevators did not have a floor named the 13th floor. Early tall-building designers, fearing a fire on the 13th floor, or fearing tenants&#x27; superstitions about the rumor, decided to omit having a 13th floor listed on their elevator numbering. This practice became commonplace, and eventually found its way into American mainstream culture and building design.

Vancouver city planners have banned the practice of skipping 4s and 13s, since it could lead to mistakes by first responders, for example going to the wrong floor.

===Origin===
The origin of skipping the thirteenth floor when installing elevators is not known. However, during the advent of early skyscrapers, New York architectural critics warned developers not to exceed the height of the 13th floor. These critics insisted that buildings rising above the 13th floor () would lead to increased street congestion, ominous shadows and lower property values. Nevertheless, in a work published in 1939, sociologist Otto Neurath compared the use of money in an economy, which he saw as unnecessary, to the superstition of not installing the thirteenth floor: merely a social convention.

===Methods of avoiding===
*Skipping: Most commonly, 13 is skipped, as in: &quot;12&quot;, &quot;14&quot;, &quot;15&quot;... The floor labeled &quot;14&quot; on the elevator is the thirteenth floor and the number 13 is skipped on the elevator console. In such buildings, floors after 12 are nominally incorrect, with their labeled floor being one higher than the actual floor. Many ships, including cruise liners have omitted having a 13th deck due to triskaidekaphobia. Instead, the decks are numbered up to 12 and skip straight to number 14.
*12A, 12B, 14: Sometimes to keep numbers consistent the 13th floor is simply renumbered as &quot;12A&quot; or &quot;12B&quot;, as in: &quot;12&quot;, &quot;12A&quot;, &quot;14&quot;.., or &quot;12&quot;, &quot;12B&quot;, &quot;14&quot;; this does not affect the numbers of the higher floors. Likewise, &quot;14&quot; could be used for the 13th floor and &quot;14A&quot; or &quot;14B&quot; could be used for the 14th floor.
*Special designations: Other buildings will often use names for certain floors to avoid giving a floor on the building the number 13 designation. One such example is the Radisson Hotel in Winnipeg, Manitoba, where the 13th floor is called the &quot;pool floor&quot;. Another example is the Sheraton on the Falls in Niagara Falls, Ontario, where the 13th floor consists solely of a restaurant. A third example is the Trump International Hotel and Tower Chicago in Chicago, Illinois, where the 13th floor is the mezzanine floor.
*Uninhabited 13th floor: sometimes, the floor is put to some other use, such as a mechanical floor. Such usage is sometimes the subject of conspiracy theories (see below).
*Letter M: In Richmond, Virginia, the Monroe Park Towers has a 13th floor, but it is used for mechanical equipment and is only accessible from the freight elevator or the stairs. The M designation on the elevator buttons of the freight elevator can also be construed as meaning the &quot;Mechanical level&quot; in this particular building, or as a &quot;Mezzanine level&quot;.
*Split-level apartments* Sometimes, a tenement block will contain split-level apartments where the units themselves contain internal staircases and the main elevators for the building therefore do not stop on every floor. One example is Princess Towers in Kingston, Ontario, which has stories excluding the roof-top. The elevators stop at B (basement), G (ground), 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15th floors only. In this case, the unmarked 11th and 13th floors are accessed within units on the marked 12th floor.

===Research===
In a 2007 Gallup poll, 13 percent of American adults reported that they would be bothered if given a hotel room on the thirteenth floor, while 9 percent indicated that they would be sufficiently bothered to request a room on a different floor. Research on thirteenth-floor effects on real estate values presents a mixed picture. Several prominent American real estate developers have claimed that they are unaware of any reduction in the value of thirteenth-floor offices or apartments. On the other hand, in studies conducted in Russia, Antipov and Pokryshevskaya, and Burakov found that thirteenth-floor apartments were less likely to sell compared to apartments on twelfth or fourteenth floors. This effect, however, was eliminated if developers offered buyers a 10% or greater discount on the cost of thirteenth-floor apartments.

==Notable people with triskaidekaphobia==
* Arnold Schoenberg
* Franklin D. Roosevelt
* Sholom Aleichem
* Stephen King
* Nick Yarris
* Ángel Nieto

==Similar phobias==

* Number 4 (Tetraphobia). In China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam, as well as in some other East Asian and South East Asian countries, it is not uncommon for buildings (including offices, apartments, hotels) to omit floors with numbers that include the digit 4, and Finnish mobile phone manufacturer Nokia&#x27;s 1xxx-9xxx series of mobile phones does not include any model numbers beginning with a 4 (except Series 40, Nokia 3410 and Nokia 4.2). This originates from Classical Chinese, in which the pronunciation of the word for &quot;four&quot; (四, &quot;sì&quot; in Mandarin) is very similar to that of the word for &quot;death&quot; (死, &quot;sǐ&quot; in Mandarin), and remains so in the other countries&#x27; Sino-Xenic vocabulary (Korean &quot;sa&quot; for both; Japanese &quot;shi&quot; for both; Vietnamese &quot;tứ&quot; &quot;four&quot; vs. &quot;tử&quot; &quot;death&quot;). In South Korea, buildings tend to include the fourth floor in spite of similar pronunciation issues in the Korean language, though some newer buildings may substitute the letter F in the place of the number 4.
* Friday the 13th (Paraskevidekatriaphobia or Friggatriskaidekaphobia) is considered to be a day of bad luck in a number of western cultures. In Greece and some areas of Latin America, Tuesday the 13th is similarly considered unlucky.
* Number 17 (Heptadecaphobia). In Italy, perhaps because in Roman numerals 17 is written XVII, which can be rearranged to VIXI, which in Latin means &quot;I have lived&quot; but can be a euphemism for &quot;I am dead.&quot; In Italy, some planes have no row 17 and some hotels have no room 17. In Italy, cruise ships built and operated by MSC Cruises lack a Deck 17.
* Number 39 (Triakontenneaphobia). There is a belief in some parts of Afghanistan that the number 39 (thrice thirteen) is cursed or a badge of shame.
* Number 616 (Hexakosioihekkaidekaphobia) or 666 (Hexakosioihexekontahexaphobia), which come from the Biblical number of the beast.

==Lucky 13==

In some regions, 13 is or has been considered a lucky number. For example, prior to the First World War, 13 was considered to be a lucky number in France, even being featured on postcards and charms. In more modern times, 13 is lucky in Italy except in some contexts, such as sitting at the dinner table. In Cantonese-speaking areas, including Hong Kong and Macau, the number 13 is considered lucky because it sounds similar to the Cantonese words meaning &quot;sure to live&quot; (as opposed to the unlucky number 14 which in Cantonese sounds like the words meaning &quot;sure to die&quot;). Colgate University was started by 13 men with $13 and 13 prayers, so 13 is considered a lucky number. Friday the 13th is the luckiest day at Colgate.

A number of sportspeople are known for wearing the number 13 jersey and performing successfully. On November 23, 2003, the Miami Dolphins retired the number 13 for Dan Marino, who played quarterback for the Dolphins from 1983 to 1999. Kurt Warner, St. Louis Rams quarterback (NFL MVP, 1999 &amp; 2001, and Super Bowl XXXIV MVP) also wore number 13. Wilt Chamberlain, 13-time NBA All-Star, has had his No. 13 Jersey retired by the NBA&#x27;s Golden State Warriors, Philadelphia 76ers; Los Angeles Lakers, Harlem Globetrotters, and Kansas University Jayhawks, all of which he played for. In 1966, the Portugal national football team achieved their best-ever result at the World Cup final tournaments by finishing third, thanks to a Mozambican-born striker, Eusebio, who has scored nine goals at World Cup – four of them in a 5-3 quarterfinal win over North Korea – and won the Golden Boot award as the tournament&#x27;s top scorer while wearing the number 13. In the 1954 and 1974 World Cup finals, Germany&#x27;s Max Morlock and Gerd Müller, respectively, played and scored in the final, wearing the number 13. More recent footballers playing successfully despite wearing number 13, include Michael Ballack, Alessandro Nesta, and Rafinha. Among other sportspeople who have chosen 13 as their number, are Venezuelans Dave Concepción, Omar Vizquel, Oswaldo Guillén and Pastor Maldonado due to the number being considered lucky in Venezuelan culture. Swedish-born hockey player Mats Sundin, who played 14 of his 18 NHL seasons for the Toronto Maple Leafs, setting team records for goals and points, had his number 13 retired by the team on 15 October 2016.

Outside of the sporting industry, 13 is used as a lucky number by other individuals, including Taylor Swift who has made prominent use of the number 13 throughout her career.

==In popular culture==
Some conspiracy theorists have suggested that the thirteenth floor in government buildings is not really missing, but actually contains top-secret governmental departments, or more generally that it is proof of something sinister or clandestine going on. This implication is often carried over, implicitly or explicitly, into popular culture; for example in:
* The films &quot;The Thirteenth Floor,&quot; &quot;Nightmare on the 13th Floor,&quot; and &quot;1408&quot;.
* The hidden research and development labs of Network 23 in the television program &quot;Max Headroom&quot;.
* The top-secret research and development division of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; in the fifth book of the series, &quot;Mostly Harmless&quot;.
* The computer game &quot;Floor 13&quot; by Virgin Interactive.
* The sci-fi comedy &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; where &quot;floor 13&quot; referred to a secret brig which was several decks high.
* The book &quot;Company&quot; by Max Barry.
* The Superman story in &quot;Action Comics&quot; #448 (June 1975) featured a secret thirteenth floor used to teleport alien tourists from another planet to visit Earth.
* The &quot;&quot; storyline in &quot;Batman&quot; features the thirteenth floors of Gotham&#x27;s buildings being used as bases by the assassins of a secret society that has ruled Gotham for generations.
* The level &quot;The 13th Floor&quot; in the computer game &quot;Tomb Raider: Chronicles&quot;.
* The episode &quot;Grey 17 Is Missing&quot; of the TV series &quot;Babylon 5&quot; has a similar theme of a &quot;missing&quot; floor number actually containing a hidden floor with dark secrets.
* The psychedelic rock band The 13th Floor Elevators.
* &quot;The Rockford Files&quot; episode &quot;Sticks and Stones May Break Your Bones, But Waterbury Will Bury You&quot;.
* The first-season episode &quot;Ghost In The Machine&quot; of the TV series &quot;The X-Files&quot; features a scene where the Central Operating System reads aloud each distinct level, omitting the thirteenth floor as the elevator ascends.
* In the Marvel Comics event storyline &quot;Iron Man 2020&quot;, an army of rebel robots and artificial intelligences have a safe haven in the form of an extra-dimensional plane of existence made of solid light called the Thirteenth Floor that can be reached through any elevator in Manhattan, and access to it manifests in the form of a button for the thirteen floor that only cyber beings can see that appears off to the side of a regular floor button panel.
* In the film &quot;No Country For Old Men&quot; Carson Wells (Woody Harrelson) mentions to Man who hires Wells (Stephen Root) that one floor in a building seems to be missing.
* In the Canadian cartoon series, Freaky Stories, an accountant becomes obsessed with finding the 13th floor, only become trapped with dozens of like-minded men by their collective obsession.

==See also==
* List of phobias, including Numerophobia
*National Accident Day (Finland)

==Notes==
: The main reason for this was stated to be to increase the number of car sales in the second half of the year. Even though 70% of new cars are bought during the first four months of the year, some consumers believe that the calendar year of registration does not accurately reflect the real age of a new car, since cars bought in January will most likely have been manufactured the previous year, while those bought later in the year will be actually made in the same year.
: Tuesday is generally unlucky in Greece for the fall of Byzantium Tues 29th May 1453. In Spanish-speaking countries, there is a proverb: En martes no te cases, ni te embarques &#x27;On Tuesday, do not get married or set sail&#x27;.

==References==
==External links==
* &#x27;Unlucky&#x27; airline logo grounded BBC, 21 February 2007
* Would you buy a number 13 house? BBC Magazine, Friday, 12 December 2008
* Triskaidekaphobia on MathWorld
* Who&#x27;s Afraid Of Friday The 13th? on NPR</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13" start="0" end="17" title="Triskaidekaphobia" label="Triskaidekaphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204372" start="99" end="114" title="Friday the 13th" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656613" start="247" end="260" title="Isador Coriat" label="Isador Coriat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="566" end="577" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q510406" start="611" end="627" title="Tarot card games" label="Tarot card games"/>
<link wikidata="Q726633" start="683" end="704" title="Visconti-Sforza Tarot" label="Visconti-Sforza Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q727407" start="717" end="728" title="Trump (card games)" label="trump cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q585905" start="806" end="830" title="Antoine Court de Gébelin" label="Antoine Court de Gébelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703727" start="874" end="893" title="Tarot of Marseilles" label="Tarot of Marseilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q324653" start="1022" end="1055" title="Johann Gottlob Immanuel Breitkopf" label="Johann Gottlob Immanuel Breitkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q69939" start="1478" end="1505" title="Johann August Ephraim Goeze" label="Johann August Ephraim Götze"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="2251" end="2262" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="2264" end="2269" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="2275" end="2283" title="Disciple (Christianity)" label="disciple"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2297" end="2302" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301602" start="2459" end="2471" title="Douglas Hill" label="Douglas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="2522" end="2532" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="2572" end="2580" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="2600" end="2604" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204900" start="2671" end="2675" title="Höðr" label="Höðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q131658" start="2685" end="2691" title="Balder" label="Balder"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="2872" end="2882" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="2892" end="2908" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="2926" end="2930" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q131658" start="2935" end="2941" title="Balder" label="Balder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="3137" end="3152" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="3168" end="3187" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="3455" end="3472" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768855" start="3693" end="3710" title="the Thirteen Club" label="the Thirteen Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="4135" end="4152" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="4156" end="4174" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296558" start="4589" end="4606" title="British K-class submarine" label="K-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784617" start="4690" end="4710" title="Battle of May Island" label="Battle of May Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520129" start="4730" end="4755" title="British L-class submarine" label="British L-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="4788" end="4797" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="4842" end="4845" title="Central Time Zone" label="CST"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090397" start="4956" end="4982" title="Friday the 13th mini-crash" label="Friday the 13th mini-crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740415" start="5053" end="5091" title="Vehicle registration plates of Ireland" label="Vehicle registration plates in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="6008" end="6017" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q600770" start="6104" end="6112" title="STS-41-G" label="STS-41-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q752802" start="6186" end="6194" title="STS-41-C" label="STS-41-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="6338" end="6351" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="6383" end="6388" title="STS-9" label="STS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327677" start="6859" end="6868" title="black cat" label="black cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204372" start="6920" end="6935" title="Friday the 13th" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q178836" start="7572" end="7579" title="STS-107" label="STS-107"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135865" start="7600" end="7607" title="STS-113" label="STS-113"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944036" start="7888" end="7905" title="Boots Court Motel" label="Boots Court Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="7909" end="7922" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="8279" end="8284" title="storey" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="8667" end="8681" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804522" start="8770" end="8786" title="mechanical floor" label="mechanical floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="8995" end="9008" title="superstitious" label="superstitious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="9111" end="9124" title="Otis Elevator" label="Otis Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="9572" end="9581" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19693316" start="9680" end="9695" title="first responder" label="first responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q78570" start="10186" end="10198" title="Otto Neurath" label="Otto Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="10219" end="10224" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="10338" end="10355" title="social convention" label="social convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751979" start="11494" end="11508" title="Radisson Hotels" label="Radisson Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="11512" end="11520" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="11522" end="11530" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494699" start="11614" end="11635" title="Sheraton on the Falls" label="Sheraton on the Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="11705" end="11715" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q546221" start="11740" end="11783" title="Trump International Hotel and Tower Chicago" label="Trump International Hotel and Tower Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="11834" end="11849" title="mezzanine floor" label="mezzanine floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804522" start="11933" end="11949" title="mechanical floor" label="mechanical floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="11990" end="12009" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12015" end="12020" title="#In popular culture" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="12377" end="12386" title="Mezzanine" label="Mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="12656" end="12673" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="13794" end="13811" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="13814" end="13835" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q238090" start="13838" end="13853" title="Sholom Aleichem" label="Sholom Aleichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="13856" end="13868" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899167" start="13871" end="13882" title="Nick Yarris" label="Nick Yarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q251846" start="13885" end="13896" title="Ángel Nieto" label="Ángel Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q202" start="13928" end="13929" title="4 (number)" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q72210" start="13931" end="13942" title="Tetraphobia" label="Tetraphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13948" end="13953" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="13955" end="13964" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="13966" end="13972" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="13974" end="13983" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13985" end="13990" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="13992" end="13997" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="14003" end="14010" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="14124" end="14131" title="offices" label="offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="14133" end="14143" title="apartments" label="apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="14145" end="14151" title="hotels" label="hotels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14258" end="14291" title="List of Nokia products#1xxx–9xxx series" label="1xxx-9xxx series of mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995656" start="14354" end="14363" title="Series 40" label="Series 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016106" start="14365" end="14375" title="Nokia 3410" label="Nokia 3410"/>
<link wikidata="Q65241342" start="14380" end="14389" title="Nokia 4.2" label="Nokia 4.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="14413" end="14430" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565510" start="14659" end="14669" title="Sino-Xenic" label="Sino-Xenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="14834" end="14845" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204372" start="15043" end="15058" title="Friday the 13th" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="15165" end="15180" title="western culture" label="western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="15186" end="15192" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q40118" start="15285" end="15287" title="17 (number)" label="17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730759" start="15289" end="15304" title="Heptadecaphobia" label="Heptadecaphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="15463" end="15472" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q663626" start="15615" end="15626" title="MSC Cruises" label="MSC Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q712782" start="15652" end="15654" title="39 (number)" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195255" start="15656" end="15675" title="Triakontenneaphobia" label="Triakontenneaphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069927" start="15802" end="15805" title="616 (number)" label="616"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="15807" end="15833" title="Hexakosioihekkaidekaphobia" label="Hexakosioihekkaidekaphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213058" start="15838" end="15841" title="666 (number)" label="666"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="15843" end="15872" title="Hexakosioihexekontahexaphobia" label="Hexakosioihexekontahexaphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="15904" end="15923" title="number of the beast" label="number of the beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16177" end="16182" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191335" start="16533" end="16551" title="Colgate University" label="Colgate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="16807" end="16821" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q195367" start="16848" end="16858" title="Dan Marino" label="Dan Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q945750" start="16919" end="16930" title="Kurt Warner" label="Kurt Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q176843" start="16990" end="17006" title="Super Bowl XXXIV" label="Super Bowl XXXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q182455" start="17033" end="17049" title="Wilt Chamberlain" label="Wilt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="17283" end="17314" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q162043" start="17439" end="17446" title="Eusebio" label="Eusebio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14132" start="17533" end="17544" title="North Korea national football team" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17559" end="17576" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="Golden Boot award"/>
<link wikidata="Q665946" start="17649" end="17653" title="1954 FIFA World Cup Final" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q945970" start="17658" end="17662" title="1974 FIFA World Cup Final" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q366361" start="17696" end="17707" title="Max Morlock" label="Max Morlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43744" start="17712" end="17723" title="Gerd Müller" label="Gerd Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11948" start="17874" end="17889" title="Michael Ballack" label="Michael Ballack"/>
<link wikidata="Q227892" start="17891" end="17907" title="Alessandro Nesta" label="Alessandro Nesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174926" start="17913" end="17920" title="Rafinha (footballer, born 1985)" label="Rafinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="17987" end="17996" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228579" start="17999" end="18014" title="Dave Concepción" label="Dave Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105857" start="18016" end="18028" title="Omar Vizquel" label="Omar Vizquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609164" start="18030" end="18045" title="Oswaldo Guillén" label="Oswaldo Guillén"/>
<link wikidata="Q82845" start="18050" end="18066" title="Pastor Maldonado" label="Pastor Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q368528" start="18158" end="18169" title="Mats Sundin" label="Mats Sundin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="18215" end="18234" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="18433" end="18445" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="18542" end="18562" title="conspiracy theorists" label="conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503443" start="18770" end="18781" title="secrecy" label="clandestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="18863" end="18878" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q630289" start="18914" end="18934" title="The Thirteenth Floor" label="The Thirteenth Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597418" start="18948" end="18975" title="Nightmare on the 13th Floor" label="Nightmare on the 13th Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203560" start="18993" end="18997" title="1408 (film)" label="1408"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912691" start="19094" end="19106" title="Max Headroom (TV series)" label="Max Headroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="19174" end="19215" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187655" start="19261" end="19276" title="Mostly Harmless" label="Mostly Harmless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="19290" end="19303" title="computer game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429178" start="19310" end="19318" title="Floor 13 (video game)" label="Floor 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="19328" end="19346" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="19374" end="19383" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19438" end="19442" title="Military prison#Brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155500" start="19490" end="19497" title="Company (novel)" label="Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912232" start="19507" end="19516" title="Max Barry" label="Max Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="19524" end="19532" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="19548" end="19561" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="19726" end="19732" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19959" end="19982" title="Tomb Raider: Chronicles" label="Tomb Raider: Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210146" start="20058" end="20067" title="Babylon 5" label="Babylon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q861190" start="20214" end="20238" title="The 13th Floor Elevators" label="The 13th Floor Elevators"/>
<link wikidata="Q283660" start="20248" end="20266" title="The Rockford Files" label="The Rockford Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647533" start="20395" end="20415" title="Ghost in the Machine (The X-Files)" label="Ghost In The Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="20445" end="20456" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="20612" end="20625" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072691" start="20648" end="20661" title="Iron Man 2020" label="Iron Man 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="20887" end="20896" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183081" start="21085" end="21107" title="No Country For Old Men (film)" label="No Country For Old Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q201279" start="21128" end="21143" title="Woody Harrelson" label="Woody Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q464320" start="21178" end="21190" title="Stephen Root" label="Stephen Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026145" start="21276" end="21290" title="Freaky Stories" label="Freaky Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q327658" start="21450" end="21465" title="List of phobias" label="List of phobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439400" start="21477" end="21489" title="Numerophobia" label="Numerophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457952" start="21491" end="21522" title="National Accident Day (Finland)" label="National Accident Day (Finland)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37142" wikidata="Q171303" url="?curid=37142" title="Zeno of Citium">
<text>Zeno of Citium (; , ; c. 334 – c. 262 BC) was a Hellenistic philosopher from Citium (, ), Cyprus. 
He was the founder of the Stoic school of philosophy, which he taught in Athens from about 300 BC. Based on the moral ideas of the Cynics, Stoicism laid great emphasis on goodness and peace of mind gained from living a life of virtue in accordance with nature. It proved very popular, and flourished as one of the major schools of philosophy from the Hellenistic period through to the Roman era, and enjoyed revivals in the Renaissance as Neostoicism and in the current era as Modern Stoicism.

==Life==
Zeno was born c. 334 BC, in the colony of Citium in Cyprus. His ancestry is disputed between Phoenician and Greek, because Citium contained both Phoenician and Greek inhabitants. While a number of contemporary and modern historians regard Zeno as a Phoenician, other modern scholars have contested this arguing for a Greek or Greco-Phoenician background. The only things that historians know with certainty, are that Zeno had a Greek name, a Greek higher education and that there is no evidence he knew a language other than Greek. His father, Mnaseas, had a name ambiguously meaningful both in Phoenician (&quot;one causing to forget&quot;) and in Greek (&quot;mindful&quot;). His mother and her name are not recorded.

Most of the details known about his life come from the biography and anecdotes preserved by Diogenes Laërtius in his &quot;Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers&quot; written in the 3rd century AD, a few of which are confirmed by the &quot;Suda&quot; (a 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia). Diogenes reports that Zeno&#x27;s interest in philosophy began when &quot;he consulted the oracle to know what he should do to attain the best life, and that the gods&#x27; response was that he should take on the complexion of the dead. Whereupon, perceiving what this meant, he studied ancient authors.&quot; Zeno became a wealthy merchant.

On a voyage from Phoenicia to Peiraeus he survived a shipwreck, after which he went to Athens and visited a bookseller. There he encountered Xenophon&#x27;s &quot;Memorabilia&quot;. He was so pleased with the book&#x27;s portrayal of Socrates that he asked the bookseller where men like Socrates were to be found. Just then, Crates of Thebesthe most famous Cynic living at that time in Greecehappened to be walking by, and the bookseller pointed to him.

Diogenes Laërtius describes Zeno as a haggard, dark-skinned person, living a spare, ascetic life despite his wealth. This coincides with the influences of Cynic teaching, and was, at least in part, continued in his Stoic philosophy. From the day Zeno became Crates’ pupil, he showed a strong bent for philosophy, though with too much native modesty to assimilate &quot;Anaideia;&quot; Cynic “shamelessness” and the disregard for societal norms in favor of freedom. An example of this may be found in the writings of Apuleius who narrates an incident where Crates and Hipparchia, his wife and fellow Cynic, engaged in a public act of sexual intercourse and, as such, drew a crowd. Zeno, upon catching sight of this, covered them both with his cloak so as to prevent bystanders from witnessing the copulating couple, displaying his own inability to be apathetic to the expectations of society. Hence Crates, desirous of curing this defect in him, gave him a potful of lentil-soup to carry through the Ceramicus (the pottery district); and when he saw that Zeno was ashamed and tried to keep it out of sight, Crates broke the pot with a blow of his staff. As Zeno began to run off in embarrassment with the lentil-soup flowing down his legs, Crates chided, &quot;Why run away, my little Phoenician? Nothing terrible has befallen you.&quot;

According to his contemporaries, Zeno was attracted only to boys and other men, and Diogenes Laërtius mentions by name at least one with whom he was enamored, a young man named Chremonides (who may or may not be the Athenian statesman and general Chremonides).

Apart from Crates, Zeno studied under the philosophers of the Megarian school, including Stilpo, and the dialecticians Diodorus Cronus, and Philo. He is also said to have studied Platonist philosophy under the direction of Xenocrates, and Polemo.

Zeno began teaching in the colonnade in the Agora of Athens known as the Stoa Poikile (Greek Στοὰ Ποικίλη) in 301 BC. His disciples were initially called &quot;Zenonians,&quot; but eventually they came to be known as &quot;Stoics,&quot; a name previously applied to poets who congregated in the Stoa Poikile.

Among the admirers of Zeno was king Antigonus II Gonatas of Macedonia, who, whenever he came to Athens, would visit Zeno. Zeno is said to have declined an invitation to visit Antigonus in Macedonia, although their supposed correspondence preserved by Laërtius is undoubtedly the invention of a later writer. Zeno instead sent his friend and disciple Persaeus, who had lived with Zeno in his house. Among Zeno&#x27;s other pupils there were Aristo of Chios, Sphaerus, and Cleanthes who succeeded Zeno as the head (&quot;scholarch&quot;) of the Stoic school in Athens.

Zeno is said to have declined Athenian citizenship when it was offered to him, fearing that he would appear unfaithful to his native land, where he was highly esteemed, and where he contributed to the restoration of its baths, after which his name was inscribed upon a pillar there as &quot;Zeno the philosopher&quot;. We are also told that Zeno was of an earnest, gloomy disposition; that he preferred the company of the few to the many; that he was fond of burying himself in investigations; and that he disliked verbose and elaborate speeches. Diogenes Laërtius has preserved many clever and witty remarks by Zeno, although these anecdotes are generally considered unreliable.

Zeno died around 262 BC. Laërtius reports about his death:

At Zeno&#x27;s funeral an epitaph was composed for him stating:

This signified that even though Zeno was of non-Greek background the Greeks still respected him, comparing him to the legendary Phoenician hero Cadmus who had brought the alphabet to the Greeks, as Zeno had brought Stoicism to them and was described as &quot;the noblest man of his age&quot; with a bronze statue being built in his honor.

During his lifetime, Zeno received appreciation for his philosophical and pedagogical teachings. Among other things, Zeno was honored with the golden crown, and a tomb was built in honor of his moral influence on the youth of his era.

The crater Zeno on the Moon is named in his honour.

==Philosophy==

Following the ideas of the Old Academy, Zeno divided philosophy into three parts: logic (a wide subject including rhetoric, grammar, and the theories of perception and thought); physics (not just science, but the divine nature of the universe as well); and ethics, the end goal of which was to achieve eudaimonia through the right way of living according to Nature. Because Zeno&#x27;s ideas were later expanded upon by Chrysippus and other Stoics, it can be difficult to determine precisely what he thought. But his general views can be outlined as follows:
===Logic===
In his treatment of logic, Zeno was influenced by Stilpo and the other Megarians. Zeno urged the need to lay down a basis for logic because the wise person must know how to avoid deception. Cicero accused Zeno of being inferior to his philosophical predecessors in his treatment of logic, and it seems true that a more exact treatment of the subject was laid down by his successors, including Chrysippus. Zeno divided true conceptions into the comprehensible and the incomprehensible, permitting for free-will the power of assent (&quot;sinkatathesis&quot;/συνκατάθεσις) in distinguishing between sense impressions. Zeno said that there were four stages in the process leading to true knowledge, which he illustrated with the example of the flat, extended hand, and the gradual closing of the fist:
Zeno stretched out his fingers, and showed the palm of his hand, – &quot;Perception,&quot; – he said, – &quot;is a thing like this.&quot;– 
Then, when he had closed his fingers a little, – &quot;Assent is like this.&quot; – Afterwards, when he had completely closed his hand, and showed his fist, that, he said, was Comprehension. From which simile he also gave that state a new name, calling it &quot;katalepsis&quot; (κατάληψις). But when he brought his left hand against his right, and with it took a firm and tight hold of his fist: – &quot;Knowledge&quot; – he said, was of that character; and that was what none but a wise person possessed.

===Physics===
The universe, in Zeno&#x27;s view, is God: a divine reasoning entity, where all the parts belong to the whole. Into this pantheistic system he incorporated the physics of Heraclitus; the universe contains a divine artisan-fire, which foresees everything, and extending throughout the universe, must produce everything:
Zeno, then, defines nature by saying that it is artistically working fire, which advances by fixed methods to creation. For he maintains that it is the main function of art to create and produce and that what the hand accomplishes in the productions of the arts we employ, is accomplished much more artistically by nature, that is, as I said, by artistically working fire, which is the master of the other arts.

This divine fire, or aether, is the basis for all activity in the universe, operating on otherwise passive matter, which neither increases nor diminishes itself. The primary substance in the universe comes from fire, passes through the stage of air, and then becomes water: the thicker portion becoming earth, and the thinner portion becoming air again, and then rarefying back into fire. Individual souls are part of the same fire as the world-soul of the universe. Following Heraclitus, Zeno adopted the view that the universe underwent regular cycles of formation and destruction.

The nature of the universe is such that it accomplishes what is right and prevents the opposite, and is identified with unconditional Fate, while allowing it the free-will attributed to it. According to Zeno&#x27;s beliefs, &quot;[t]rue happiness&quot; can only be found by obeying natural laws and living in tune with the course of fate.

===Ethics===

Like the Cynics, Zeno recognised a single, sole and simple good, which is the only goal to strive for. &quot;Happiness is a good flow of life,&quot; said Zeno, and this can only be achieved through the use of right reason coinciding with the universal reason (&quot;Logos&quot;), which governs everything. A bad feeling (&quot;pathos&quot;) &quot;is a disturbance of the mind repugnant to reason, and against Nature.&quot; This consistency of soul, out of which morally good actions spring, is virtue, true good can only consist in virtue.

Zeno deviated from the Cynics in saying that things that are morally adiaphora (indifferent) could nevertheless have value. Things have a relative value in proportion to how they aid the natural instinct for self-preservation. That which is to be preferred is a &quot;fitting action&quot; (&quot;kathêkon&quot;/καθῆκον), a designation Zeno first introduced. Self-preservation, and the things that contribute towards it, has only a conditional value; it does not aid happiness, which depends only on moral actions.

Just as virtue can only exist within the dominion of reason, so vice can only exist with the rejection of reason. Virtue is absolutely opposed to vice, the two cannot exist in the same thing together, and cannot be increased or decreased; no one moral action is more virtuous than another. All actions are either good or bad, since impulses and desires rest upon free consent, and hence even passive mental states or emotions that are not guided by reason are immoral, and produce immoral actions. Zeno distinguished four negative emotions: desire, fear, pleasure and sorrow (&quot;epithumia, phobos, hêdonê, lupê&quot; / ἐπιθυμία, φόβος, ἡδονή, λύπη), and he was probably responsible for distinguishing the three corresponding positive emotions: will, caution, and joy (&quot;boulêsis, eulabeia, chara&quot; / βούλησις, εὐλάβεια, χαρά), with no corresponding rational equivalent for pain. All errors must be rooted out, not merely set aside, and replaced with right reason.

==Works==
None of Zeno&#x27;s original writings have survived except as fragmentary quotations preserved by later writers. The most famous of his works was his &quot;Republic&quot;, written in conscious imitation of, or opposition to, Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;. Although it has not survived, more is known about it than any of his other works. It outlined Zeno&#x27;s vision of the ideal Stoic society.

A manuscript that was attributed to Zeno, matching a known title of one of Zeno&#x27;s works, Περὶ φύσεως (&quot;On Nature),&quot; was discovered in 1949 in an Old Armenian translation. In 1956 it was translated into Russian and published with an extensive commentary. Subsequent philological investigation concluded that the author could not have been Zeno and was instead an anonymous Christian philosopher of the late sixth century or a little later, writing in the tradition of ancient philosophy, but doing so as a Christian. He is now known as Pseudo-Zeno. His work shows an integration of Christian and philosophical concepts, but in a very restrained way.

The titles of many of Zeno&#x27;s writings are, however, known and are as follows:
* Ethical writings:
** Πολιτεία – &quot;The Republic&quot;
** Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν βίου – &quot;On Life according to Nature&quot;
** Περὶ ὁρμῆς ἢ Περὶ ἀνθρώπου φύσεως – &quot;On Impulse, or on the Nature of Humans&quot;
** Περὶ παθῶν – &quot;On Passions&quot;
** Περὶ τοῦ καθήκοντος – &quot;On Duty&quot;
** Περὶ νόμου – &quot;On Law&quot;
** Περὶ τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς παιδείας – &quot;On Greek Education&quot;
* Physical writings:
** Περὶ ὄψεως – &quot;On Sight&quot;
** Περὶ τοῦ ὅλου – &quot;On the Universe&quot;
** Περὶ σημείων – &quot;On Signs&quot;
** Πυθαγορικά – &quot;Pythagorean Doctrines&quot;
* Logical writings:
** Καθολικά – &quot;General Things&quot;
** Περὶ λέξεων
** Προβλημάτων Ὁμηρικῶν εʹ – &quot;Homeric Problems&quot;
** Περὶ ποιητικῆς ἀκροάσεως – &quot;On Poetical Readings&quot;
* Other works:
** Τέχνη
** Λύσεις – &quot;Solutions&quot;
** Ἔλεγχοι βʹ
** Ἄπομνημονεύματα Κράτητος ἠθικά
** Περὶ οὐσίας – &quot;On Being&quot;
** Περὶ φύσεως – &quot;On Nature&quot;
** Περὶ λόγου – &quot;On the Logos&quot;
** Εἰς Ἡσιόδου θεογονίαν
** Διατριβαί – &quot;Discourses&quot;
** Χρεῖαι

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Dawson, Doyne (1992). &quot;Cities of the Gods: Communist Utopias in Greek Thought&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Hunt, Harold. &quot;A Physical Interpretation of the Universe. The Doctrines of Zeno the Stoic&quot;. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1976. 
* Long, Anthony A., Sedley, David N. &quot;The Hellenistic Philosophers&quot;, Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
* Pearson, Alfred C. &quot;Fragments of Zeno and Cleanthes&quot;, (1891). Greek/Latin fragments with English commentary.
* Reale, Giovanni. &quot;A History of Ancient Philosophy. III. The systems of the Hellenistic Age&quot;, (translated by John R. Catan, 1985 &quot;Zeno, the Foundation of the Stoa, and the Different Phases of Stoicism&quot;)
* Schofield, Malcolm. &quot;The Stoic Idea of the City&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. 

==External links==
* &quot;Zeno of Citium&quot; by Robin Turner in &quot;Sensible Marks of Ideas&quot;
* &quot;Zeno of Cittium – founder of Stoicism&quot; by Paul Harrison.
* Selected Bibliography on the Early Stoic Logicians: Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus
* https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101086695/it</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171303" start="0" end="14" title="Zeno of Citium" label="Zeno of Citium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753132" start="48" end="59" title="Hellenistic philosophy" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="77" end="83" title="Kition" label="Citium"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="90" end="96" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="125" end="130" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="172" end="178" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="230" end="236" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797504" start="270" end="278" title="good and evil" label="goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740046" start="283" end="296" title="calmness" label="peace of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="326" end="332" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="352" end="358" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q753132" start="413" end="440" title="Hellenistic philosophy" label="major schools of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="450" end="468" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="484" end="493" title="Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524079" start="538" end="549" title="Neostoicism" label="Neostoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="576" end="591" title="Modern Stoicism" label="Modern Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="645" end="651" title="Kition" label="Citium"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="655" end="661" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="696" end="705" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="711" end="716" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711834" start="1031" end="1041" title="Greek name" label="Greek name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555987" start="1045" end="1067" title="Education in Greece" label="Greek higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="1416" end="1433" title="Diogenes Laërtius" label="Diogenes Laërtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="1447" end="1489" title="Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers" label="Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="1569" end="1573" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="1708" end="1718" title="Pythia" label="the oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1981" end="1990" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="1994" end="2002" title="Peiraeus" label="Peiraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="2105" end="2113" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373343" start="2127" end="2138" title="Memorabilia (Xenophon)" label="Memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="2198" end="2206" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q317947" start="2289" end="2305" title="Crates of Thebes" label="Crates of Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="2321" end="2326" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2350" end="2356" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="2503" end="2510" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="2935" end="2943" title="Apuleius" label="Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q235494" start="2986" end="2996" title="Hipparchia of Maroneia" label="Hipparchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576697" start="3038" end="3070" title="Public sex" label="public act of sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q630974" start="3418" end="3427" title="Ceramicus" label="Ceramicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q969152" start="4004" end="4015" title="Chremonides" label="Chremonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145454" start="4081" end="4096" title="Megarian school" label="Megarian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q381048" start="4108" end="4114" title="Stilpo" label="Stilpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="4124" end="4133" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q715478" start="4138" end="4153" title="Diodorus Cronus" label="Diodorus Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366567" start="4159" end="4164" title="Philo the Dialectician" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="4198" end="4207" title="Platonist" label="Platonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214121" start="4242" end="4252" title="Xenocrates" label="Xenocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q553856" start="4258" end="4264" title="Polemon (scholarch)" label="Polemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q327328" start="4294" end="4303" title="Stoa" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q395367" start="4311" end="4326" title="Ancient Agora of Athens" label="Agora of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q936234" start="4340" end="4352" title="Stoa Poikile" label="Stoa Poikile"/>
<link wikidata="Q241386" start="4613" end="4633" title="Antigonus II Gonatas" label="Antigonus II Gonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="4637" end="4644" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q662932" start="4927" end="4935" title="Persaeus" label="Persaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q646951" start="5017" end="5032" title="Aristo of Chios" label="Aristo of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311453" start="5034" end="5042" title="Sphaerus" label="Sphaerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310149" start="5048" end="5057" title="Cleanthes" label="Cleanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q648976" start="5096" end="5105" title="scholarch" label="scholarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="5912" end="5919" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="5995" end="6004" title="barbarian" label="non-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q27613" start="6095" end="6101" title="Cadmus" label="Cadmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="6122" end="6130" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="6365" end="6376" title="pedagogical" label="pedagogical"/>
<link wikidata="Q119286" start="6538" end="6542" title="Zeno (crater)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6550" end="6554" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="6623" end="6634" title="Platonic Academy" label="Old Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="6649" end="6659" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="6678" end="6683" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="6710" end="6718" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="6720" end="6727" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="6749" end="6759" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="6764" end="6771" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="6774" end="6781" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="6792" end="6799" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="6809" end="6815" title="divinity" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="6853" end="6859" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771260" start="6898" end="6908" title="eudaimonia" label="eudaimonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211411" start="7016" end="7026" title="Chrysippus" label="Chrysippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q381048" start="7217" end="7223" title="Stilpo" label="Stilpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145454" start="7238" end="7247" title="Megarian school of philosophy" label="Megarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="7357" end="7363" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q211411" start="7560" end="7570" title="Chrysippus" label="Chrysippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="7852" end="7861" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q385379" start="8368" end="8378" title="katalepsis" label="katalepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="8632" end="8640" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="8666" end="8669" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="8749" end="8760" title="pantheistic" label="pantheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="8799" end="8809" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="9760" end="9765" title="souls" label="souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147295" start="9799" end="9809" title="Anima mundi" label="world-soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="10079" end="10083" title="Destiny" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="10308" end="10314" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="10565" end="10570" title="Logos" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="10793" end="10799" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q356932" start="10909" end="10918" title="adiaphora" label="adiaphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194113" start="11136" end="11144" title="kathekon" label="kathêkon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="11419" end="11423" title="evil" label="vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="11886" end="11894" title="emotions" label="emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="12566" end="12571" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="12585" end="12593" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181074" start="12903" end="12915" title="Classical Armenian" label="Old Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q100149151" start="13293" end="13304" title="Pseudo-Zeno" label="Pseudo-Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427121" start="15650" end="15663" title="Paul Harrison (pantheist)" label="Paul Harrison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37143" wikidata="Q211411" url="?curid=37143" title="Chrysippus">
<text>Chrysippus of Soli (; , ; ) was a Greek Stoic philosopher. He was a native of Soli, Cilicia, but moved to Athens as a young man, where he became a pupil of the Stoic philosopher Cleanthes. When Cleanthes died, around 230 BC, Chrysippus became the third head of the Stoic school. A prolific writer, Chrysippus expanded the fundamental doctrines of Cleanthes&#x27; mentor Zeno of Citium, the founder and first head of the school, which earned him the title of the Second Founder of Stoicism.

Chrysippus excelled in logic, the theory of knowledge, ethics, and physics. He created an original system of propositional logic in order to better understand the workings of the universe and role of humanity within it. He adhered to a fatalistic view of fate, but nevertheless sought a role for personal agency in thought and action. Ethics, he thought, depended on understanding the nature of the universe, and he taught a therapy of the unruly passions which depress and crush the soul. He initiated the success of Stoicism as one of the most influential philosophical movements for centuries in the Greek and Roman world. The linguistic orientation of Chrysippus&#x27; work made it difficult for its students even within the Stoic school.

Of his several written works, none have survived except as fragments. In 2004, segments of some of his works were discovered among the Herculaneum papyri.

== Life ==
Presumably of Phoenician descent, Chrysippus was the son of Apollonius of Tarsus, and he was born at Soli, Cilicia. He was slight in stature, and is reputed to have trained as a long-distance runner. While still young, he lost his substantial inherited property when it was confiscated to the king&#x27;s treasury. Chrysippus moved to Athens, where he became the disciple of Cleanthes, who was then the head (&quot;scholarch&quot;) of the Stoic school. He is believed to have attended the courses of Arcesilaus and his successor Lacydes, in the Platonic Academy.

Chrysippus threw himself eagerly into the study of the Stoic system. His reputation for learning among his contemporaries was considerable. He was noted for intellectual audacity and self-confidence and his reliance on his own ability was shown, among other things, in the request he is supposed to have made to Cleanthes: &quot;Give me the principles, and I will find the proofs myself.&quot; He succeeded Cleanthes as head of the Stoic school when Cleanthes died, in around 230 BC.

Chrysippus was a prolific writer. He is said to rarely have gone without writing 500 lines a day and he composed more than 705 works. His desire to be comprehensive meant that he would take both sides of an argument and his opponents accused him of filling his books with the quotations of others. He was considered diffuse and obscure in his utterances and careless in his style, but his abilities were highly regarded, and he came to be seen as a preeminent authority for the school.
He died during the 143rd Olympiad (208–204 BC) at the age of 73. Diogenes Laërtius gives two different accounts of his death. In the first account, Chrysippus was seized with dizziness having drunk undiluted wine at a feast, and died soon after. In the second account, he was watching a donkey eat some figs and cried out: &quot;Now give the donkey a drink of pure wine to wash down the figs&quot;, whereupon he died in a fit of laughter. His nephew Aristocreon erected a statue in his honour in the Kerameikos. Chrysippus was succeeded as head of the Stoic school by his pupil Zeno of Tarsus.

Of his written works, none survived except as fragments quoted in the works of later authors like Cicero, Seneca, Galen, Plutarch, and others. In 2004, segments from &quot;Logical Questions&quot; and &quot;On Providence&quot; were discovered among the Herculaneum papyri. A third work by Chrysippus may also be among them.

== Study ==
Chrysippus had a long and successful career of resisting the attacks of the Academy and hoped not simply to defend Stoicism against the assaults of the past, but also against all possible attack in the future. He took the doctrines of Zeno and Cleanthes and crystallized them into what became the definitive system of Stoicism. He elaborated the physical doctrines of the Stoics and their theory of knowledge and he created much of their formal logic. In short, Chrysippus made the Stoic system what it was. It was said that &quot;without Chrysippus, there would have been no Stoa&quot;.

== Logic ==

Chrysippus wrote much on the subject of logic and created a system of propositional logic. Aristotle&#x27;s term logic had been concerned with the interrelations of terms such as &quot;Socrates&quot; or &quot;man&quot; (&quot;all men are mortal, Socrates is a man, so Socrates is mortal&quot;). Stoic logic, on the other hand, was concerned with the interrelations of propositions such as &quot;it is day&quot; (&quot;if it is day, it is light: but it is day: so it is light&quot;). Though the earlier Megarian dialecticians – Diodorus Cronus and Philo – had worked in this field and the pupils of Aristotle – Theophrastus and Eudemus – had investigated hypothetical syllogisms, it was Chrysippus who developed these principles into a coherent system of propositional logic.

===Propositions===
Chrysippus defined a proposition as &quot;that which is capable of being denied or affirmed as it is in itself&quot; and gave examples of propositions such as &quot;it is day&quot; and &quot;Dion is walking.&quot; He distinguished between simple and non-simple propositions, which in modern terminology are known as atomic and molecular propositions. A simple proposition is an elementary statement such as &quot;it is day.&quot; Simple propositions are linked together to form non-simple propositions by the use of logical connectives. Chrysippus enumerated five kinds of molecular propositions according to the connective used:

Thus several types of molecular propositions, familiar to modern logic, were listed by Chrysippus, including the conjunction, the disjunction, and the conditional, and Chrysippus studied their criteria of truth closely.

===Conditional propositions===
The first logicians to debate conditional statements were Diodorus Cronus and his pupil Philo. Writing five-hundred years later, Sextus Empiricus refers to a debate between Diodorus and Philo. Philo regarded all conditionals as true except those which with a correct antecedent had an incorrect consequent, and this meant a proposition such as &quot;if it is day, then I am talking,&quot; is true unless it is day and I fall silent. But Diodorus argued that a true conditional is one in which the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusionthus, because the proposition &quot;if it is day, then I am talking&quot; can be false, it is invalid. However, paradoxical propositions were still possible such as &quot;if atomic elements of things do not exist, atomic elements exists.&quot; Chrysippus adopted a much stricter view regarding conditional propositions, which made such paradoxes impossible: to him, a conditional is true if denial of the consequent is logically incompatible with the antecedent. This corresponds to the modern-day strict conditional.

===Syllogistic===
Chrysippus developed a syllogistic or system of deduction in which he made use of five types of basic arguments or argument forms called indemonstrable syllogisms, which played the role of axioms, and four inference rules, called &quot;themata&quot; by means of which complex syllogisms could be reduced to these axioms. The forms of the five indemonstrables were:

Of the four inference rules (themata, θέματα), only two survived. One, the so-called first &quot;thema&quot;, was a rule of antilogism. The other, the third &quot;thema&quot;, was a cut rule by which chain syllogisms could be reduced to simple syllogisms. The purpose of Stoic syllogistic was not merely to create a formal system. It was also understood as the study of the operations of reason, the divine reason (&quot;logos&quot;) which governs the universe, of which human beings are a part. The goal was to find valid rules of inference and forms of proof to help people find their way in life.
According to Sextus Empiricus, Chrysippus held that dogs use disjunctive syllogism, such as when using scent to pick which path to run down. This was in contrast to a tradition since Aristotle, who saw reasoning (and reasoning deductively) as man&#x27;s defining aspect.

===Other logical work===
Chrysippus analyzed speech and the handling of names and terms. He also devoted much effort in refuting fallacies and paradoxes. According to Diogenes Laërtius, Chrysippus wrote twelve works in 23 books on the Liar paradox; seven works in 17 books on amphiboly; and another nine works in 26 books on other conundrums. In all, 28 works or 66 books were given over to puzzles or paradoxes.
Chrysippus is the first Stoic for whom the third of the four Stoic categories, i.e. the category &quot;somehow disposed&quot; is attested. In the surviving evidence, Chrysippus frequently makes use of the categories of &quot;substance&quot; and &quot;quality&quot;, but makes little use of the other two Stoic categories (&quot;somehow disposed&quot; and &quot;somehow disposed in relation to something&quot;). It is not clear whether the categories had any special significance for Chrysippus, and a clear doctrine of categories may be the work of later Stoics.

===Later reception===
Chrysippus came to be renowned as one of the foremost logicians of ancient Greece. When Clement of Alexandria wanted to mention one who was master among logicians, as Homer was master among poets, it was Chrysippus, not Aristotle, he chose. Diogenes Laërtius wrote: &quot;If the gods use dialectic, they would use none other than that of Chrysippus.&quot; The logical work by Chrysippus came to be neglected and forgotten. Aristotle&#x27;s logic prevailed, partly because it was seen as more practical, and partly because it was taken up by the Neoplatonists. As recently as the 19th century, Stoic logic was treated with contempt, a barren formulaic system, which was merely clothing the logic of Aristotle with new terminology. It was not until the 20th century, with the advances in logic, and the modern propositional calculus, that it became clear that Stoic logic constituted a significant achievement.

== Epistemology ==
For the Stoics, truth is distinguished from error by the sage who possesses right reason. Chrysippus&#x27;s theory of knowledge was empirical. The senses transmit messages from the external world, and their reports are controlled not by referring them to innate ideas, but by comparing them to previous reports stored in the mind. Zeno had defined impressions of sense as &quot;an impression in the soul&quot; and this was interpreted literally by Cleanthes, who compared the impression on the soul to the impression made by a seal on wax. Chrysippus preferred to regard it as an alteration or change in the soul; that is, the soul receives a modification from every external object that acts upon it, just as the air receives countless strokes when many people are speaking at once.

In the receipt of an impression, the soul is purely passive and the impression reveals not only its own existence, but that also of its causejust as light displays itself and the elements that are in it. The power to name the object resides in the understanding. First must come the impression, and the understandinghaving the power of utteranceexpresses in speech the affection it receives from the object. True presentations are distinguished from those that are false by the use of memory, classification and comparison. If the sense organ and the mind are healthyand provided that an external object can be really seen or heardthe presentation, due to its clearness and distinctness, has the power to the that always lies in our power, to give or to withhold. In a context in which people are understood to be beings, reason is developed out of these notions.

== Physics ==

Chrysippus insisted on the organic unity of the universe, as well as the and mutual interdependence of all of its parts. He said, the universe is &quot;the soul and guide of itself.&quot; Following Zeno, Chrysippus determined fiery breath or aether to be the primitive substance of the universe. Objects are made up of inert formless matter and an informing soul, &quot;pneuma&quot;, provides form to the undifferentiated matter. The &quot;pneuma&quot; all of substance and maintains the unity of the universe and constitutes the soul of the human being.

The classical elements change into one another by a process of condensation and rarefaction. Fire first becomes solidified into air; then air into water; and lastly, water into earth. The process of dissolution takes place in the reverse order: earth being rarefied into water, water into air and air into fire.

The human soul was divided by Chrysippus into eight faculties: the five senses, the power of reproduction, the power of speech, and the &quot;ruling part&quot; that is located in the chest rather than the head. Individual souls are perishable; but, according to the view originated by Chrysippus, the souls of wise people survive longer after their death. No individual soul can, however, survive beyond the periodic conflagration, when the universe is renewed.

There were no universals or abstract objects for Chrysippus, making him a kind of nominalist.

===Fate===
For Chrysippus, all things happen according to fate: what seems to be accidental has always some hidden cause. The unity of the world consists in the chain-like dependence of cause upon cause. Nothing can take place without a sufficient cause. According to Chrysippus, every proposition is either true or false, and this must apply to future events as well:
If any motion exists without a cause, then not every proposition will be either true or false. For that which has not efficient causes is neither true nor false. But every proposition is either true or false. Therefore, there is no motion without a cause. And if this is so, then all effects owe their existence to prior causes. And if this is so, all things happen by fate. It follows therefore that whatever happens, happens by fate.
The Stoic view of fate is entirely based on a view of the universe as a whole. Individual things and persons only come into consideration as dependent parts of this whole. Everything is, in every respect, determined by this relation, and is consequently subject to the general order of the world.

If his opponents objected that, if everything is determined by destiny, there is no individual responsibility, since what has been once foreordained must happen, come what may, Chrysippus replied that there is a distinction to be made between simple and complex predestination. Becoming ill may be fated whatever happens but, if a person&#x27;s recovery is linked to consulting a doctor, then consulting the doctor is fated to occur together with that person&#x27;s recovery, and this becomes a complex fact. All human actionsin fact, our destinyare decided by our relation to things, or as Chrysippus put it, events are &quot;co-fated&quot; to occur:
The non-destruction of one&#x27;s coat, he says, is not fated simply, but co-fated with its being taken care of, and someone&#x27;s being saved from his enemies is co-fated with his fleeing those enemies; and having children is co-fated with being willing to lie with a woman. ... For many things cannot occur without our being willing and indeed contributing a most strenuous eagerness and zeal for these things, since, he says, it was fated for these things to occur in conjunction with this personal effort. ... But it will be in our power, he says, with what is in our power being included in fate.
Thus our actions are predetermined, and are causally related to the overarching network of fate, but nevertheless the moral responsibility of how we respond to impressions remains our own. The one all-determining power is active everywhere, working in each particular being according to its nature, whether in rational or irrational creatures or in inorganic objects. Every action is brought about by the co-operation of causes depending on the nature of things and the character of the agent. Our actions would only be involuntary if they were produced by external causes alone, without any co-operation – on the part of our wills – with external causes. Virtue and vice are set down as things in our power, for which, consequently, we are responsible. Moral responsibility depends only on freedom of the will, and what emanates from our will is our own, no matter whether it is possible for us to act differently or not. This rather subtle position, which attempts to reconcile determinism with human responsibility, is known as soft-determinism, or as compatibilism.

===Divination===

Chrysippus also argued for the existence of fate based on divination, which he thought there was good evidence for. It would not be possible for diviners to predict the future if the future itself was accidental. Omens and portents, he believed, are the natural symptoms of certain occurrences. There must be countless indications of the course of providence, for the most part unobserved, the meaning of only a few having become known to humanity. To those who argued that divination was superfluous as all events are foreordained, he replied that both divination and our behaviour under the warnings which it affords are included in the chain of causation.

===God===
The Stoics believed that the universe is God, and Chrysippus affirmed that &quot;the universe itself is God and the universal outpouring of its soul.&quot; It is the guiding principle of the universe, &quot;operating in mind and reason, together with the common nature of things and the totality which embraces all existence.&quot; Based on these beliefs, physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein identified Chrysippus as a Pandeist.

Chrysippus sought to prove the existence of God, making use of a teleological argument:
If there is anything that humanity cannot produce, the being who produces it is better than humanity. But humanity cannot produce the things that are in the universethe heavenly bodies, etc. The being, therefore, who produces them is superior to humanity. But who is there that is superior to humanity, except God? Therefore, God exists.
Chrysippus spoke of God and gods interchangeably. He interpreted the gods of traditional Greek religion by viewing them as different aspects of the one reality. Cicero tells us that &quot;he further maintained that aether is that which people call Zeus, and that the air which permeates the seas is Poseidon, and that the earth is what is known by the name of Demeter, and he treated in similar style the names of the other gods.&quot; In addition, the universe exists for the benefit of the universal god:
We should infer in the case of a beautiful dwelling-place that it was built for its owners and not for mice; we ought, therefore, in the same way to regard the universe as the dwelling-place of the gods.

===Theodicy===
In response to the question of how evil could exist in a good universe, Chrysippus replied &quot;evil cannot be removed, nor is it well that it should be removed.&quot; Firstly, he argued, following Plato, that it was impossible for good to exist without evil, for justice could not be known without injustice, courage without cowardice, temperance without intemperance or wisdom without foolishness. Secondly, apparent evils exist as a consequent of nature&#x27;s goodness, thus it was necessary for the human skull to be made from small and thin bones for reasons of utility, but this superior utility meant that the skull is vulnerable to blows. Thirdly, evils are distributed according to the rational will of Zeus, either to punish the wicked or because they are important to the world-order as a whole. Thus evil is good under disguise, and is ultimately conducive to the best. Chrysippus compared evil to the coarse jest in the comedy; for, just as the jest, though offensive in itself, improves the piece as a whole, &quot;so too you may criticize evil regarded by itself, yet allow that, taken with all else, it has its use.&quot;

== Mathematics ==
Chrysippus regarded bodies, surfaces, lines, places, the void and time as all being infinitely divisible. He determined one of the principal features of the infinite set: since a man and a finger have an infinite number of parts as do the universe and a man, it cannot be said that a man has more parts than his finger, nor that the universe has more parts than a man.

Chrysippus also responded to a problem first posed by Democritus. If a cone is divided by a plane parallel to its base, are the surfaces of the segments equal or unequal? If they are equal, then the cone becomes a cylinder; if they are unequal, then the surface of the cone must be stepped. The reply of Chrysippus was that the surfaces are both equal and unequal. Chrysippus was, in effect, negating the law of excluded middle with respect to the equal and unequal, and thus he may have anticipated an important principle of modern infinitesimal calculus, namely, the limit and the process of convergence towards a limit.

Chrysippus was notable for claiming that &quot;one&quot; is a number. One was not always considered a number by the ancient Greeks since they viewed one as that by which things are measured. Aristotle in his &quot;Metaphysics&quot; wrote, &quot;... a measure is not the things measured, but the measure or the One is the beginning of number.&quot; Chrysippus asserted that one had &quot;magnitude one&quot; (), although this was not generally accepted by the Greeks, and Iamblichus wrote that &quot;magnitude one&quot; was a contradiction in terms.

== Ethics ==
Chrysippus taught that ethics depended on physics. In his &quot;Physical Theses&quot;, he stated: &quot;for there is no other or more appropriate way of approaching the subject of good and evil on the virtues or happiness than from the nature of all things and the administration of the universe.&quot; The goal of life, said Chrysippus, is to live in accordance with one&#x27;s experience of the actual course of nature. A person&#x27;s individual nature is part of the nature of the whole universe, and thus life should be lived in accordance with one&#x27;s own human nature as well as that of the universe. Human nature is ethical, and humanity is akin to the Divine, emanating from the primal fire or aether, which, though material, is the embodiment of reason; and people should conduct themselves accordingly. People have freedom, and this freedom consists in emancipation from irrational desires (lust, riches, position in life, domination, etc.) and in subjecting the will to reason. Chrysippus laid the greatest stress on the worth and dignity of the individual, and on the power of will.

The Stoics admitted between the good and the bad a third class of thingsthe indifferent (&quot;adiaphora&quot;). Of things morally indifferent, the best includes health, and riches, and honour, and the worst includes sickness and poverty. Chrysippus accepted that it was normal in ordinary usage to refer to the preferred indifferent things as &quot;good&quot;, but the wise person, said Chrysippus, uses such things without requiring them. Practice and habit are necessary to render virtue perfect in the individualin other words, there is such a thing as moral progress, and character has to be built up.

===&quot;On Passions&quot;===

The Stoics sought to be free of the unruly emotions, which they regarded as being contrary to nature. The passions or emotions (&quot;pathe&quot;) are the disturbing element in right judgment. Chrysippus wrote a whole book, &quot;On Passions&quot; (), concerning the therapy of the emotions. The passions are like diseases which depress and crush the soul, thus he sought to eradicate them (&quot;apatheia&quot;). Wrong judgements turn into passions when they gather an impetus of their own, just as, when one has started running, it is difficult to stop. One cannot hope to eradicate the passions when one is in the heat of love or anger: this can only be done when one is calm. Therefore, one should prepare in advance, and deal with the passions in the mind as if they were present. By applying reason to passions such as greed, pride, or lust, one can understand the harm which they cause.

== See also ==
* Apocatastasis
* Deixis
* History of logic
* Lazy argument
* List of unusual deaths in antiquity

==Notes==
== References ==
== Works cited==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Bobzien, Susanne (1999), &quot;Chrysippus&#x27; Theory of Causes&quot;. In K. Ierodiakonou (ed.), &quot;Topics in Stoic Philosophy&quot;, Oxford: OUP, 196–242. 
* Bréhier, Émile, (1951), &quot;Chrysippe et l&#x27;ancien stoicisme&quot;. Paris. 
* Dufour, Richard (2004), &quot;Chrysippe. Oeuvre philosophique&quot;. Textes traduits et commentés par Richard Dufour, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2 volumes (logic and physics), 
* Hahm, D. E. &quot;Chrysippus&#x27; solution to the Democritean dilemma of the cone&quot;, Isis 63 (217) (1972), 205–220.
* Ide, H. A. &quot;Chrysippus&#x27;s response to Diodorus&#x27;s Master Argument&quot;, History and Philosophy Logic 13 (2) (1992), 133–148.
* Tieleman, Teun L. (1996) &quot;Galen and Chrysippus on the Soul: Argument and Refutation in the &quot;De Placitis&quot; Books II–III&quot;. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. 
* Tieleman, Teun L. (2003) &quot;Chrysippus&#x27; &quot;on Affections&quot;: Reconstruction and Interpretation&quot;. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. 
== External links ==

* 
* Early Stoic Logic: Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos, Chrysippus of Soli an annotated bibliography on the logic of Chrysippus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211411" start="0" end="18" title="Chrysippus" label="Chrysippus of Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="34" end="39" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="40" end="45" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="46" end="57" title="Philosophy" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q656954" start="78" end="91" title="Soli, Cilicia" label="Soli, Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="106" end="112" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q310149" start="178" end="187" title="Cleanthes" label="Cleanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171303" start="370" end="384" title="Zeno of Citium" label="Zeno of Citium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="514" end="519" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="525" end="544" title="theory of knowledge" label="theory of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="546" end="552" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618377" start="558" end="565" title="Stoic physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="600" end="619" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="727" end="737" title="fatalistic" label="fatalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="746" end="750" title="Destiny" label="fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="796" end="802" title="agency (philosophy)" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408345" start="931" end="946" title="Stoic passions" label="unruly passions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1094" end="1099" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1104" end="1109" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736373" start="1370" end="1388" title="Herculaneum papyri" label="Herculaneum papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1416" end="1425" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="1476" end="1482" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q656954" start="1503" end="1516" title="Soli, Cilicia" label="Soli, Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1737" end="1743" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q310149" start="1777" end="1786" title="Cleanthes" label="Cleanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q648976" start="1817" end="1826" title="scholarch" label="scholarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q73527" start="1902" end="1912" title="Arcesilaus" label="Arcesilaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q386261" start="1931" end="1938" title="Lacydes of Cyrene" label="Lacydes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="1947" end="1963" title="Platonic Academy" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="2962" end="2970" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="3002" end="3019" title="Diogenes Laërtius" label="Diogenes Laërtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517569" start="3145" end="3149" title="Ancient Greece and wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="3240" end="3244" title="Common fig" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12242142" start="3349" end="3374" title="Death from laughter" label="died in a fit of laughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572655" start="3387" end="3398" title="Aristocreon" label="Aristocreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q630974" start="3437" end="3447" title="Kerameikos" label="Kerameikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q189767" start="3515" end="3529" title="Zeno of Tarsus" label="Zeno of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="3630" end="3636" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="3638" end="3644" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="3646" end="3651" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3653" end="3661" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736373" start="3784" end="3802" title="Herculaneum papyri" label="Herculaneum papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="3944" end="3951" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="4186" end="4194" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618377" start="4214" end="4232" title="Stoic physics" label="physical doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="4257" end="4276" title="epistemology" label="theory of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="4540" end="4559" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4561" end="4570" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237125" start="4578" end="4588" title="term logic" label="term logic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4635" end="4640" title="Syllogism#Terms in syllogism" label="terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="4838" end="4849" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145454" start="4972" end="4994" title="Megarian school" label="Megarian dialecticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q715478" start="4997" end="5012" title="Diodorus Cronus" label="Diodorus Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366567" start="5017" end="5022" title="Philo the Dialectician" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="5068" end="5077" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="5080" end="5092" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q358482" start="5097" end="5104" title="Eudemus of Rhodes" label="Eudemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641477" start="5124" end="5146" title="hypothetical syllogism" label="hypothetical syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345785" start="5581" end="5587" title="Atomic sentence" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345785" start="5592" end="5601" title="Molecular sentence" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q211790" start="5781" end="5799" title="logical connective" label="logical connective"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="6009" end="6020" title="Logical conjunction" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="6026" end="6037" title="Logical disjunction" label="disjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881229" start="6047" end="6058" title="Material conditional" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311695" start="6101" end="6106" title="Logical truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q715478" start="6206" end="6221" title="Diodorus Cronus" label="Diodorus Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366567" start="6236" end="6241" title="Philo the Dialectician" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q236594" start="6277" end="6293" title="Sextus Empiricus" label="Sextus Empiricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q260460" start="6415" end="6425" title="antecedent (logic)" label="antecedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q261155" start="6443" end="6453" title="consequent" label="consequent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848046" start="6815" end="6839" title="Paradoxes of material implication" label="paradoxical propositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q375520" start="7201" end="7219" title="strict conditional" label="strict conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667497" start="7355" end="7368" title="argument form" label="argument form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="7446" end="7461" title="Rule of inference" label="inference rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="8027" end="8032" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="8058" end="8066" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="8713" end="8725" title="Liar paradox" label="Liar paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456276" start="8754" end="8763" title="amphiboly" label="amphiboly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="8952" end="8968" title="Stoic categories" label="Stoic categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="9565" end="9586" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="9644" end="9649" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="9667" end="9671" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="9718" end="9735" title="Diogenes Laërtius" label="Diogenes Laërtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="9765" end="9774" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="10022" end="10035" title="Neoplatonists" label="Neoplatonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="10285" end="10307" title="propositional calculus" label="propositional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624172" start="10463" end="10467" title="Sage (sophos)" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="10538" end="10547" title="Empiricism" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="10553" end="10558" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="10933" end="10937" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="12119" end="12127" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="12313" end="12319" title="aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048935" start="12441" end="12447" title="pneuma (Stoic)" label="pneuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="12601" end="12605" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="12631" end="12649" title="classical elements" label="classical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="12690" end="12702" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294544" start="12707" end="12718" title="rarefaction" label="rarefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723512" start="12720" end="12724" title="Fire (classical element)" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637489" start="12755" end="12758" title="Air (classical element)" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637515" start="12774" end="12779" title="Water (classical element)" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488752" start="12804" end="12809" title="Earth (classical element)" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="13033" end="13045" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="13060" end="13066" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618377" start="13348" end="13370" title="ekpyrosis" label="periodic conflagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228412" start="13393" end="13400" title="palingenesis" label="renewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202253" start="13485" end="13495" title="nominalist" label="nominalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="13556" end="13560" title="destiny" label="fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190255" start="14685" end="14710" title="individual responsibility" label="individual responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551125" start="16911" end="16924" title="compatibilism" label="compatibilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="17003" end="17013" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="17656" end="17659" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298673" start="17997" end="18019" title="Max Bernhard Weinstein" label="Max Bernhard Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="18047" end="18055" title="Pandeist" label="Pandeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="18089" end="18105" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="18123" end="18144" title="teleological argument" label="teleological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="18553" end="18557" title="Greek gods" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="18645" end="18651" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="18732" end="18736" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="18783" end="18791" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="18844" end="18851" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="19094" end="19098" title="mice" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="19246" end="19250" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="19410" end="19415" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100736" start="20146" end="20152" title="Ancient Greek comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="20390" end="20396" title="Physical body" label="bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="20408" end="20413" title="Line (geometry)" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221906" start="20415" end="20421" title="Location (geography)" label="places"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="20427" end="20431" title="Vacuum" label="void"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="20436" end="20440" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085623" start="20454" end="20474" title="Infinite divisibility" label="infinitely divisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="20527" end="20539" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="20574" end="20582" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="20794" end="20804" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="20811" end="20815" title="Cone (geometry)" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="20832" end="20837" title="Plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="20954" end="20962" title="Cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q917657" start="21022" end="21029" title="Step function" label="stepped"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="21145" end="21167" title="law of excluded middle" label="law of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="21273" end="21295" title="infinitesimal calculus" label="infinitesimal calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="21309" end="21314" title="Limit (mathematics)" label="limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211057" start="21334" end="21361" title="Convergent series" label="convergence towards a limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="21411" end="21414" title="1 (number)" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="21426" end="21432" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="21555" end="21564" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="21578" end="21589" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q310916" start="21835" end="21845" title="Iamblichus" label="Iamblichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="21950" end="21956" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q356932" start="23122" end="23131" title="adiaphora" label="adiaphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408345" start="23702" end="23717" title="Stoic passions" label="unruly emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q406365" start="24063" end="24071" title="apatheia" label="apatheia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24578" end="24591" title="Apocatastasis#Stoicism" label="Apocatastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="24594" end="24600" title="Deixis" label="Deixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q468620" start="24603" end="24619" title="History of logic" label="History of logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506150" start="24622" end="24635" title="Lazy argument" label="Lazy argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q131384785" start="24638" end="24673" title="List of unusual deaths in antiquity" label="List of unusual deaths in antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q274978" start="24945" end="24959" title="Émile Bréhier" label="Bréhier, Émile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="37145" wikidata="Q47154" url="?curid=37145" title="Lucretius">
<text>Titus Lucretius Carus ( ; ;  – October 15, 55 BC) was a Roman poet and philosopher. His only known work is the philosophical poem &quot;De rerum natura&quot;, a didactic work about the tenets and philosophy of Epicureanism, which usually is translated into English as &quot;On the Nature of Things&quot;—and somewhat less often as &quot;On the Nature of the Universe&quot;. 
Very little is known about Lucretius&#x27;s life; the only certainty is that he was either a friend or client of Gaius Memmius, to whom the poem was addressed and dedicated. &quot;De rerum natura&quot; was a considerable influence on the Augustan poets, particularly Virgil (in his &quot;Aeneid&quot; and &quot;Georgics&quot;, and to a lesser extent on the &quot;Eclogues&quot;) and Horace. The work was almost lost during the Middle Ages, but was rediscovered in 1417 in a monastery in Germany by Poggio Bracciolini and it played an important role both in the development of atomism (Lucretius was an important influence on Pierre Gassendi) and the efforts of various figures of the Enlightenment era to construct a new Christian humanism.

== Life ==
Virtually nothing is known about the life of Lucretius, and there is insufficient basis for a confident assertion of the dates of Lucretius&#x27;s birth or death in other sources. Another, yet briefer, note is found in the &quot;Chronicon&quot; of Donatus&#x27;s pupil, Jerome. Writing four centuries after Lucretius&#x27;s death, he enters under the 171st Olympiad: &quot;Titus Lucretius the poet is born.&quot; If Jerome is accurate about Lucretius&#x27;s age (43) when Lucretius died (discussed below), then it may be concluded he was born in 99 or 98 BC. Less specific estimates place the birth of Lucretius in the 90s BC and his death in the 50s BC, in agreement with the poem&#x27;s many allusions to the tumultuous state of political affairs in Rome and its civil strife.
Lucretius probably was a member of the aristocratic &quot;gens Lucretia&quot;, and his work shows an intimate knowledge of the luxurious lifestyle in Rome. Lucretius&#x27;s love of the countryside invites speculation that he inhabited family-owned rural estates, as did many wealthy Roman families, and he certainly was expensively educated with a mastery of Latin, Greek, literature, and philosophy.

A brief biographical note is found in Aelius Donatus&#x27;s &quot;Life of Virgil&quot;, which seems to be derived from an earlier work by Suetonius. The note reads: &quot;The first years of his life Virgil spent in Cremona until the assumption of his &quot;toga virilis&quot; on his 17th birthday (when the same two men held the consulate as when he was born), and it so happened that on the very same day Lucretius the poet passed away.&quot; However, although Lucretius certainly lived and died around the time that Virgil and Cicero flourished, the information in this particular testimony is internally inconsistent: if Virgil was born in 70 BC, his 17th birthday would be in 53. The two consuls of 70 BC, Pompey and Crassus, stood together as consuls again in 55, not 53.

Another note regarding Lucretius&#x27;s biography is found in Jerome&#x27;s &quot;Chronicon&quot;, where he contends that Lucretius &quot;was driven mad by a love potion, and when, during the intervals of his insanity, he had written a number of books, which were later emended by Cicero, he killed himself by his own hand in the 44th year of his life.&quot; The claim that he was driven mad by a love potion, although defended by such scholars as Reale and Catan, is often dismissed as the result of historical confusion, or anti-Epicurean bias. In some accounts the administration of the toxic aphrodisiac is attributed to his wife Lucilia. Regardless, Jerome&#x27;s image of Lucretius as a lovesick, mad poet continued to have significant influence on modern scholarship until quite recently, although it now is accepted that such a report is inaccurate.

== &quot;De rerum natura&quot; ==
His poem &quot;De rerum natura&quot; (usually translated as &quot;On the Nature of Things&quot; or &quot;On the Nature of the Universe&quot;) transmits the ideas of Epicureanism, which includes atomism and cosmology. Lucretius was the first writer known to introduce Roman readers to Epicurean philosophy. The poem, written in some 7,400 dactylic hexameters, is divided into six untitled books, and explores Epicurean physics through richly poetic language and metaphors. Lucretius presents the principles of atomism, the nature of the mind and soul, explanations of sensation and thought, the development of the world and its phenomena, and explains a variety of celestial and terrestrial phenomena. The universe described in the poem operates according to these physical principles, guided by &quot;fortuna&quot;, &quot;chance&quot;, and not the divine intervention of the traditional Roman deities and the religious explanations of the natural world.

Within this work, Lucretius makes reference to the cultural and technological development of humans in his use of available materials, tools, and weapons through prehistory to Lucretius&#x27;s own time. He specifies the earliest weapons as hands, nails, and teeth. These were followed by stones, branches, and fire (once humans could kindle and control it). He then refers to &quot;tough iron&quot; and copper in that order, but goes on to say that copper was the primary means of tilling the soil and the basis of weaponry until, &quot;by slow degrees&quot;, the iron sword became predominant (it still was in his day) and &quot;the bronze sickle fell into disrepute&quot; as iron ploughs were introduced. He had earlier envisaged a pre-technological, pre-literary kind of human whose life was lived &quot;in the fashion of wild beasts roaming at large&quot;. From this beginning, he theorised, there followed the development in turn of crude huts, use and kindling of fire, clothing, language, family, and city-states. He believed that smelting of metal, and perhaps too, the firing of pottery, was discovered by accident: for example, the result of a forest fire. He does specify, however, that the use of copper followed the use of stones and branches and preceded the use of iron.
Lucretius seems to equate copper with bronze, an alloy of copper and tin that has much greater resilience than copper; both copper and bronze were superseded by iron during his millennium (1000 BC to 1 BC). He may have considered bronze to be a stronger variety of copper and not necessarily a wholly individual material. Lucretius is believed to be the first to put forward a theory of the successive uses of first wood and stone, then copper and bronze, and finally iron. Although his theory lay dormant for many centuries, it was revived in the nineteenth century and he has been credited with originating the concept of the three-age system that was formalised from 1834 by C. J. Thomsen.

===Reception===
In a letter by Cicero to his brother Quintus in February 54 BC, Cicero said: &quot;The poems of Lucretius are as you write: they exhibit many flashes of genius, and yet show great mastership.&quot; In the work of another author in late Republican Rome, Virgil writes in the second book of his &quot;Georgics&quot;, apparently referring to Lucretius, &quot;Happy is he who has discovered the causes of things and has cast beneath his feet all fears, unavoidable fate, and the din of the devouring Underworld.&quot;

==Natural philosophy==

Lucretius was an early thinker in what grew to become the study of evolution. He believed that nature experiments endlessly across the aeons, and the organisms that adapt best to their environment have the best chance of surviving. Living organisms survived because of the commensurate relationship between their strength, speed, or intellect and the external dynamics of their environment. Prior to Charles Darwin&#x27;s 1859 publication of &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, the natural philosophy of Lucretius typified one of the foremost non-teleological and mechanistic accounts of the creation and evolution of life. In contrast to modern thought on the subject, he did not believe that new species evolved from previously existing ones. Lucretius challenged the assumption that humans are necessarily superior to animals, noting that mammalian mothers in the wild recognize and nurture their offspring as do human mothers.

While Epicurus left open the possibility for free will by arguing for the uncertainty of the paths of atoms, Lucretius viewed the soul or mind as emerging from fortuitous arrangements of distinct particles.

==See also==
* &quot;The Swerve: How the World Became Modern&quot;, a modern historiography by Stephen Greenblatt
* List of English translations of &quot;De rerum natura&quot;
* Javelin argument

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

==External links==

* 
** &quot;On The Nature Of Things&quot;
* 
* &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry&quot; by David Simpson
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
* Lucretius&#x27;s works: text, concordances and frequency list
* Bibliography De rerum natura Book III (archived 26 November 2006)
* Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High-resolution images of works by Lucretius in .jpg and .tiff format.
* Lucretius: &quot;De rerum natura&quot; (1475–1494), digitised codex at Somni
* Titi Lucretii Cari &quot;De rerum natura libri sex&quot;, published in Paris 1563, later owned and annotated by Montaigne, fully digitised in Cambridge Digital Library
* Discussion Forum For Lucretius and Epicurean Philosophy
*Is nature continuous or discrete? How the atomist error was born</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="0" end="21" title="Lucretius" label="Titus Lucretius Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="56" end="61" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="62" end="66" title="Roman literature" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745515" start="71" end="82" title="Ancient Roman philosophy" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q861986" start="136" end="151" title="De rerum natura" label="De rerum natura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="161" end="169" title="didactic" label="didactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="210" end="222" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="478" end="484" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472899" start="488" end="501" title="Gaius Memmius (praetor 58 BC)" label="Gaius Memmius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821017" start="613" end="627" title="Augustan poetry" label="Augustan poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="642" end="648" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="663" end="669" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q674439" start="686" end="694" title="Georgics" label="Georgics"/>
<link wikidata="Q546203" start="738" end="746" title="Eclogues" label="Eclogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="758" end="764" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="802" end="813" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q318254" start="873" end="891" title="Poggio Bracciolini" label="Poggio Bracciolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="951" end="958" title="atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192315" start="1000" end="1015" title="Pierre Gassendi" label="Pierre Gassendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1059" end="1076" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327432" start="1096" end="1114" title="Christian humanism" label="Christian humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675945" start="1357" end="1366" title="Chronicon (Jerome)" label="Chronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="1398" end="1404" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="1485" end="1493" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="1822" end="1830" title="allusion" label="allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1880" end="1884" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="1893" end="1905" title="Roman civil wars" label="civil strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="1946" end="1958" title="aristocratic" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935928" start="1965" end="1978" title="Lucretia gens" label="gens Lucretia"/>
<link wikidata="Q247137" start="2347" end="2361" title="Aelius Donatus" label="Aelius Donatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2383" end="2389" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="2447" end="2456" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="2566" end="2578" title="toga virilis" label="toga virilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="2638" end="2647" title="Roman consul" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="2845" end="2855" title="fl." label="flourished"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="3019" end="3025" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="3030" end="3037" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249918" start="3250" end="3256" title="potion" label="potion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697230" start="3721" end="3728" title="Lucilia (wife of Lucretius)" label="Lucilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="4145" end="4157" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="4174" end="4181" title="atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="4186" end="4195" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="4318" end="4336" title="dactylic hexameter" label="dactylic hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="4441" end="4449" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="4489" end="4496" title="atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="4525" end="4529" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="4607" end="4616" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="4670" end="4679" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940793" start="4828" end="4847" title="divine intervention" label="divine intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="4855" end="4880" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="traditional Roman deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="5943" end="5953" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="6259" end="6265" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q475234" start="6849" end="6865" title="three-age system" label="three-age system"/>
<link wikidata="Q320931" start="6899" end="6912" title="Christian Jürgensen Thomsen" label="C. J. Thomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="6946" end="6952" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q316054" start="6968" end="6975" title="Quintus Tullius Cicero" label="Quintus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185030" start="7084" end="7090" title="genius" label="genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="7184" end="7190" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7537" end="7546" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="7870" end="7884" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="7918" end="7942" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="8019" end="8031" title="Teleology" label="teleological"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="8410" end="8418" title="Epicurus" label="Epicurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="8449" end="8458" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q178036" start="8478" end="8511" title="Brownian motion" label="uncertainty of the paths of atoms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8633" end="8672" title="The Swerve: How the World Became Modern" label="The Swerve: How the World Became Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="8689" end="8703" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q639065" start="8707" end="8725" title="Stephen Greenblatt" label="Stephen Greenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354906" start="8728" end="8787" title="List of English translations of De rerum natura" label="List of English translations of &amp;quot;De rerum natura&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165344" start="8790" end="8806" title="Javelin argument" label="Javelin argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="9570" end="9579" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989882" start="9600" end="9625" title="Cambridge Digital Library" label="Cambridge Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
